=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces”  (Esther 1:1).1What follows is a series of wordplays on the name Aḥashverosh.Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korḥa said: Who blackened [hishḥir] the faces of Israel like the bottom of a pot. Rabbi Berekhya said: Who weakened [hikḥish] the head of Israel with fasting and abstinence. Rabbi Levi said: Who gave them gall and wormwood to drink [hishka]. Rabbi Yuda son of Rabbi Simon said: Who sought to undermine the foundation of Israel.2Literally, to undermine the egg of Israel. The wordplay with the name Aḥashverosh is obscure in this case. Perhaps it involves the word הוריש, meaning to dispossess or destroy. Rabbi Taḥlifa bar bar Ḥana said: Who was the brother [aḥ] of a leader [rosh], the brother of Nebuchadnezzar. Was he his brother? Was not this one a Chaldean and that one a Median? Rather, this one canceled the construction of the Temple, and that one destroyed it; therefore, Scripture equated them. That is what is written: “Even one who is lax in his work is brother to a master of destruction.” (Proverbs 18:9). “Even one who is lax in his work,” that is Aḥashverosh, who canceled the construction of the Temple. “Is brother to a master of destruction,” that is Nebuchadnezzar, who destroyed the Temple.Alternatively, “Aḥashverosh” – Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: One said: “Aḥashverosh,” who killed his wife [Vashti] because of his beloved one [Haman]; “that Aḥashverosh,” who killed his beloved one [Haman] because of his wife [Esther]. Rabbi Neḥemya said: “Aḥashverosh,” who canceled the construction of the Temple; “that Aḥashverosh,” who decreed that it should be rebuilt. Was it him who decreed? Was it not Cyrus who decreed? Rather, it is written: “During the first year of King Cyrus” (Ezra 6:3). During that year, all his advisers came to him; they said to him: ‘Your father decreed about it that it shall not be rebuilt, and you decree about it that it shall be rebuilt? Does a king abrogate the decrees of another king?’ He said to them: ‘Bring me the copies of the decrees.’ Immediately, they brought them to him. That is what is written: “A scroll was found in Aḥmeta in the capital” (Ezra 6:2). What was written in it? “Now, issue a decree to cancel” (Ezra 4:21). He said to them: ‘Is ‘forever’ written? It is only written: “Until a decree from me will be issued.” Who can say to me that were my father alive, he would not have built it?’ Therefore, he is included with the prophets; that is what is written: “The elders of the Jews built and prospered [in accordance with the prophecy of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah son of Ido, and built and finished, by the decree of the God of Israel, and by the decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaḥshasta3The midrash identifies Artaḥshasta king of Persia as Aḥashverosh. king of Persia]” (Ezra 6:14).
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces” (Esther 1:1). Hu [appears] five [times] for evil, and five for good. Five for evil: “He [hu] was a mighty hunter”4Nimrod. (Genesis 10:9); “he is [hu] Esau, father of Edom” (Genesis 36:43); “this is [hu] Datan and Aviram” (Numbers 26:9); “he is [hu] King Aḥaz” (II Chronicles 28:22); “that [hu] Aḥashverosh” (Esther 1:1). Five for good: “Abram, he is [hu] Abraham” (I Chronicles 1:27); “that [hu] Aaron and Moses…that [hu] Moses and Aaron” (Exodus 6:26–27); “David was [hu] the youngest” (I Samuel 17:14); “he [hu], Yeḥizhiyahu” (II Chronicles 32:30); “he [hu], Ezra, came up from Babylon” (Ezra 7:6). Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of the Rabbis from there: We have one that is better than all of them: “He is [hu] the Lord our God; His judgments are throughout the land” (Psalms 105:7), whose attribute of mercy is forever.
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh…” Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis, Rabbi Levi said: Aḥashverosh is Artaḥshasta. The Rabbis say: [He was called] Aḥashverosh, since anyone who remembers him, his head hurts [ḥoshesh et rosho]. Why did Scripture call him Artaḥshasta? It is because he would anger [martiaḥ] and exhaust [vetash] [others]. Aḥashverosh – Rabbi Yitzḥak and the Rabbis, Rabbi Yitzḥak said: “Aḥashverosh” – as all the troubles came during his days, as it is stated: “there was great mourning among the Jews” (Esther 4:3). “That is Aḥashverosh” – as all the good came during his days, as it is stated: “Joy and gladness for the Jews, a banquet and a holiday” (Esther 8:17). The Rabbis say: “Aḥashverosh” – before Esther came before him; “that is Aḥashverosh” – after Esther came before him, he would no longer copulate with menstruants.
“It was during the days of Aḥashverosh; that [hu] Aḥashverosh who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces.”  “Who reigned” – but had not yet reigned.5This is obscure. Perhaps it means that he had not been an heir to the throne. “From India [Hodu] to Kush” – but isn’t it a short distance from Hodu to Kush?6It is unclear what places the Rabbis identified as Hodu and Kush. The Babylonian Talmud (Megila 11a) records two opinions: one that they are at opposite ends of the earth (consistent with their identification with India and Ethiopia) and the other that they were adjacent to one another, as is implied here. Rather, just as he reigned from Hodu to Kush, so he reigned over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces. On a similar note: “For he [Solomon] ruled over the entire region beyond the river, from Tifsaḥ to Gaza” (I Kings 5:4), but isn’t it a short distance from Tifsaḥ to Gaza? Rather, just as he reigned from Tifsaḥ to Gaza, so he reigned from one end of the world to the other end. Similarly, “From your palace to Jerusalem, kings bring gifts to You”7The literal reading of the verse is “From Your Temple above Jerusalem, to You will kings bring gifts.” The midrash is reading the verse to mean that the kings will bring gifts from the king’s palace to the Temple in Jerusalem. (Psalms 68:30) –  is it not but a short distance from your palace [i.e. the king’s palace] to [the Temple in] Jerusalem? Rather, just as it is commonplace that the sacrificial offerings [go] from the palace to [the Temple in] Jerusalem, so too, processions with gifts are destined to be commonplace for the messianic king. That is what is written: “All kings will prostrate themselves before him” (Psalms 72:11). Rabbi Kohen, brother of Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba, said: Just as the Divine Presence is found between the Temple and Jerusalem, so will the Divine Presence fill the world from one end to the other end. That is what is written: “May the whole earth be filled with His glory, amen and amen” (Psalms 72:19).
“…who reigned from India to Kush, one hundred and twenty-seven provinces.” Rabbi Eliezer in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: Are there not two hundred and fifty-two provinces in the world? David ruled over them all; that is what is written: “David’s renown went out to all the lands” (I Chronicles 14:17). Solomon ruled over them all; that is what is written: “Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms...” (I Kings 5:1). Aḥav ruled over them all; that is what is written: “As the Lord your God lives, there is no nation or kingdom [to where my lord did not send to seek you]” (I Kings 18:10). Does a person take an oath about a place that he does not rule? Additionally, from here: “He counted the young princes of the dominions, and they were two hundred and thirty-two…” (I Kings 20:15). Where were the rest?8Earlier it was said that there were two hundred and fifty-two provinces, and here there are representatives of only two hundred and thirty-two dominions. Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis: Rabbi Levi said: They ceased to exist in the famine during the days of Eliyahu. The Rabbis said that Ben Haddad came and took them. That is what is written: “Ben Haddad king of Aram gathered his entire army, and thirty-two kings were with him, and horses and chariots; he went and besieged Samaria, and waged war against it” (I Kings 20:1). We need twenty, and you say thirty-two? Rather, there were provinces that were intractable, and he would take two [young princes] from them as hostages in his charge.Rabbi Berekhya and the Rabbis [related to the verse: “He pierced my kidneys with the contents of his quiver [benei ashpato]” (Lamentations 3:13)].  Rabbi Berekhya said: These were the captives [benei ukaifi] and the hostages [benei emuryai].9These were the “contents of his quiver,” with which God pierced Israel’s kidneys. The Rabbis said: Benei ukaifi – as they were subjugated with manacles [arkof], and benei emuryai – as they were substitutes [temurot] for their fathers. And so it says: “And the hostages [benei hataaruvot]” (II Kings 14:14), they were guarantees [me’uravot] for their fathers.Nebuchadnezzar ruled over them all; that is what is written: “Everywhere the sons of man, the beasts of the field, and the birds of the heavens dwell, [He has given into your hand and set your rule over them all]” (Daniel 2:38). Cyrus ruled over them all; that is what is written: “The Lord…has given me all the kingdoms of the earth” (Ezra 1:2). Darius ruled over them all; that is what is written: “Then King Darius wrote to all the peoples, [the nations, and the [speakers of different] languages that reside in the entire earth]” (Daniel 6:26). Aḥashverosh ruled over half of them. Why over half of them? Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa and the Rabbis, Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: You divided my kingdom, as you said: “He is the God, who is in Jerusalem” (Ezra 1:3); by your life, I am going to divide your kingdom. The Rabbis say: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: You split My house, as you said: “Its height shall be sixty cubits10The height of the Sanctuary in Solomon’s Temple was one hundred and twenty cubits. and its width sixty cubits” (Ezra 6:3); by your life, I am going to split your kingdom. Let it say one hundred and twenty-six, for what reason does the verse state “one hundred and twenty-seven provinces”? Rather, this is what the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him: You added one ascent [aliya]11Aliya means both second floor and ascent. to My house from your own, as you said: “Any among you from His entire people, may his God be with him, and he may ascend” (Ezra 1:3); I, too, will provide you with an additional ascent from my own, so he added one province to the tally; that is what is written: “One hundred and twenty-seven provinces.”
Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: It is written: “The hair of His head like pure wool” (Daniel 7:9); that He has no debt to any creature. Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Ayevu: It is written: “I have trodden a winepress alone and from the peoples there was no man with Me...” (Isaiah 63:3). Does the Holy One blessed be He need the help of the nations, that He said: “And from the peoples there was no man with Me?” Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He said: When I examine the ledgers of the nations of the world and no merit will be found for them before Me, at that moment, “I trod on them in My wrath and I trampled them in My fury” (Isaiah 63:3). Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥilkiyya said in the name of Rabbi Simon: It is written: “It shall be on that day that I will seek to destroy all the nations [that come against Jerusalem]” (Zechariah 12:9). Will seek? Is there anyone preventing Him? Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He is saying: When I examine the ledgers of the nations of the world and no merit will be found for them before Me, at that moment, I will seek to destroy all the nations. Rabbi Simon in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan: It is written: “Vengeance and recompense are Mine at the time that their foot will falter” (Deuteronomy 32:35). Is it heroism for a person to say that when the enemies of Israel12“Enemies of Israel” refers to Israel. Rabbinic custom was to substitute “enemies of Israel” for Israel when referring to Israel’s evil deeds or the consequences thereof. falter, I will punish them? Rather, this is what the Holy One blessed be He said: When they cease fulfilling the mitzvot that are customary13Hebrew regilot, a play on regel, foot, in the verse. among them, and no merit will be found for them before Me, at that moment, “vengeance and recompense are Mine.” Rabbi Berekhya in the name of Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Huna in the name of Rabbi Levi, and Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Levi, the three of them said one verse: “Your hand will find all Your enemies; Your right hand will find [timtza] Your foes” (Psalms 21:9). Your hand will be present [metzuya] to repay Your enemies, You will present [tamtze] the attribute of justice to them, You will present [tamtze] them with how few are the good deeds they performed; therefore, it says: “Your hand will find all Your enemies.”
Another matter: “One hundred and twenty-seven provinces” – Rabbi Yuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yuda said: He conquered seven that were as difficult as twenty; he conquered twenty that were as difficult as one hundred. Rabbi Neḥemya said: He took troops from seven and conquered twenty; he took troops from twenty and conquered one hundred. How did he conquer them? Rabbi Yuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yuda said: Like a semi-circle, you conquer the outer areas and the inner areas become conquered by themselves. Rabbi Pinḥas said: The world is circular. Rabbi Avun said: It is like the surface of a two-kav vessel.14A kav is measure of volume. A two-kav vessel contains slightly less than three liters. Rabbi Neḥemya said: It is like an aqueduct; you conquer the outsides and the insides are conquered by themselves.
Rabbi Akiva was sitting and lecturing and his students [began] dozing. He sought to rouse them; he said: Why did Esther merit to rule over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces? Rather, so said the Holy One blessed be He: Let Esther, the daughter of Sarah, who lived one hundred and twenty-seven years, come and rule over one hundred and twenty-seven provinces. Rabbi Levi said: Everywhere that it says field, it is a town [ir]; a town, a city [medina]; a city, a province. From where is a field a town? As it is stated: “Go to Anatot, to your fields” (I Kings 2:26); from where is a town [ir], a city? As it is stated: “Pass through the midst of the town [ir], through the midst of Jerusalem” (Ezekiel 9:4). A city [medina], a province, as it is stated: “One hundred and twenty-seven provinces [medina].”

 “In those days, when King Aḥashverosh was sitting on his royal throne that was in the Shushan citadel” (Esther 1:2). This is one of the places15The reference to  “places” is unclear. It perhaps refers to places in Scripture. Alternatively, it could mean non-specifically, “one of the times.” that the ministering angels were passing notes before the Holy One blessed be He, saying before Him: Master of the universe, the Temple is in ruins and this wicked man is sitting and making drinking parties. He said to them: Set days against days; that is what is written: “In those days I saw in Judah some treading winepresses on Shabbat...” (Nehemiah 13:15). Rabbi Ḥelbo said: Alas, those were days of woe. Rabbi Bevai said: “Those [hahem] days” – ha (an expression of woe) for those days. That is what you say: “Wail, woe for the day” (Ezekiel 30:2). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Lamentations for those days. That is what you say: “A lamentation will be lamented” (Micha 2:4).
“When King [Aḥashverosh] was sitting [keshevet hamelekh].” Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The nations of the world do not sit securely. They objected: Is it not written: “When King [Aḥashverosh] was sitting”? He said to them: Beshevet hamelekh [while the king was sitting] is not written here, rather, keshevet hamelekh [as if the king were sitting] – sitting that is not sitting. However, the sitting of Israel is sitting, as it is stated: “When Israel sat [beshevet] in Ḥeshbon and its environs” (Judges 11:26).
“On his royal throne” – Rabbi Kohen in the name of Rabbi Azarya: “On his royal throne [kisse malkhuto],” malkhuto is written [without the vav]. He sought to sit on Solomon’s throne but they did not allow him to do so. They said to him: Any king who is not ruler of the world may not sit on it. He arose and made a throne of his own, in his image. That is what is written: “On his royal throne [kisse malkhuto],” malkhuto is written [without the vav].16The defective spelling symbolizes the incompleteness of his reign.What throne was it? “The king [Solomon] made a great throne of ivory” (I Kings 10:18; II Chronicles 9:17). Rabbi Aḥa said: But isn’t it written: “Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria” (II Kings 10:1). Rabbi Hoshaya said: Just as he had seventy sons in Samaria, so he had seventy sons in Yizre’el. Each and every one had two palaces, one for the winter and one for the summer. That is what is written: “I will strike the winter house with the summer house” (Amos 3:15). Rabbi Yuda son of Rabbi Simon said: Four, as it is stated: “And the ivory houses will be demolished” (ibid.). The Rabbis said: Six, as it is stated: “And many houses will be destroyed – the utterance of the Lord” (ibid.). And here it says: “A great throne of ivory”? (I Kings 10:18; II Chronicles 9:17).Rabbi Hoshaya the Great said: It was made according to the specifications of the chariot of the One who spoke and the world came into existence, the Holy One blessed be He. And so it says: “There were six stairs to the throne” (I Kings 10:19; II Chronicles 9:18) – six stairs corresponding to six heavens. But aren’t there seven? Rabbi Avun said: That where the King resides is separate. Six [stairs] corresponding to six lands [i.e., types of lands]: Land, Ground, Earth, Valley, Desert, Desolation, and World,17World is the seventh ‘land,’ and is the place from which God judges the others. and it is written: “He will judge the world in righteousness, He will administer fair judgment to the nations” (Psalms 9:9). Six corresponding to the six orders of the Mishna: Zera’im – Seeds; Moed – Appointed times; Nashim – Women; Nezikin  – Damages; Kodashim  – Consecrations; Teharot – Purities.Six, corresponding to the six days of Creation.Six corresponding to the six matriarchs: Sarah, Rebecca, Leah, Rachel, Bilha, Zilpa.Rav Huna said: Six corresponding to the six mitzvot about which the king is cautioned and commanded, as it is written: “He shall not amass wives for himself” (Deuteronomy 17:17); “he shall not amass horses for himself” (Deuteronomy 17:16); “and silver and gold, he shall not amass greatly” (Deuteronomy 17:17); “You shall not distort judgment, you shall not give preference, and you shall not take a bribe” (Deuteronomy 16:19).When he [Solomon] ascended the first step, the herald would proclaim and say to him: “He shall not amass wives for himself.” On the second, he would proclaim: “He shall not amass horses for himself.” On the third, he would proclaim: “And silver and gold, he shall not amass.” On the fourth, “you shall not distort judgment.” On the fifth, “you shall not give preference.” On the sixth, “you shall not take a bribe.” And so it says [about the throne which was on the sixth step]: “There were arm rests on this side and that side of the place of the seat” (I Kings 10:19). When he came to sit, he [the herald] would say to him: Know before whom you sit, before the He who spoke and the world came into existence.They said: Once Solomon died, Shishak, king of Egypt, came and took it [the throne] from them. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Shishak is Pharaoh, and why is he called by the name Shishak? Because he came against Israel with enthusiasm [bishkikut] and said: I am taking it in payment for my daughter’s marriage contract. He waged war with Zeraḥ the Kushite and he took it from him. Asa waged war with Zeraḥ the Kushite who fell by his hand and he took it from him. It was taught: Asa and all the kings of Judah sat upon it. When Nebuchadnezzar came up and destroyed Jerusalem, he exiled it to Babylon, and from Babylon to Media, from Media to Greece, and from Greece to Edom [Rome]. Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei said: I saw its fragments in Rome. Nebuchadnezzar sat upon it, Cyrus sat upon it, Aḥashverosh sought to sit upon it but they did not allow him to do so. They said to him: Any king who has not become ruler of the world may not sit on it. He arose and made one of his own like it; that is what is written: “On his royal throne [kisse malkhuto],” malkhuto is written [without the vav].” “And there was a round top to the throne, at its back” (I Kings 10:19) –  Rabbi Aḥa said: Like this round headrest of an armchair. “There were arm rests on this side and that side of the place of the seat” (ibid.). He ascends the first step, and the lion extends its foreleg to him. On the second, the eagle extends its leg to him. “Of the place of the seat,” this is how they greeted him, and at the place of the seat, there was a golden scepter behind it, and a dove was set in its top with a golden crown in its mouth, so that the king would be sitting on the seat with a golden crown [suspended just above him], touching but not touching.
Rabbi Ayevu said: It is written: “For dominion belongs to the Lord; He rules over nations” (Psalms 22:29), yet you say, “when King Aḥashverosh was sitting on his royal throne”?18Isn’t it actually God’s royal throne? Rather, in the past, there was royal sovereignty in Israel. When they sinned, sovereignty was taken from them and given to the nations of the world; that is what is written: “I will sell the land into the hands of the wicked” (Ezekiel 30:12). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Into the hands of evil stewards; tomorrow, when Israel repents, the Holy One blessed be He will take it from the idolaters and returns it to Israel. When? “Saviors will ascend Mount Zion” (Ovadya 1:21).
“That was in  the Shushan citadel” – Rabbi Pinḥas said in the name of Rabbi Ḥananel: The Holy One blessed be He said to him: Cyrus referred to the name of His city and the name of His province,19The name of God’s city and God’s province.as he said: “In Jerusalem, which is in Judah” (Ezra 1:2); I, too, will refer to the name of your city and the name of your province, as it is stated: “That was in the Shushan citadel which is in the province of Elam” (Daniel 8:2).
“In the third year of his reign, he made a banquet for all his princes and his servants, the elite of Persia and Media, the nobles and governors of the provinces before him” (Esther 1:3).Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya: Rabbi Yehuda said: In the third year of the crafting of the throne. Once he completed the crafting of the throne, “he made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.” Rabbi Neḥemya said: In the third year of the cancellation of the construction of the Temple; once three years since the cancellation of the construction of the Temple were completed, “he made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Eimi said: There were four good attributes in that man: He went three years without a crown and without a throne; he waited four years until he found a wife appropriate for him; and he would not do anything without consulting. Rabbi Pinḥas said: And anyone who did him a favor, he would record it; that is what is written: “It was found written that Mordekhai had told...” (Esther 6:2).
“He made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.”  Antoninus made a feast for Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi, who said to him: Perhaps you have not fulfilled your obligation to the lamplighters? He said to him: Of what significance are they to me? He said to him: Perhaps they will put murky oil in the lamps and ruin the feast. He said to him: From where do you know this? He said to him: From Aḥashverosh, about whom it is written: “He made a banquet for all his princes and his servants.”
“The elite of Persia and Media:” It is taught in the name of Rabbi Natan about these ten measures: There are ten portions of licentiousness in the world, nine in Alexandria and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of wealth in the world, nine in Rome and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of poverty in the world, nine in Lydia20‘Lydia’ refers to the district in Asia Minor. Alternatively, this could be Lod, the town in Judea. and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of sorcery in the world, nine in Egypt and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of foolishness in the world, nine among the Ishmaelites and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of vigor in the world, nine among the Ishmaelites and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of lice in the world, nine among the Persians and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of attractiveness in the world, nine in Media and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of ugliness in the world, nine in the East and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of power in the world, nine among the Chaldeans and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of courage in the world, nine in Judah and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of beauty in the world, nine in Jerusalem and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of wisdom in the world, nine in the Land of Israel and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of Torah in the world, nine in the Land of Israel and one in the rest of the world. There are ten portions of hypocrisy in the world, nine in Jerusalem and one in the rest of the world; that is what is written: “…for from the prophets of Jerusalem hypocrisy has gone out to all the land” (Jeremiah 23:15).
Another matter: “The elite of Persia and Media” – sometimes Media precedes Persia and sometimes Persia precedes Media. When the throne is in Media, Persia is secondary to it; when the throne is in Persia, Media is secondary to it. [Regarding] Persia, why do they call it Persia [Paras]? Because it received hegemony in pieces [perusot] [non-consecutively], once in the days of Terada, once in the days of Adarkian, and once in the future; that is what is written: “This shall be peace: When Assyria will come into our land and when it will tread in our palaces...”21The midrash understands Assyria in the verse to refer to Persia.  (Micah 5:4). [Regarding] Media, why do they call it Media [Madai]? Because they acknowledge [modaya] the Holy One blessed be He. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Abba said: The kings of Media were upright, and the Holy One blessed be He has nothing against them other than the idolatry that was bequeathed to them by their ancestors.
The nobles – Rabbi Elazar said: The nobles are the king’s two legions, as the king is not called Augustus (i.e. emperor) until they call him that first, and these are they. Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The Decumanians and the Augustans [legions].22These are clearly Latin terms and presumably based on Roman units that were close to the emperor. Some have suggested that these are the Praetorian Guards, transplanted here to a Babylonian/Persian context. It was they who counseled Nebuchadnezzar and he went up and destroyed the Temple. The Holy One blessed be He destroyed them utterly and established others in their stead, and these were they. Rabbi Yuda son of Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Elazar: They were the capable and the literate; Rav Huna said: Those possessing reason and their deputies; Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Those possessing reason were his counselors; that is what you say: “Then Daniel responded with counsel and discretion” (Daniel 2:14).
“And governors of the provinces before him.” Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: Rabbi Elazar said: Like the court in Geder, where the king sits in judgment above, and all the people sit before him on the ground. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Like the great basilica filled with people, with the king sitting on his couch and all the people prostrated before him; that is why it says: “And governors of the provinces before him.”
