=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment to prepare1The Rambam's wording here represents a change from his wording in Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 35) where he describes the mitzvah in passive terms: "having the oil made in a unique fashion available for anointing." Perhaps he chose that wording for, as explained in Halachah 5, after the oil was made at Moses' command, no other such oil was ever made and the mitzvah was merely "to have it." the anointing oil so that it will be ready [to use] for those articles that require anointing,2Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 107) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. See the gloss of the Radbaz who explains that anointing the kings and the High Priest is not considered one of the mitzvot, for there were times when this anointment was not practiced. as [Exodus 30:25] states: "And you shall make it3The mixture of spices mentioned in the previous verses. as the oil of sacred anointment."
While in the desert, Moses our teacher [had]4This addition is necessary, for as indicated by Exodus 37:29, Moses himself did not prepare the anointment oil. It was prepared by Betzalel and the other craftsmen working with him. it prepared. He took the equivalent of 500 shekel5According to Scriptural Law, based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 8:8), in modern measure a shekel of the Torah is equivalent to 16 grams of pure silver. Nevertheless, as the Rambam states in Hilchot Shekalim 1:2, in the era of the Second Temple, our Sages increased its measure by almost a fourth. Accordingly, the measure of silver required for the redemption of the firstborn and other obligations where a shekel is required is significantly larger. of the holy shekalim of musk, cinnamon, and costus6The Rambam describes these spices in the following halachah. and the equivalent of 250 shekel of fragrant cane. The Torah's statement [ibid.:23]: "And fragrant cinnamon, half its measure, 250," implies that [the entire quantity] should be weighed out in two measures, 250 each time. Each one should be ground separately, mixed together7The Kessef Mishneh states that the obligation to grind the herbs is derived from a comparison to the incense offering. The order in which they are ground and then mixed is a logical deduction. If they are ground first, they will be mixed more thoroughly and more effectively. and then soaked in pure, sweet water until all of its power was extracted into the water. A hin - which is equivalent to twelve log with each log comprising four revi'iot8A common halachic measure equivalent to approximately 86 cc according to Shiurei Torah and approximately 150 cc according to Chazon Ish. Thus a hin is 48 times this amount. - of oil was placed above the water.9For the oil will float above the water. The entire mixture was then cooked over fire until the water boiled off and only the oil remained.10Otherwise, the amount of oil used would not be sufficient to soak all the herbs (Rashi, in his commentary to Exodus 30:24 . It was then set aside for [future] generations.
Musk refers to the blood contained with a wild beast from India that is of universal renown which people everywhere use as a fragrance.11The Rambam is referring to a secretion of the abdominal gland of the male musk deer, a large animal that roams the mountains of Nepal and Tibet. The secretion is reddish-brown, with a honeylike consistency and a strong fragrance. After the gland is cut open, the secretion hardens, assumes a blackish-brown color, and when dry becomes granular.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's definition, stating that it is improper that the blood of a beast - and certainly, a non-kosher beast - be used in the Sanctuary. He interprets the term mor as referring to the fragrant herb, myrrh. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's view, explaining that the loathsome quality one would associate with the blood of a beast departs from it when the secretion dries and becomes granular. See also the Ramban's commentary to Exodus 30:23, where he discusses both positions. Cinnamon is a tree that comes from the Indian islands which has a pleasant fragrance and which people use as incense. The term kidah refers to costus.12It is the root of a tall herb, whose botanical name is Saussurea lappa, which even today grows only in the highlands of Kashmir. Fragrant cane, this refers to thin canes13In his notes to his translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Keritot 1:1), Rav Kapach identifies this as the acorus calamus plant. In his Living Torah, Rav Aryeh Kaplan identifies this as the cymbopogon martini or palmarosa plant. like red straw that come from the Indian islands and have a pleasant fragrance. They are types of herbs which doctors place in balsam.
One who willfully prepares anointing oil in this manner and with these measurements without adding or reducing [the quantity of the herbs] is liable for karet.14Literally, the soul's being cut off. This involves premature death in this world (before the age of 50, Mo'ed Kattan 28a) and the soul not meriting a portion in the world to come (Hilchot Teshuvah 8:1).Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 83) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 109) includes the prohibition against making such oil among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. If he prepares it unknowingly, he must bring a fixed sin-offering,15The term "fixed sin-offering" is used to differentiate between this offering and "an adjustable guilt offering" in which instance, the offering the person brings changes according to his financial capacity. See Hilchot Shegagot 1:4. [as ibid.:34] states: "One who makes such a compound shall be cut off from his nation." [The above applies] provided he prepared it for anointment. If, however, he prepared it for practice or to give to other people,16Even if those people desire to use it for anointment. As long as he personally does not intend to use it for anointment, he is not liable (Radbaz). he is exempt.17I.e., the act is forbidden, but he is not liable.
One who anoints himself with an olive-sized portion18For to be liable, one must benefit from a minimum measure and that minimum measure is, as is true with regard to partaking of forbidden substances, an olive-sized portion. of the oil of anointment willfully is liable for karet. If he [anoints himself] unknowingly, he must bring a fixed sin-offering, [as ibid.] states: "And one who applies it to an unauthorized person,19I.e., someone other than a High Priest, a king, and the priest who lead the people in war, as stated in Halachah 7. shall be cut off from his nation."One is liable only for anointing oneself with the oil of anointment made by Moses,20And not a copy, even if it was made in the exact same manner. as the prooftext states "from it," from [the oil] of which [ibid.:31] states "This will be oil for sacred anointing for Me." No other [anointing] oil was ever made aside from that made by Moses.21That oil remained throughout the majority of the First Temple period until it was entombed by King Josiah together with the ark, as the Rambam relates in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:1. From that point onward, neither the High Priests or kings were anointed.On the surface, one might ask: Since no other oil was ever made, why is making the oil considered one of the 613 mitzvot? For as the Rambam clarifies several times in Sefer HaMitzvot, if an obligation is not ongoing, it is not appropriate to consider it as a mitzvah. On that basis, a number of commands, for example, the command to wage war against Midian (Numbers 7:2 , were excluded from this reckoning.The Minchat Chinuch (positive mitzvah 107) notes that the prooftext quoted by the Rambam concludes "for your generations," i.e., for all time. The mitzvah was to have the oil made by Moses available at all time. After the oil was entombed by King Josiah, new oil was not made, because the oil which Moses made is still available. At the coming of Mashiach, that oil will surface and again be used.
[One is liable] whether he anoints himself or others,22The Radbaz maintains that if the others willfully allow the oil to be applied to their flesh, they are also liable. The Tosefta, Makkot, ch. 3, also rules in this manner. as [the prooftext] states: "And one who applies it to an unauthorized person." One who spreads it on utensils, an animal, a gentile - who is [halachicly equivalent] to an animal23See Kiddushin 68a; Hilchot Eruvin 2:9. - or who spreads it on a corpse, is exempt, as [implied by ibid.:32]: "It should not be spread on the flesh of a man."24And none of the above are halachicly equivalent to a man.
For all time,25I.e., in contrast to the era of Moses where this oil was also used to anoint the priestly garments and the vessels of the Sanctuary, as stated in Halachah 12. we do not [use this oil] except to anoint the High Priest, the priest who leads the nation in war,26See Hilchot Melachim, ch. 7, which states that a priest is appointed to speak before the nation and inspire them in war. and kings from the House of David.27The kings of the ten tribes, by contrast, were not anointed with this anointing oil, only balsam oil, as stated in Hilchot Melachim 1:10. According to the Rambam (ibid.:7), King Saul was also anointed with this oil. He is not mentioned, because his regal line did not continue for posterity. Even a High Priest who is the son of a High Priest should be anointed,28In contrast, the kings were anointed only when there is a dispute over the inheritance or during a civil war (ibid.:12 and Halachah 11 of this chapter). as [Leviticus 6:15] states: "The priest from his sons anointed in place of him...."
Since there was no anointing oil [during] the Second Temple [era],29As mentioned above, the anointing oil was entombed toward the conclusion of the First Temple Era. the High Priest was installed in his office by putting on the garments of the High Priest alone.
How was the High Priest anointed? The oil should be poured on his head and applied between his eyes in the form of the Greek letter chi,30Our text follows the manuscript versions of the Mishneh Torah and the manuscript versions of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 6:3). Most of the later printings of the Mishneh Torah replace the C with an X, for in fact, this is the form of the Greek letter. Kin'at Eliyahu suggests that although the Rambam speaks about the Greek letter, perhaps his intent was the Roman letter. like this C as [Leviticus 8:12] states: "And he poured the anointing oil on Aaron's head and anointed him to sanctify him." The kings of the Davidic dynasty are anointed [with the oil] spread as a crown on their foreheads.31The translation of rosho as "forehead" rather than "head," is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Keritot 1:1). They should not be anointed on other places [on their bodies], nor should one use an excessive amount of oil.
A person who places the anointing oil on a king or High Priest who had been anointed previously is exempt, for [the prooftext] speaks of "one who applies it to an unauthorized person." And these individuals are not unauthorized with regard to this oil.32For we are obligated to apply it to them.If, however, one - even a king or a High Priest - spreads it [on his flesh], he is liable, for [the prooftext] states: "It should not be spread on the flesh of a man." This implies all men.33Including a High Priest or king. When a High Priest takes the anointment oil from his head and spreads it on his belly, he is liable for karet,34Even though the oil was placed on his flesh, since it should not have been applied to this portion of the body, doing so is included in the above prohibition. provided he spreads an olive-sized portion.35The Ra'avad objects to this qualification, maintaining that once he places an olive-sized portion of the oil on his skin, he is liable even if he spreads a smaller measure. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that the simple meaning of Keritot 6b appears to support the Ra'avad's position. Nevertheless, they also provide interpretations that support the Rambam's understanding.
A king should only be anointed next to a spring.36Horiot 12a explains that the king was anointed there as an sign that his dynasty should be perpetuated, just as a stream continues in a never-ending flow. This symbolism is only appropriate for kings of the Davidic dynasty, whose dynasty will continue for-ever. In contrast, the dynasties of the kings of Israel will eventually be interrupted [see Hilchot Melachim 1:9 (Kessef Mishneh)].Accordingly, King David ordered that Solomon be anointed at the Gichon Stream (1 Kings 1:33 . We do not anoint the king who is the son of a king, for the kingship is a hereditary position for the king for all time,37When mentioning this law, Hilchot Melachim 1:7 continues: "Not only the monarchy, but all other positions of authority and appointments in Israel, are transferred to one's children and grand-children as inheritances forever." The order of inheritance of the crown follows the order of inheritance of property as explained in Hilchot Nachalot, ch. 1. The first in line for the monarchy are the deceased king's sons, in order of age. Should none of his sons be alive, the right is passed to his grandchildren. The children of the elder son are granted preference. If the king has no male descendents, the monarchy is given to his brothers. If they are not alive, it is granted to their sons. From them, the right to the throne passes to the deceased king's nephews (his sister's sons), then to his uncles, to his first cousins. as [Deuteronomy 17:20] states: "[Thus] he and his descendants [will prolong their reign] in the midst of Israel." If there is a controversy, he should be anointed to resolve the controversy and to notify to all that he alone is the king, as Solomon was anointed because of the controversy [stirred up by] Adoniyahu.381 Kings, Chapter l, describes Adoniyahu's abortive attempt to declare himself as David's successor. Yoash was anointed because of Atal'ya,39II Kings, Chapter 11, describes Atal'ya's murder of the children of King Achazyahu, her assumption of the throne, and the revolt which established Yoash as king. and Yehoachaz was anointed because of his brother Yehoyakim.40Yehoachaz was younger than Yehoyakim. Nevertheless, he was given the throne, because he was more capable than his brother, and better suited to serve in his father's position. See the commentaries to II Kings, ch. 23. When Elisha had Yehu anointed,41See II Kings, ch. 9. he did not have him anointed with the anointment oil, but with balsam oil. This is an accepted tradition among the sages.
All of the vessels of the Sanctuary that were fashioned [at the command] of Moses were sanctified only by being anointed with the anointing oil,42The Radbaz uses this concept to reinforce his thesis that the Rambam does not consider applying the anointing oil as a mitzvah, because it did not apply for all time. as [Numbers 7:1] states: "And he anointed them and sanctified them." This practice was not followed in the coming generations. Instead, all of the utensils became sanctified when they were used for their purpose in the Temple, as [implied by Numbers 4:12] "...that they will serve with them in the Sanctuary," i.e., through service, they are sanctified.
The spoons and the bowls used to contain the meal offerings and similarly, the basins used to receive the blood, and the other vessels used [in the Sanctuary] were all made of silver and gold. It was permitted to make them from other metals, as we explained.43Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 1:18-19. There the Rambam explains that it is preferable to make them from precious metals. Nevertheless, if this is beyond the financial capacity of the community, they can be made from base metals. Indeed, when the Hasmoneans conquered Jerusalem, it is said that they first made a Menorah of iron coated with tin. They receive their holiness by being used for the [desired] tasks. If they were broken, they should be smelted down and another utensil made from them,44Note a similar ruling in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 8:21. for their holiness never departs from them.
If the sacred utensils became perforated or cracked, the cracks are not plugged close. Instead, the utensils should be smelted down and new utensils made.45For patchwork is not becoming to the Temple.
When a knife has become dislodged from its shaft or blemished, it is not returned to its shaft, nor is it sharpened. Instead, it should be entombed on the side of the Temple, between the Sanctuary and the Entrance Hall on the south46This portion of the Temple was called Beit HaChalafot, "the Chamber of the Knives," for this reason (Middot 4:7). and new ones should be made. For [conduct bespeaking] poverty is not [appropriate] in a place where wealth [is in place].
There were two containers for dry measure in the Temple: an isaron and a half an isaron.47An isaron is the size of 43.2 eggs. According to modern measure, the size of an egg is considered to be 57.6 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 99.5 cc according to Chazon Ish. The isaron was for the meal offering48For as stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:5, the meal offerings were measured out using an isaron as the basic measure. and the half isaron to separate the meal offering brought by the High Priest every day.49As stated in ibid. 12:4, 13:2, each day the High Priest would bring a meal offering and he would divide it in half. Half was offered in the morning, and half in the afternoon.
There were seven containers of liquid measure: a hin,50See Halachah 2. a half a hin, a third of a hin, a fourth of a hin, a log, a half a log, and a fourth of a log. 51As mentioned above, a revi'it, a fourth of a log, is a common halachic measure equivalent to approximately 86 cc according to Shiurei Torah and approximately 150 cc according to Chazon Ish.Why were there measures of a half a hin, a third of a hin, a fourth of a hin? To measure out the wine libations for the sacrifices.52As Numbers 28:14 states, the wine libation for a bull was half a hin, for a ram, one third of a hin, and for a ewe, one fourth of a hin. See also Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 2:4. A log was necessary to measure the oil for the meal offerings.53As stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 12:7, a log of oil is poured over all the different meal offerings. A half a log was necessary to measure out the oil for every lamp of the lamps of the Menorah.54For as stated in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:11, this quantity of oil was placed in the lamps every day of the year. And a fourth [of a log] to divide the oil for [the High Priest's] chavitan offering.55For as indicated by Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:3, a fourth of a log of oil is poured on each of the cakes the High Priest brings.
There is nothing that is measured with a hin. Why [then] was it there? [It remained, because] it had been in the Sanctuary from the time of Moses who used it to measure the oil for the anointing oil.56As stated in Halachah 2 above. With the measure of a half a log that was in the Temple, water was measured for the Sotah water57A sotah, a woman accused of adultery, was forced to drink water in which a scroll containing a curse with God's name had been blotted out. See Hilchot Sotah 3:9. and oil for the thanksgiving offerings.58As stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 9:20, a log of oil was used in the baking processes of the different types of wafers used for this offering. Kin'at Eliyahu asks: Since there were specific measures employed in making each type of wafer, why weren't smaller measures used to measure out this oil? With the measure of a fourth [of a log], oil was measured for the bread brought by a nazirite59As stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:23, a fourth of a log of oil was used in the preparation of this bread. and water for the purification of a metzora.60A person with a physical affliction similar to - but not identical with - leprosy. As related in Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 11:1, as part of such a person's purification process, a bird was slaughtered and its blood poured over water. It is not that through these deeds the measures became sanctified,61I.e., receiving the blood of a sacrificial animal is an act of service. Therefore it consecrates the container. Preparing the meal offerings, by contrast, is not an act of service. Therefore it does not sanctify the container. but rather because of the tasks [performed] in the Sanctuary that were mentioned [in the preceding halachah].
All of these measures are consecrated and are considered as sacred utensils. [There is, however a difference between them.] The liquid measures were anointed on both the inside and the outside, while the dry measures were anointed only on the inside. Therefore the overflow of the liquid measures was consecrated,62Because it had touched a sacred utensil, the outside of the measure. These liquids were collected and used as libations or sold and the proceeds used to bring sacrifices for the altar. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 2:9-11.See also Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:20. and the overflow of the dry measures was not consecrated.63Because it never touched a sacred utensil.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The incense offering was prepared every year. Preparing it fulfills a positive commandment,1As the Radbaz states, the Rambam does not consider the preparation of the incense offering as a separate mitzvah. Indeed, in his Sefer HaMitzvos, General Principle 10, he explains that preparing the incense offering should not be considered as a separate mitzvah, for until it is actually offered it is an incomplete act. The mitzvah of bringing the incense offering is mentioned in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:1. as [Exodus 30:34] states: "And you take spices...." Four of the spices are explicitly mentioned in the Torah. They are balsam,2The Rambam defines the terms mentioned here in Halachah 4. onycha, storax, and frankincense. The others were communicated as a halachah communicated to Moses at Sinai.
[The requirement for] eleven spices was communicated to Moses at Sinai.3I.e., through the principles of Biblical exegesis, our Sages (Keritot 8b) derived that the incense offering contained this number of spices. They would prepare them with an exact weight and add to them - without weighing them: Salt of Sodom,4Although a measure of volume was mentioned for Salt of Sodom (see the following halachah), a measure of weight was not. Jordanian amber,5Amber is the fossilized resin from ancient forests. The resin becomes buried and fossilized through a natural polymerization of the original organic compounds. Heating amber will soften it and eventually it will burn, producing a pleasant fragrance. Others identify kipat hayardein with roses. Living Torah refers to it as cycla men, an attractive flower that grows in the Mediterranean region. and an herb that would produce smoke. Only select people would know its identity and that knowledge was conveyed as halachah from person to person.
This is the weight of the eleven spices: balsam, onycha, storax, frankincense, 70 maneh from each one. A maneh is 100 dinarim,6A dinar is 76.8 grams (81.6 grams according to a more stringent view) in modern measure.musk, cassia, spikenard, and saffron, 16 maneh, costus, 12 maneh, cinnamon, 9 maneh, Ceylonese cinnamon 3 maneh. The weight of the entire mixture was 368 maneh.The entire mixture was ground very thin. A fourth of a kab7A measure of volume equal to 1376 cc according to Shiurei Torah, 2400 cc according to Chazon Ish. of the salt of Sodom and a small amount of Jordanian amber and the smoke raising herb were added. A maneh of it was burned every day8Half a maneh in the morning and half in the afternoon. on the golden altar. There were 365 maneh, corresponding to the 365 days of the year. The three remaining maneh were ground again on the day before Yom Kippur very finely for [the High Priest] to take a handful to offer on Yom Kippur.9In the Holy of Holies. See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 4:1. The remainder is the remainder of the incense that was mentioned in [Hilchot] Shekalim.10365 portions of incense were prepared although an ordinary lunar year has 353, 354, or 355 days. Hence, at the end of the year, there was a certain amount left over. In Hilchot Shekalim 4:12, the Rambam writes that on Rosh Chodesh Nissan, the remainder of the incense was redeemed and then given to the craftsmen who prepared it. Afterwards, it was repurchased from them. Thus when a leap year was declared, there was enough incense.
Nataf mentioned by the Torah are the balsam trees that produce balsam oil.11Balsam is an evergreen tree whose sap has a very pleasant fragrance. Onycha is tziporen12The claw or nail of the strombus or wing-shell, a shell-fish common in the Red Sea. When burned, they emit a strong fragrance. which people include in incense. Storax is like black honey and it produces a disagreeable odor. It comes from the sap of the trees grown in Greece. These are the names of the spices in Arabic: od balasan, atzpar tiv, miyah,13These terms refer to balsam, onycha, and storax. lican,14Frankincense is the gum resin of a tree found growing in tropical regions, a member of the Burseraceae family. This resin exudes as a milky liquid and hardens into yellowish droplets, known as frankincense tears. It gives off a warm, slightly citrine perfume. muski,15Musk, see Chapter 1, Halachah 3. ketziyah,16In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Keritot 1:1), the Rambam states that this is an herb that he cannot identify. Some have identified it with cassia, an aromatic bark, similar to cinnamon, but differing in strength and quality. sanbali alnaturin,17Spikenard is obtained from an Indian plant, found in the Himalaya mountains, the Nardostachys jatamansi. saffron, kosht,18Costus, see Chapter 1, Halachah 3. od,19Cinnamon. kesser silica,20Ceylonese cinnamon. and anber.21Jordanian amber.
How is the incense offering prepared? Nine kabbin of vetch lye are brought and the onycha is rubbed with it.22This cleanses it thoroughly and improves its appearance. Afterwards, the onycha is soaked in 21 kabbin of caper wine23Alternatively, wine from Cyprus. or a very strong, aged white wine. Afterwards each of the spices is ground very finely alone. While he is grinding, he should say: "Grind thoroughly. Grind thoroughly," for the entire time that he is grinding.24For the chanting improves the spices (Keritot 6b). Then he mixes them all together.
All of the acts involved in its preparation are performed in the Sanctuary, in the Temple Courtyard, [using ingredients that] have been consecrated.25Keritot 6b derives this concept from the description of the anointment oil in Exodus 30:32: "It is holy; it shall be holy for you." The repetition of the term "holy" implies that all of the activity to prepare it must be performed with entities that are consecrated. An equation is established between that oil and the incense offering. When one prepares the incense offering from unconsecrated ingredients or in an unconsecrated utensil, it is unacceptable.
Twice a year, the incense would be returned to the grinder.26To grind it again, lest it have solidified. In the summer, it would be spread out so that it would not become musty. In the rainy season, it is stored away lest its fragrance be weakened.
If one included any honey in it, it is disqualified.27Although this would greatly improve its fragrance, there is an explicit Biblical prohibition (Leviticus 2:11; Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:2) against burning any such incense. If one omits any of its spices, he is liable for death, for it is considered as foreign incense. If one prepared it little by little in appropriate proportions, it is acceptable. Even if one prepared half [a maneh] in the morning and half in the afternoon, [it is acceptable].
When a person prepares incense from these eleven spices according to these proportions to smell its fragrance, he is liable for karet for its preparation28Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 85) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 110) consider the prohibition against preparing incense for its fragrance as one of the Torah's 613 commandments.if he prepared it willfully, even if he did not actually smell its fragrance. If he did so inadvertently, he is liable for a fixed sin offering. Even if he did not prepare the entire quantity [of 368 maneh], but merely a half or a third, since he prepared it according to the above proportions, he is liable for karet, as [Exodus 30:38] states: "You shall not make [incense] for yourselves according to its formula. Anyone who prepares [incense] like this to smell its fragrance shall be cut off from his people."
If he prepared it to learn or with the intent of giving it to the community, he is not liable. If he smelled its fragrance, but did not prepare it, he is not liable for karet. Instead, he is bound by the laws applying to all of those who derive benefit from consecrated property.29This is speaking about a person who smells the fragrance of the communal incense offering. A person who smells the incense of a private individual who copied the formula of the incense offering is not liable.See Hilchot Meilah 1:2 for the details of one's liability. See also ibid. 5:16 which states that this applies only when the column of smoke from the incense is rising. Once it has already risen, the prohibition no longer applies. The Torah obligated a person for karet only when he prepared it according to its formula for the sake of smelling it.
The incense offering is offered on the Golden Altar in the Temple each day. No other entity is offered on it. If one offered any incense other than this or offered this incense, but it was donated by an individual or a group,30But not to the community as a whole.The Radbaz quotes Rashi (Keritot 6a) which states that one is liable for death at the hand of heaven for bringing such an incense offering. (The death of Aaron's sons, Nadav and Avihu, are cited as proof for this thesis.) or one offered a sacrifice on it,31The blood of certain sacrifices is, however, sprinkled on it, as stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:13; Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 4:2. or poured a libation on it, one is liable for lashes,32Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 82) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 104) consider the prohibition against making such offerings on this altar as one of the Torah's 613 commandments. as [ibid.:9] states: "You shall not offer upon it foreign incense, a burnt offering, or a meal offering."
When the ark is transported from place to place, it should not be transported on an animal or on a wagon. Instead, it is a mitzvah for it to be carried on one's shoulders.33Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 34) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 379) consider this mitzvah as one of the Torah's 613 commandments.The prooftext cited by the Rambam refers to the ark being carried by the Levites, the descendants of the family of Kehot. In Sefer HaMitzvot, however, the Rambam writes that the mitzvah for all time was to have the ark carried by the priests and not the Levites. Indeed, the narrative of the ark being carried in Joshua 3:6 and II Samuel 15:25 corroborates this thesis. (The Ramban explains that this does not contradict the Biblical command, because the priests are also descendants of Kehot.) The reason the mitzvah was fulfilled by the Levites while the Jews journeyed through the desert is because there were not enough priests to carry the ark at that time. Since David forgot and had it transported on a wagon, there was an outbreak [of Divine anger] at Uzzah.34As the Bible relates, II Samuel, ch. 6, God vented His anger for the transgression on Uzzah, causing his death. Instead, it is a mitzvah to carry it on one's shoulders, as [Numbers 7:9] states: "For the holy task is their obligation. They shall carry it on their shoulders."
When [the Levites] carry the ark on their shoulders, they should carry it face to face, with their backs pointed outward and their faces inward.35Thus those in the front will be walking backwards. This is necessary so that they will not be turning their backs to the ark (Bamidbar Rabbah, ch. 5). They must be careful that the staves of the ark are not removed from the rings. Anyone who removes one of the staves36Although the prooftext quoted by the Rambam speaks of the staves, using the plural term, he understands the prohibition as applying even to one of them. See the Minchat Chinuch (mitzvah 96) which discusses this issue. from the rings is liable for lashes,37Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 86) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 96) consider the prohibition against removing the staves as one of the Torah's 613 commandments. as [Exodus 25:15] states: "The staves shall be in the rings of the ark. They shall not be removed from it."

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
The descendants of Levi were singled out for service in the Sanctuary, as [Deuteronomy 10:8] states: "At that time, God separated the tribe of Levi."1See also Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel 13:12 which states:Why did the Levites not receive a portion in the inheritance of Eretz Yisrael and in the spoils of war like their brethren? Because they were set aside to serve God and minister unto Him and to instruct people at large in His just paths and righteous judgments, as [Deuteronomy 33:10] states: "They will teach Your judgments to Jacob and Your Torah to Israel." Therefore they were set apart from the ways of the world. It is a positive commandment2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 23) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 394) include this mitzvah in their reckoning of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for the Levites to be free and prepared for the service of the Sanctuary, whether they desire to do so or not,3The Sifri to the prooftext quoted states that they can be compelled to do so against their will. as [Numbers 18:23] states: "And the Levite shall perform the service of the tent of meeting." When a Levite accepts all the mitzvot of the Levites with the exception of one matter, he is not accepted unless he accepts them all.
Their service was to guard the Temple.4See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, ch. 8, which describes the guarding of the Temple. Among [the Levities], there were gate-keepers5See I Chronicles 9:17-26 which lists the Levites who served this function. The guards would serve as watchmen and not perform any physical work. The gatekeepers performed physical activities, opening the gates, closing them, and locking them. who would open the gates of the Temple and close its doors. And there were singers who would accompany the sacrifices with song each day. [The latter concept is derived from the exegesis of Deuteronomy 18:7]: "And he shall serve in the name of God, his Lord, as all of his Levite brethren." Which service involves [invoking] the name of God? I would say: song.When were songs recited? At the time that the wine libations6Arachin, loc. cit., associates the wine libations with song, stating: "Song is recited only over wine." See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 6:5. [accompanying] all the communal burnt offerings,7I.e., the daily offerings and the special offerings brought on Sabbaths, Rashei Chadashim, and holidays. and the peace offerings brought on Shavuous,8As a prooftext for this concept, Arachin 11b cites Numbers 10:10: "And you shall sound the trumpets over your burnt offerings and over peace offerings." The plural term implies offerings that are brought for the entire Jewish people. were brought. Song was not recited over the freewill burnt offerings that the community would bring for "the dessert of the altar,"9See Hilchot Shekalim 4:9 for a description of these sacrifices. nor on the wine libations that are brought independently.10With this phrase, Rambam is referring to both wine libations brought by individuals and those brought by the community but were not brought on the same day as the sacrifice with which they were associated. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 6:8.
A Levite who is in an acute state of mourning11I.e., a close relative died that day (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:9). is permitted to perform his service and sing.12In contrast to a priest who may not offer a sacrifice while in such a state (Ibid.:6). There should never be less than twelve Levites13Arachin 13b explains that there were at least twelve musical instruments playing each day. And there was one singer corresponding to every one of these instruments. standing on the duchan14The platform of three steps that divided between the Courtyard of the Israelites and the Courtyard of the Priests (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:3). each day to recite the songs over the sacrifices and their number could be increased without end. The songs were sung vocally without musical instruments, for the fundamental dimension of the song is vocalization. Others would stand on [the duchan] and play melodies with musical instruments: some of them were Levites and some of them were Israelites of distinguished lineage, fit to marry into the priesthood. For only a person of distinguished lineage was allowed to ascend to the duchan.15Indeed, the fact that a person had served on the duchan is a sign of his lineage. The people who play musical instruments are not included in the number of the twelve singers [required].
On what instruments would they play? On lyres, flutes, harps, trumpets, and a cymbal.16In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Arachin 2:3), the Rambam describes these instruments at length. There should not be less than two lyres, nor more than six. There should not be less than two flutes, nor more than twelve. There should not be less than two trumpets, nor more than one hundred and twenty.17Indeed, II Chronicles 5:12 speaks of 120 trumpeters. There should not be less than nine harps and there is no upper limit. There should only be one cymbal.
On all the days of the festivals and on the Rashei Chadashim, the priests would sound the trumpets while the sacrifice was being offered and the Levites would recite songs, as [Numbers 10:10] states: "On the day of your celebration, on your festivals, and at the beginning of your months, you shall sound the trumpets."18The preceding verse speaks of sounding the trumpets as an outcry of distress. This mitzvah is described in Hilchot Ta'aniot, ch. 1. In his Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 59), the Rambam writes that the two soundings of the shofar are considered as a single mitzvah.Each trumpet was made from a block of silver.19Numbers 10:2 speaks of beating out the silver and forming trumpets in that manner. If it was made from scraps of silver, it is acceptable. If it is made from other metals, it is unacceptable.The flutes on which they would play would have cane reeds, because they produce a sweet sound. The melody would always be played by a single flute, because it produces a pleasant sound.20Our translation follows the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arachin 2:3). Rashi, Arachin 10a, offers a different interpretation, explaining that all melodies were concluded by a long note from a lone flute.
Twelve days a year, the flute would be sounded before the altar:21I.e., on these days, the Levites would sing the Hallel and be accompanied by the flutes alone. On the other days of the year, they would be accompanied by the other instruments (ibid.). During the slaughter of the first Paschal sacrifice,22On the 14th of Nissan. and during the second Paschal sacrifice,23I.e., on Pesach Sheni, on the 14th of Iyar. Those who did not bring a sacrifice on the first Pesach had the opportunity to compensate by bringing the sacrifice a month later (Hilchot Korban Pesach,, ch. 5). on the first day of Pesach, on the first day of Shavuot, and on the eight days of Sukkot. [The sounding of] the flute on these occasions24This also applies with regard to the sounding of the other musical instruments. A flute is mentioned, because a flute was also sounded in association with the water libation (see Hilchot Lulav 8:13) and the sounding of the flute at that time did not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions (Rashi, Sukkah 50b). supersedes the Sabbath [prohibitions],25For it is forbidden to sound musical instruments on the Sabbath. because it is associated with a sacrifice and the sounding of a flute associated with a sacrifice is an act of Temple service and supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions.
A Levite may not enter the Temple Courtyard to perform his service until he studied for five years beforehand. [This concept is derived as follows. Numbers 8:24] states: "This is [the edict] with regard to the Levites: From the age of 25..." and [ibid. 4:30] states: "From the age of 30...." How can [this apparent contradiction be resolved]? They study for five years and they do not enter the service until they fully mature and attain manhood [as ibid.:19] states: "Each man to his service."26As evident from Chapter 5, Halachah 15, the attainment of manhood mentioned here apparently refers to reaching the age of Bar Mitzvah. Hence the commentaries question the Rambam's statements, for they apparently contradict his statement made previously, that a Levite must be 30 to begin his service. The Radbaz and Rav Yosef Corcus explain that the obligation to be 30 applied only when the Sanctuary was being transported. (Just as the disqualification at age 50 applied only in the era when the Sanctuary was transported [see the following halachah], so too, it is reasonable to postulate that the obligation to be 30 applied only then.) In other eras, all that was necessary was that the Levite study the necessary laws for five years.
The Torah's statement [Numbers 8:25]: "At the age of 50, he will turn back from the ranks of the workers [of the Sanctuary]," applied only in the era when the Sanctuary was carried from place to place. It is not an [ongoing] mitzvah for future generations.27See Sefer HaMitzvot,, General Principle 3, which mentions this issue. For future generations, a Levite is not disqualified because of age or because of physical blemishes,28As a priest is (see Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, ch. 6). only due to a change in voice,29Chullin 24a states that the Levites on the duchan must sing in a manner that their voices sound like one voice. If the voice of a particular Levite becomes spoiled and he is no longer capable of singing in this manner, he is unfit to perform this service. i.e., if his voice spoils because of his advanced age, he is disqualified from serving in the Temple. It appears to me that he is disqualified only from serving as a singer, but he could become one of the doorkeepers.30Indeed, even in the era when the Sanctuary was transported, an elderly person was disqualified only from carrying it. He could serve as a watchman or a singer even then (Har HaMoriah).
Samuel the Seer and King David divided the Levites into 24 watches.31Ta'anit 27a derives this concept from I Chronicles 9:22. Each week, a different watch would serve [in the Temple]. The head of the watch would divide all the men of the watch into different "clans." On each day of the week, designated men would serve.32The designation of the clans and thus the determination of who would be serving in the Temple on a particular day was the responsibility of the head of the watch (Kessef Mishneh). The heads of the clans would assign the workers on the day that they were designated to work, [allotting each] one appropriate tasks.All of the Levites are warned [not to participate in] the service of the altar,33This is part of the prohibition mentioned in the following halachah. as [ibid. 18:3] states: "But to the holy utensils and to the altar they should not draw close so they do not die." [This prohibition implies] that they should not draw close to the service [of the Sanctuary], but they may touch [the sacred utensils].34This is derived from the law mentioned in Hilchot Mitamei Mishkav UMoshav 11:11 that when the table for the Showbread was displayed to the people, they were warned not to touch it lest it become impure. One can infer that there is no difficulty in touching it per se, only in making it impure (Har HaMoriah).The commentaries have noted that Numbers 4:15 specifically mentions that the Levites should not touch the sacred utensils and that doing so was punishable by death. It is, however, possible to explain that this stringency only applied during the time the Sanctuary was transported through the desert and not in subsequent generations.
Just as the Levites were warned not to perform the service of the priests,35As stated in the previous halachah. so too, the priests are warned not to perform the work of the Levites, as [the above verse] states: "Also they,36The Levites. also you [shall not die]."37The priests. Similarly, the Levites themselves were warned that each one should not perform the task incumbent on a colleague.38Sefer HaMitzvot (negative mitzvah 72) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 389) include the prohibition against performing service designated for someone else in their reckoning of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Thus a singer should not assist39The Kessef Mishneh questions the Rambam's ruling, because according to Arichin 11b, the source for the Rambam's ruling, it would appear that someone who merely renders assistance is not liable for violating a Scriptural commandment. a door-keeper, nor a door-keeper a singer, as [ibid. 4:49] states: "Every man, according to his service and his burden."
When Levites perform the service of the priests or one Levi assisted in a task that is not his, they are liable for death at the hand of heaven, for [ibid. 18:3] states: "shall not die."40Implying that the violation of this commandment makes one liable to die. When, by contrast, a priest performs the service of a Levite, he is not liable for death. Instead, he violates merely a negative commandment.41The Ra'avad takes issue with the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that the priests are also liable for death, noting that this is stated in Arichin, loc. cit. The Or Sameach notes that the Sifri Zuta (which the Rambam quotes in Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., also quoted by the Yalkut Shimoni) to the verse rules differently, distinguishing between the priests and the Levites, leaving room for the Rambam's decision.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
The priests were set aside from the Levites as a whole [to perform] the sacrificial service, as [I Chronicles 23:13] states: "And Aaron was set apart to sanctify him as holy of holies." It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 32) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 269) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to distinguish the priests, make them holy, and prepare them for the sacrifices, as [Leviticus 21:8] states: "And you shall sanctify him because he offers the food of your God."
It is necessary for every Jewish person to show them much honor and to give them priority for every matter of holiness, to begin [reading] the Torah first,2I.e., to receive the first aliyah in the public reading of the Torah. In the Talmudic era (and so is the practice in some communities today), the person receiving the aliyah would himself read from the Torah. to recite the blessings first,3I.e., to recite the blessing HaMotzi and to lead the Grace (Rashi, Gittin 59b). and to take a desirable portion first.4In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Gittin 5:8), the Rambam emphasizes that this applies only when there are no sages present whose knowledge surpasses that of the priest. If such sages are present, they are given priority.
Moses divided the priests into eight watches: four from Elazar and four from Itamar. This continued until [the days of] Samuel the prophet. At that time, he and King David divided them into 24 watches.5More particularly, Samuel divided them into 16 watches and David, into 24 (Ta'anit 27a). For each watch, there was one who served as the leader. A watch would ascend to Jerusalem to serve for the entire week. They would switch on the Sabbath day. The previous watch would depart and the one which follows would enter.6The changing of the watches was marked by the division of the showbread. The entering watch would receive six loaves and the departing watch, six loaves. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:12. [This cycle would continue] until its completion and then they would start again.
It is a positive commandment for all the watches to share equal status7Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 36) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 509) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.There is, however, a difference between the definition of the mitzvah here and that of Sefer HaMitzvot. In that source, the Rambam describes the mitzvah as creating the watches, while here he defines it as allowing all of the watches to serve during the festivals. during the pilgrimage festivals. Any one of the priests who comes during the pilgrimage festivals and desires to serve [in the Temple] may serve and receive a portion [of the sacrifices]. We do not tell him: "Go and [wait] until your watch [receives its turn]," as [Deuteronomy 18:6] states: "When the Levite8All the commentaries agree that this verse is referring to a priest, who is a descendant of the tribe of Levi. See the conclusion of Halachah 6. will come from one of your cities... [to the place that God will choose, he shall serve..."].
In which context does the above apply? With regard to the sacrifices of the festivals,9The Kessef Mishneh explains that this refers both to the communal offerings required to be offered on the festivals and the individual offerings which people would bring as part of their pilgrimage obligations. the division of the showbread,10See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:12. and the two loaves [offered on] Shavuot.11See ibid. 8:11. Vowed offerings,12A pledge to bring a particular type of sacrifice (see Hilchot Nedarim 1:2). freewill offerings,13A pledge to bring a designated animal as a sacrifice (ibid.). and the daily offerings are offered only by the watch that serves at that time.14I.e., although all the priests had license to come and serve in the Temple during the pilgrimage festivals, there was also one watch which was designated to serve at that time, and that watch was entrusted with offering these sacrifices. [This applies] even during the pilgrimage festivals, as [ibid.:8] states: "Portion for portion shall they eat, except for what was transacted by the ancestors." The implication is that they will partake "portion for portion" of the communal offerings, but not of the other sacrifices. For these were already divided by their ancestors and established for each watch in its week.
Similarly, the service involved with the showbread is performed by the watch whose turn is established. The service involved with the two breads [of Shavuos] is performed by all the watches.15The difference between the two is that the showbread is not offered because of the festival (but is instead, an ongoing obligation for every Sabbath), while the two loaves are (Radbaz).How do we know that [the verse cited above] is speaking only about the festivals? Because it states: "from one of your cities among all Israel." [One can infer] that it is speaking about a time when the entire Jewish people enter through one gate.16We have translated the word sha'arecha figuratively as "your cities," even though it literally means "your gates." The implication is that the verse is speaking about a time when all of Israel come to one city, Jerusalem, for the pilgrimage festivals.How do we know that it is speaking about priests?17For it mentions Levites. For it states: "Portion for portion shall they eat" and there are no presents to be eaten allotted in the Temple except to the priests.
Similarly, when a priest has a sacrifice [of his own], he may come to the Temple and offer it on any day that he desires,18I.e., even if it is not the time when his watch was designated to serve. as [that verse] states: "He shall come at any [impulse] of his heart's desires and serve." He may even offer his sin offering and guilt offering and bring about atonement for himself. [In such an instance,] the right to the hide and to partake of the sacrifice belongs to him. If he desires he may give his sacrifice to any priest he desires to sacrifice it. [In such an instance,] the right to the hide and to partake of the sacrifice belongs to the priest to whom he gave it.19The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the priest who brought the sacrifice has the right to partake of it and benefit from its hide, even if he did not offer it. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh debate these two perspectives based on Bava Kama 110a.
If the priest who brings the sacrifice is physically blemished,20In which instance, he is forbidden to bring his own sacrifice. he should give his sacrifice to the [priests of] the watch serving that week and the hide belongs to them.21This follows the version of Bava Kama 109b cited by Rashi. The standard published text follows a different version. Since he is unable to offer the sacrifice, he may not appoint an agent to offer it, but instead, must give it to the members of the watch. Since they offer it, they are entitled to its hide. The owner of the sacrifice may, however, receive a portion of the meat of the sacrifice since he is permitted to partake of sacrificial meat. If he was ill or sick to the extent that he could serve only with difficulty, he may give the sacrifice to any priest he desires,22Since it is possible for him to serve, he may appoint an agent to act as the owner of the sacrifice. the hide and the service23According to Rashi (ibid. 110a), it appears that the intent is the priests of the watch are given the right to partake of the sacrifice. Since the owner could not partake of it himself, he cannot appoint an agent to do so. belong to the [priests of] the watch serving that week. If he cannot serve at all, the sacrifice belongs to the [priests of] the watch serving that week in its entirety.24Since he cannot serve himself, he cannot appoint an agent to serve in his place.
If [all the priests of the watch] are impure and a communal sacrifice is involved and all of the priests25I.e., all the priests found in Jerusalem at that time, including those of other watches. were impure,26In which instance, the communal sacrifices may be offered by the priests while in a state of impurity, as stated in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:12. Individual sacrifices may not be offered by impure priests even under these circumstances. the sacrifice may be given to the priests of that watch who were ritually pure, but have physical blemishes.27In such a situation, the sacrifice should be brought in a state of ritual impurity. Nevertheless, the sacrificial meat itself was ritually pure and it should be eaten by a priest who is ritually pure. Since the priest who is physically blemished is ritually pure and is part of the watch which is serving, he should be given the meat to eat. The hide and the service belong to [the priests of] the watch serving that week [even though they are] impure.28A blemished priest cannot perform service in the Temple even in such a situation.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and states that the sacrifice should be given to any priest to offer even though that priest is impure and the right to partake of the sacrifice and use the hide should be given to the priests of that watch who have physical blemishes. The Radbaz explains that the Rambam's intent is that a priest with physical blemishes should receive the meat. The hide, however, belongs to the priests who offered it.
If the sacrifice belonged to the High Priest and he was in a state of acute mourning,29His mother, father, brother, sister, son, daughter, or wife died that day. he may give it to any priest he desires. The hide and the service belong to [the priests of] the watch serving that week. [The rationale is that] since a High Priest is fit to perform service in a state of acute mourning,30Hence he can appoint an agent. as will be explained,31Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:6. The High Priest may offer sacrifices while in a state of acute mourning, but may not partake of them. Other priests are not allowed to offer sacrifices in this state. he may appoint an agent for his sacrifice.
The head of every watch divides his watch into clans32The Radbaz implies that the division was a creative one and that each week, the head of the watch would make a division according to his perception of the needs of the Temple service for that week. so that [the priests] in each clan will serve on one of the days of the week, one on one day, another on the next, and another on the next. Each of the clans had a head who was appointed over it.
A High Priest is appointed33By the High Court of 71 judges as stated in Halachah 15. [to serve as] the head of all of the priests. He is anointed with the anointing oil34Described in Chapter 1, in particular, Halchot 7 and 9. and clothed in the garments of the High Priest,35The eight garments described in Chapter 8, Halachot 1-2. An ordinary priest wears four priestly garments and the High Priest, eight. as [Leviticus 21:10] states: "And the priest who was elevated over his brethren, over whose head was poured [the anointment oil]...." If there is no anointment oil,36As was the case in the latter years of the First Temple and throughout the Second Temple period (see Chapter 1, Halachah 8). he is initiated into office merely by [wearing] the garments of the High Priest,37The term marbeh begadim, literally, "increased [his] garments," is used to described this initiation, because he is garbed with the eight garments of the High Priest as opposed to the four of an ordinary priest. as [the above verse] states: "...over whose head was poured [the anointment oil] and who was initiated to wear the garments." [Implied is that] just as he is initiated with the anointment oil, so too, he is initiated with the garments [of the High Priesthood].
How is he initiated with the garments? He puts on the eight garments [of the High Priest] and [later] removes them and does so again on the morrow for seven days, as [Exodus 29:30] states: "The priest from his sons who serves in his stead shall put them on for seven days." Just as he puts on the clothes for seven consecutive days, so too, he is anointed with the oil for seven consecutive days.38The Radbaz explains that the paradigm for this was set by the initiation of Aaron in the High Priesthood at the time of the dedication of the Sanctuary. Although Aaron was anointed on the first day, Moses served as a High Priest for the first seven days (Radbaz). If he performed service before he was initiated by wearing the clothes for all seven days or before he was anointed for all seven days, his service is acceptable.39Implied is that the initial preference is for him not to perform service. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the obligation to be initiated for seven days before serving applies only with regard to the Yom Kippur service, but not with regard to other matters. Since he was initiated or anointed once, he is a High Priest with regard to all matters.
There is no difference in [the laws pertaining to] a High Priest who was anointed with the anointment oil and [those applying to] one who was initiated by wearing the garments of the High Priest except [the obligation] for the High Priest to bring a bull [as a sacrifice] if he inadvertently violated one of the mitzvot for which a sin offering is required, as [Leviticus 4:3] states: "If the anointed priest40Thus including only a High Priest who was anointed. will sin...."41See Hilchot Shegagot, ch. 15, for a description of the details of this sacrifice. With regard to other matters, they are identical.
A High Priest should be appointed only by the court of 71 judges.42Sanhedrin 16a derives this from the advice Yisro gives to Moses (Exodus 18:22 : "Any great matter (hadavar hagadol) will be brought to you." Implied is that matters that involve gadlus (greatness) - including the appointment of the kohen gadol (the High Priest) - should be judged by a court with authority equal to that of Moses, i.e., the Sanhedrin of 71 judges. He should be anointed only during the day, as [ibid. 6:13] states: "On the day of his anointment...." Similarly, if he was initiated merely by wearing the priestly garments, the initiation should only take place during the day. Two High Priests should not be initiated together.
We also appoint a priest who will serve the High Priest like a viceroy, he is called the segen and he is also called "the appointed one." He should stand at the right hand of the High Priest at all times.43See Chapter 5, Halachot 4-5, 13. This honor is given to him. All of the other priests are under his authority.
In addition, katikolin44A Greek term meaning "general officer." are appointed to serve the segen as the segen serves the High Priest. There should be no less than two of them.45In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 5:2), the Rambam states that there should never be less than two people appointed to take care of communal matters. No less than seven amerkalin46Horiot 13a interprets this as a composite of two Aramaic terms meaning "appointed over all." See also the Targum to Numbers 3:32 which uses this term to translate nasi, "prince." The Radbaz notes that the word emir in Arabic means "officer." should be appointed, The keys to the Temple Courtyard are in their hands.47I.e., there were seven keys to the Temple Courtyard and each one had one key (Tosefta, Shekalim). In Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 8:5, the Rambam states that the keys to the Sanctuary were entrusted to the elders of the clan. Perhaps the intent is that the elders of the clan were in fact the amerkalin (Ma'aseh Rokeach). Based on the following halachah, that would seem unlikely (Kin'at Eliyahu). See also Chapter 7, Halachah 3, which speaks about a priest appointed to lock the gates of the Temple. Perhaps the intent is that the keys belonged to the amerkalin and each night, they would entrust them. If one desires to open [the courtyard], he cannot until all the amerkalin gather and open it.
Treasurers are appointed under the amerkalin. There should be no less than three. They collect the consecrated articles, redeem those which should be redeemed,48I.e., those that could be used for the Temple or its service itself should be used for that purpose and not redeemed. and use the proceeds for purposes that require these expenses.
A High Priest who was anointed receives precedence49Horiot 13a states that he is given precedence with regard to providing him with his livelihood (and by extension, redeeming him from captivity and returning his lost article). Seemingly, this order also applies - albeit with certain exceptions - with regard to establishing a hierarchy of honor. over one who was installed by wearing the garments [of the High Priesthood].50The Ritba (in his gloss to Makkot 11a) questions the source of the Rambam's ruling, Horiot, loc. cit. For seemingly, until the oil of anointment was entombed, there were only anointed High Priests and there were none initiated by wearing the priestly garments. And after it was entombed, there were no longer any anointed High Priests. And yet, the passage in Horiot appears to imply that they were contemporaries.The Ritba offers a resolution, explaining that, in the era of the First Temple, if a High Priest that was anointed was forced to be absent from the Temple for an extended period, e.g., he became ill or was taken captive, a substitute was appointed to serve as a High Priest in his place. He was not anointed, because there may never be two anointed High Priests at the same time, but instead, was initiated in his office by wearing the garments of the High Priesthood. One installed by wearing the garments who is prepared to serve receives precedence over an anointed [High Priest] disqualified because of a seminal emission.51A priest who experiences a seminal emission becomes impure and is therefore disqualified from offering sacrifices or performing any other service in the Temple until he regains ritual purity. One disqualified because of a seminal emission receives precedence over one disqualified because of a physical blemish.52For the one disqualified because of a seminal emission is fit for service after he becomes pure, while a blemished priest will never become fit. Even if the blemished can be healed, until it is healed, he is unfit. One disqualified because of a physical blemish receives precedence over the priest anointed to lead the nation in war.53See Chapter 1, Halachah 7. The priest anointed to lead the nation in war receives precedence over the segen.54Nazir 47b states that with regard to providing one with his livelihood, the priest appointed to lead the nation in war receives precedence over the segen, because the nation as a whole is dependent on him. The segen receives precedence over a katikol, a katikol over an amerkal, an amerkal over a treasurer, a treasurer over a head of a watch, a head of a watch over a head of a clan, and a head of a clan over an ordinary priest. Thus there are eight rungs in the priesthood,55The priest appointed to lead the nation in war is not counted, because he is not involved in the Temple service. Nor are those disqualified because of blemishes or impurity counted, because they do not exist at all times. Similarly, only one level of High Priest is counted, because generally, there was either an anointed High Priest or one installed through wearing the garments. Usually, both did not exist together. See the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh. one above the other.
When the king, the High Priest, or any other official dies, his son or anyone fit to inherit him56I.e., any male. Although females are fit to inherit in certain circumstances, they should not be given any positions of authority among the Jewish people. See Hilchot Melachim 1:5. is appointed in his stead. Those who are higher in the order of inheritance57The order of inheritance is listed in Hilchot Nachalot, ch. 1. receive precedence with regard to receiving the position of the deceased, provided he is equivalent [to the deceased] in wisdom,58Hilchot Melachim 1:7 states that he must be equivalent to his predecessor in both wisdom and the fear of God in order to inherit the position. The commentaries suggest emending the text here to follow that reading, because the fear of God is the very foundation of the spiritual heritage of the Jewish people. Anyone who lacks that quality can never be a competent leader, as the Rambam states there: "[However,] under no circumstance should a person who lacks the fear of God be appointed to any position in Israel, even though he possesses much knowledge." or in the fear of God, even if he is not comparable in wisdom.59In the above source, the Rambam states: "He should be granted his father's position and given instruction." In that vein, Ketubot 103b describes how Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi instructed that his son Gamliel be given his position, even though his knowledge was not as great as his father's.If, however, a son is not comparable to his father in the fear of heaven, he should not be given his position at all. The Kessef Mishneh cites the interpretation of Leviticus 16:32 which describes the High Priest as one "who was anointed to fill the place of his ancestor." Torat Kohanim (Tzav) comments: "Should he be anointed even though he does not 'fill the place' [i.e., does not equal the level of his] ancestors? No, the Torah states 'fill the place.' If he is not equal to his father, the position should be granted to someone else." For [Deuteronomy 17:20] states with regard to a king: "He and his descendants in the midst of Israel." This teaches that the kingship is inherited. This applies with regard to any office amidst the Jewish people.60See Sifri, Shoftim.This law has been a matter of controversy throughout the years. In regard to positions of communal authority, almost all authorities accept this concept. However, controversies have frequently arisen over the inheritance of Rabbinical positions. Here, the Rambam's decision has frequently been challenged.Maharshdam (Yoreh De'ah, Responsa, n. 85) states that a city must seek out the most capable Rav possible without regard to inheritance. Similarly, the Terumat HaDeshen (Pesakim 128) states "Torah cannot be inherited."However, many prominent authorities (Rivash, Responsa 271, Ramah, Yoreh De'ah 245, Maharit Algazi, Simchat Yom Tov 6) have explained that this law applies even in regard to rabbinical positions.The difficulties in deciding the question may be seen in the Chatam Sofer's lack of certainty regarding it. In his Responsa (Orach Chayim, Responsum 12), he at first espouses the opinion that rabbinical positions should not be handed down from father to son. However, later (Responsum 13), he reversed himself and granted the son his father's position by inheritance.In practice, most Rabbis have reached the opinion that if the son is a capable Rabbi, though less qualified than another who seeks the position, his father's position should be awarded to him. However, if the community sees the son as incapable of filling his father's position at all, it may be given to another person. If one acquires it, he acquires it for himself and for his descendants.
The position of being the priest anointed to lead the nation in war is not transferred to one's son.61The Radbaz maintains that this ruling has to do with the unique function this priest serves. Since he leads the nation in war, it is a life or death question and the most capable person is chosen whether he is the heir or not.In a responsum (Orach Chayim 12), the Chatam Sofer takes the opposite perspective, explaining the distinction between this and other positions which are inherited as follows: The kingship and other similar positions are appointments associated with leadership. Hence if the heir is fundamentally capable, he inherits his father's position. The priest who leads the nation in war, by contrast, is an appointment based on holiness. That is not transferred by inheritance. Indeed, the High Priesthood would not be transferred by inheritance were there not a specific verse commanding us to do so. Instead, the son is like all other priests. If he is anointed as the leader in war, he is anointed. If he is not anointed, he is not anointed.62There is no obligation either way. When the priest who was anointed to lead the nation in war serves in the Temple,63While he leads them in war, he wears the eight garments of the High Priest (see Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). he serves wearing four garments like the other priests.64Although he was anointed, he is not given the status of a High Priest and wears the garments of an ordinary priest.A person should be promoted to a higher position than the one he holds and should not be demoted to a lower position, for one must ascend with regard to holy matters and not descend.65This is a principle applied in several contexts of Torah law. See Menachot 11:7; Hilchot Tefilah 3:16; Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:16. A person should never be removed from a position of authority within the Jewish people unless he acted in an unsuitable manner.66Once he is removed from his position, he should not be reinstated. See Hilchot Sanhedrin 17:9.
When a High Priest violates a transgression that is punishable by lashes, he should be given lashes in a court of three judges as is the law regarding others liable for lashes.67See Hilchot Sanhedrin 5:4. Although a case involving a question of capital punishment for a High Priest is judged by a court of 71 judges [rather than the usual 23 (ibid.:1)], we do not say that as a measure of respect for his position, he should be judged by a court of 23 judges. For if he is held liable, he will be lashed in their presence and this will be a public dishonor [Jerusalem Talmud (Sanhedrin 2:1)]. He then returns to his position of eminence.68The Jerusalem Talmud (loc. cit.) explains that this comes as a result of the holiness with which the High Priest is endowed. It is a microcosm of God's holiness and hence, like His holiness cannot be nullified.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
The High Priest must surpass all of his priestly brethren in beauty, power, wealth, wisdom, and appearance.1Rav Yosef Corcus explains that "beauty" refers to the attractiveness of his facial features, "appearance," to the comeliness of his physical form. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Yoma 1:3), the Rambam adds that the High Priest must surpass his brethren in the fear of God. If he does not have wealth of his own, all of his priestly brethren should give him according to their financial capacity until he is wealthier than all of them.2Leviticus 21:10 describes the High Priest as "the priest greater than his brethren." Yoma 18a offers two interpretations of that phrase: a) The High Priest must be greater than his brethren in all qualities that are significant to human interaction; b) his greatness must come "from (the prefix mei translated as "than" can also mean "from") his brethren"; they must grant him his wealth. The Rambam does not see the two interpretations as contradictory and combines them both in this halachah.
None of the above is an absolute requirement;3Har HaMoriah derives this from the fact that, by and large, the High Priests of the Second Temple period lacked the quality of wisdom which is the most important of all attributes. Nevertheless, they were given all the privileges of High Priests. instead, all of this is merely [the optimum way of fulfilling] the mitzvah. If he was, nonetheless, initiated, his initiation is valid.
The High Priest must conduct himself with dignity. He should not act frivolously with the people at large. They should not see him naked, nor4Our text follows the manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah and early printings. The standard published text reads slightly differently. in the bathhouse, nor in the toilet, nor while he is having his hair cut, as [Leviticus 21:6] states: "the priest greater than his brethren." This teaches that he is regarded with great honor. [Nevertheless,] if he desires that others bathe with him, he may [allow them to do so].
He should not enter a celebration or a public feast even if they are associated with a mitzvah.5For participation in a public celebration may compromise his dignity. If he desires,6I.e., the matter is left to his choice. however, he may go to a house of mourning. If he goes, he does not go walking together with the other priests. Instead, the priests surround him and display honor to him and the segen arranges the contact between him and the people. The segen and an anointed priest who was removed from his position7Rashi (Sanhedrin 19a) explains that this refers to an instance where the High Priest was disqualified from performing the Yom Kippur service and another priest had to be appointed to replace him. Although that priest is removed from the office after the first returns, he is still treated with an extra dimension of honor. stand at his right and the head of the clan [serving in the Temple], the mourners, and all others are to his left. He tells the mourners: "Be comforted" and they honor him according to their capacity.
If one [of the relatives for whom he must mourn] dies, he does not go out to the funeral procession, nor does he depart from the entrance of his home or the Temple. All of the nation come to his home to comfort him. He stands for the line of comforters8See the description of this practice in Hilchot Evel 13:1-2. with the segen at his right and the head of the clan to his left. [The people tell him]: "We are atonement for you" and he tells them: "May you be blessed from heaven."
When the meal of comfort is served to him,9See Hilchot Evel 4:9 which states that on the first day of mourning, a mourner is not allowed to partake of his own food. all of the people sit on the ground and he sits on a low bench.10During mourning, one is not permitted to sit on an ordinary chair (see ibid. 5:17-18). Indeed, in the Talmudic era, it was common for the mourners to sit on the ground itself. Nevertheless, out of respect for the High Priest, he is allowed to sit on a low stool and the visitors sit on the ground. He may not, however, sit on an ordinary stool, for he is also obligated to observe the laws of mourning (ibid. 7:6). He does not rend his garments over his dead, as do the other priests,11Rending one's garments is one of the mourning obligations. People at large, not only the priests, are obligated to rend their upper garments (ibid. 8:1). as [Leviticus 21:10] states: "He shall not rend his garments."12Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment164) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 150) include the commandment for the priests not to enter the Temple with torn garments among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Rambam discusses this mitzvah in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, ch. 1. There and in his Sefer HaMitzvot, he explains that there are additional dimensions of this prohibition that apply to a High Priest alone, even when he is not in the midst of Temple service. Since he should be in the Temple at all times, he should never rend his garments. Moreover, he is not allowed to rend his garments during mourning even outside the Temple. If he rends them, he is liable for lashes.13Even though it is a mitzvah for one to rend his garments over his dead, that does not absolve the High Priest for violating this transgression (Radbaz). He may, however, tear them from below towards his feet.14This refers to his own personal garments, not the priestly garments.He may never let his hair grow long,15Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 163) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 149) include the commandment for the priests not to enter the Temple with overgrown hair among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Rambam also discusses this mitzvah in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, loc. cit. In his Sefer HaMitzvot, he explains that there is an additional dimension of this mitzvah that applies to a High Priest.As the Rambam continues to explain, this mitzvah applies not just when the High Priest is in mourning - although others should let their hair grow as a sign of mourning (Hilchot Evel 5:1-2, 6:2), he should not - but at all times. as [ibid.] states: "He shall not allow [the hair of] his head to grow long." [This applies] even at times when he does not enter the Sanctuary. Instead, he should have his hair cut every Friday. He should not have his hair cut with a razor, rather with scissors. [He should have] the top of one hair [cut] when it reaches the base of the hair above it so that it appears that they grew as one,16This is part of the High Priest's obligation to present himself in a beautiful and attractive manner. This was a very difficult task. Sanhedrin 22b relates that one of the contemporaries of Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi (who lived approximately 100 years after the destruction of the Temple) squandered a large amount of money to have his hair cut in this manner. Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi praised him for this, for otherwise, the students would have had difficulty picturing it. as [indicated by Ezekiel 44:20]: "They shall not shave their heads, nor should they let their hair grow long. [Instead,] they shall keep their heads trimmed."
There was a chamber prepared for him in the Sanctuary which was called: "The Chamber of the High Priest."17In Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:17, the Rambam notes that this chamber was also called the Chamber of Wood and the Chamber of the Parhedrin. See the notes to that halachah for the explanation of these names. The glory and the honor of [the High Priest] would be to remain in the Sanctuary the entire day18As is the simple meaning of the charge (Leviticus 21:12 : "From the Sanctuary, he shall not depart." This, however, is not the halachic meaning of the commandment. Instead, as explained in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2, the halachic meaning is that he should not depart in the middle of his service. and to go to his private home only at night or for an hour or two during the day. His home should be in Jerusalem and he should never depart from there.19This could also be understood from the above command, for according to the Rambam, there are times when the entire city of Jerusalem is referred to as "the Sanctuary."
A High Priest may act as a judge and he is judged.20I.e., this is not considered as an affront to his honor. Testimony may be delivered against him. Capital cases against him are judged in the High Court alone, as [implied by Exodus 18:22]: "Any great matter (hadavar hagadol) will be brought to you."21This was part of Jethro's advice to Moses with regard to the appointment of judges. Implied is that matters that involve gadlus (great importance) - for example, a case involving the very life of the kohen gadol (the High Priest) - should be judged by a court with authority equal to that of Moses, i.e., the Sanhedrin of 71 judges. As mentioned in Chapter 4, Halachah 23, cases involving a transgression punishable by lashes are judged by a court of three.
If he knows testimony, he is not obligated to deliver it, even in the High Court.22In contrast, an ordinary person is obligated to deliver any testimony that he knows (Hilchot Edut 1:1). For going to testify does not enhance his honor. If it was testimony involving a King of the Jewish people,23I.e., the kings of the House of David. The kings of the Kingdom of Israel and the like, by contrast, should not be brought to court (Hilchot Sanhedrin 2:5). Alternatively, it could refer also to the King of Israel and be referring to a case involving the king's son (Radbaz). Since a king is involved, delivering testimony will not be deprecatory to the High Priest's honor. he should go to the High Court and testify concerning him.24Note the gloss of Rav Moshe HaCohen to Hilchot Edut who asks why the Rambam does not mention an instance where the High Priest's testimony is necessary to prevent a transgression, for in such an instance, seemingly, even the High Priest should be required to testify.
We already explained in the fifth book25Sefer Kedushah, Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapter 1. Halachah 1 of that chapter mentions the prohibition against marrying a widow and Halachah 13, the mitzvah to marry a virgin. These concepts are also mentioned in Hilchot Ishut 1:7-8. that [the High Priest] is forbidden [to marry] a widow and commanded to marry a virgin. He may not have two wives. If he marries two, he may not carry out the service on the fast [of Yom Kippur] until he divorces one.26Yoma 13a derives this concept from the exegesis of Leviticus 16:5 which states: "And he will atone... for his household." "His household" is interpreted as referring to his wife and the term is written in the singular, implying one wife and not two.In his gloss to Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 1:13, the Ra'avad notes that II Chronicles 24:3 speaks of Yehoyeda the High Priest and the marriage of two women, seemingly contradicting the Rambam's ruling. The Ra'avad interprets the verse as stating that Yehoyeda married the women himself. (Similarly, Rav Moshe HaCohen and others question the Rambam's ruling.) Rambam LeAm, however, advances the interpretation that the verse is stating that Yehoyeda had Yoash marry the women.He may perform chalitzah27If a man's brother dies childless, there is a mitzvah for him to marry his brother's widow. This is referred to as yibbum. If he does not desire to marry the widow, he must perform a ritual act called chalitzah that gives her the right to remarry. The Rambam is emphasizing the contrast between a High Priest and a king. A king does not perform chalitzah because such an act would be a compromise to his honor. And since he does not perform chalitzah, he is also not entitled to perform yibbum. Nor does his wife undergo yibbum for she is not allowed to marry anyone else (Hilchot Melachim 2:3). None of these restrictions apply with regard to a High Priest. and [either] chalitzah or yibbum are performed with his wife. If he divorces a women, she is permitted to marry another person.28The divorcee of a king, by contrast, is not permitted to marry anyone else (ibid.).
When the High Priest enters the Sanctuary29I.e., the outer chamber of the Temple building, not the Holy of Holies. This is evident from the fact that he is wearing the ephod and on Yom Kippur, he enters the Holy of Holies wearing only the four garments of an ordinary priest. to prostrate himself,30Prostrating oneself in the Temple was considered one of the elements of the Temple service. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:4. three support him: one on his right side, one on his left side, and one [holding] the jewels on the hind side31This refers to the jewels on the High Priest's breastplate. It is necessary to hold these jewels because the Torah commanded that the breastplate never move away from the ephod. of the ephod. He enters the Sanctuary and prostrates himself. When the segen hears the sound of the feet of the High Priest as he departs,32The movement of the High Priest created noise, because there were bells on the bottom of his cloak. he lifts up the curtain.33This refers to the curtain over the opening to the Entrance Hall. On his way in, the High Priest would open the curtain by himself. This was not, however, easy on his way out, because he would be backing out, keeping his faced turned to the Temple. After he departs, his priestly brethren enter, prostrate themselves, and depart.
On any day he desires, he may offer the incense offering.34Generally, the task of bringing the incense offering was rotated among the priests and one who offered it once would not offer it again (Yoma 26a). Nevertheless, the High Priest had the option of offering it whenever he desired. He receives the first portion of any sacrifice offered in the Temple.35This applies even if he did not offer the sacrifice himself. What is implied? If he desires, he may say: "This sin offering is mine" or "This guilt offering is mine."36Generally, the sacrifices are divided equally into portions for all the priests. The High Priest, however, could claim any sacrifice or portion of a sacrifice (see Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:18). He does not seek to be chosen for service by lot.37As the other priests are (see Hilchot Temidim UMusafim, ch. 4). Instead, whenever he desires to offer a sacrifice, he may offer [any sacrifice] he desires. With regard to consecrated [produce] from Eretz Yisrael,38E.g., terumah and challah.. he is like all other priests.
When the High Priest desired to offer a sacrifice, he would ascend the ramp with the segen on his right. When he reached the midpoint of the ramp, the segen would hold him by the right hand and help him up. The priest who would carry the head of the burnt offering would extend the limbs [he is carrying]39In addition to the head, he would carry the right leg of the animal (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 6:11). to [the High Priest] and [the High Priest] would lean upon them40A person bringing a sacrifice would lean on the sacrifice as the Rambam mentions in the following halachah and describes in ibid. 3:6-16. This ritual is called semichah. and then toss them to the fire.41For the limbs would have to be tossed to the fire (ibid. 6:4).
Similarly, all of the other limbs would be extended to him. All of those carrying the limbs would give the limbs they were carrying to the first priest and he would give them to the High Priest. He would lean upon them and toss them to the fire. If he desired to merely lean upon them and have another priest toss them to the fire, he may.There is no concept of leaning on individual limbs except when the High Priest [offers a sacrifice]. [This is an expression of] honor to him. All of the [other] leanings, by contrast, are performed on living animals.
As soon as a priest matures and attains majority,42I.e., when he reaches the age of thirteen and manifests signs of physical maturity. he is fit to serve in the Temple.43For he is obligated - and thus entitled to - perform all the mitzvot including the service in the Temple. Nevertheless, his priestly brethren would not allow him to serve in the Temple until he reached the age of 20.44At which time, he can be expected to be more mature and less likely to commit an error that would disqualify a sacrifice. He should not enter the Temple Courtyard to perform service for the first time except during a time when the Levites are chanting songs.45The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the passage from Arachin 13b which is the Rambam's source is speaking about a Levite and not a priest. The Radbaz agrees that the Ra'avad's view appears more likely from the context, but since the passage speaks about avodah - a term which usually refers to the service of offering the sacrifices - there is room for the Rambam's understanding.
A priest does not perform Temple service - nor does a High Priest perform Temple service - until he brings [a meal offering of] a tenth of an ephah from his own possessions and offer it himself, as [Leviticus 6:13] states: "This is the sacrifice of Aaron and his descendants46By mentioning Aaron, the verse indicates that this offering is brought by a High Priest. By mentioning his descendants, it indicates that it is also brought by an ordinary priest. which they will offer to God on the day that he will be anointed."If one performs any of the Temple service before he brings [this meal offering] or if a High Priest serves as a High Priest before he brings [this meal offering], his service is acceptable.
If a priest who had never performed Temple service before is appointed as the High Priest, he should bring [a meal offering of] a tenth of an ephah and offer it himself as is the training for every ordinary priest at the outset. Afterwards, he offers a second [such meal offering] as the training of a High Priest. And then he offers a third [such meal offering] which is the chavitin offering of the High Priest which he offers every day, as will be explained.47See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:18 and onward. The manner in which all three are offered is identical.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
It is impossible for the sacrifice of a person to be offered without him standing in attendance. [Now,] the communal offerings are the sacrifices of the entire Jewish people, but it is impossible for the entire Jewish people to stand in the Temple Courtyard at the time they are being offered. Therefore, the prophets of the first era1Samuel and David (Ta'anit 27a). ordained that there be selective upright and sin-fearing Jews who should serve as the agents of the entire Jewish people2In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ta'anit 4:2), the Rambam writes: " Their intent and their goal was involvement in Divine service and prayer. They were not occupied with their own concerns. Their minds and their thought were on the sacrifices." to stand [and observe the offering of] the sacrifices. They were called "the men of the maamad."3Ma'amad literally means "standing," because they would stand over the sacrifice or stand in prayer, as stated in Halachah 5. The term also has the connotation of "status" and "dignified position."They divided them into 24 ma'amadot, equaling the number of watches of the priests and Levites. Over each of the watches was one who was appointed as [the supervisor] of them all. He was called the head of the ma'amad.
Each week, the members of the ma'amad of that week would gather together. Those [living] in Jerusalem or close to it would enter the Temple with the priestly and Levitical watch of that week. When [the week of] their ma'amad arrived, those members of the ma'amad who [lived] in distant places would gather in the synagogues of their locale.
What would those who gather together - both in Jerusalem and in the synagogues - do? They would fast on the Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday of their week. They would not fast on Friday out of respect for the Sabbath4So that they would have the energy to make their Sabbath preparations. and not on Sunday, so they would not make a transition from the pleasure of the Sabbath to a fast.5This would weaken them exceedingly (ibid.).
On every day of the week that was their ma'amad, they would recite four prayer services: the morning service, the afternoon service, the neilah service,6Neilah means "closing." Hilchot Tefilah 1:7 states that the Men of the Great Assembly ordained "a prayer after the afternoon service [to be recited] close to sunset on fast days only to increase supplication and pleading due to the fast. This is called the neilah service, as if to say the gates of heaven are being closed." Since the men of the ma'amad were observing an ordained fast, they would recite this service as well. and another prayer service between the morning service and the afternoon service which was additional [and unique] for them.7The Ra'avad differs and maintains that there was not an extra service ordained especially for the men of the ma'amad. If the Mishnah spoke of Musaf, the additional service, in this context, the intent was a day like Rosh Chodesh when Musaf would be recited by the entire Jewish people.The Radbaz supports the Rambam's opinion, explaining that during this prayer service they would pray that the sacrifices be accepted and that Jews in situations of danger be saved. In the ma'amad, the priests bless the people three times, in the morning service, in this additional service, and in the neilah service.8They would not bless the people in the afternoon service, because generally, it was suspected that a priest might be intoxicated in the afternoon and it is improper to bless the people in such a state. Hence, our Sages forbade the recitation of the priestly blessing in the afternoon service at all times. They allowed it to be recited in the Neilah service, because the neilah service is only recited on a fast day. In later generations, it became customary to recite the priestly blessing (or in the Ashkenazic community, the passage Eloheinu V'Elohei Avoseinu) in the afternoon service, because at present, it is customary to recite the afternoon service late on a fast day. Hence, it resembles the neilah service and will not be confused with an ordinary afternoon service. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Taanit 4:1), Hilchot Nesiat Kapayim 14:1-2.They would have three men read from the Torah twice a day: in the morning service and in the second service that they would add.9The Ra'avad differs here as well and states that there is no extra service and, hence, no extra Torah reading, except on a day when Musaf is recited. In the afternoon service, they would not read the Torah. Instead, they would recite [the passages] by heart as one recites the Shema. They would not gather for the afternoon service on Friday, for they were busy [with their preparations] for the Sabbath.
Their gathering together for each of these prayers of these four services and their standing in prayer, supplication, and petition and reading the Torah is called a ma'amad.
What would they read [from the Torah]? The narrative of creation.10In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:2), the Rambam explains that this subject was chosen, because the ultimate fulfillment of existence is the service of sacrificial worship, as implied by Ta'anit 27b: "Were it not for the sacrifices, the heavens and the earth would not be maintained." On the first day, they would read: "In the beginning," "Let there be a firmament;"11On each day, they would read the passage associated with that and the following day of creation. On the second day, "Let there be a firmament" and "Let [the waters] be gathered;" on the third day, "Let [the waters] be gathered" and "Let there be luminaries;" on the fourth day, "Let there be luminaries" and "Let the waters teem;" on the fifth day, "Let the waters teem" and "Let the earth produce;" on the sixth day, "Let the earth produce" and "[The heavens and the earth] were completed."
A large passage12I.e., three aliyot were given out for each reading. If the passage was large - i.e., it contained eight verses - two aliyot were given in it and the third aliyah was given for the second passage that accompanied it. would be read by two men, a small passage, by one. The two passages that were read in the morning would be read during this second service from a scroll. They would then be read again during the afternoon service by heart.
During the eight days of Chanukah, the men of the ma'amad would not carry out a ma'amad13I.e., read from the Torah or recite the readings by heart [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:4)]. in the morning service.14Since they would recite the Hallel prayers that day. As Taanit 4:4 states: Whenever Hallel was recited [and the Musaf service was not recited (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah)], there was no ma'amad. The rationale is that since the recitation of Hallel took time, no further obligations were imposed on the men of the ma'amad. On any day when there was a Musaf sacrifice,15I.e., on the intermediate days of the festivals and on Rosh Chodesh. there was not a ma'amad during their second service, nor in the afternoon service,16For they were occupied with the sacrifice of the Musaf service. only during the morning and neilah services. On any day when there was a sacrifice of wood,17See the following halachah. there was not a ma'amad during the neilah service, only during the morning, second, and afternoon services.
What was a sacrifice of wood? Certain families had a fixed time on which they would go out to the forests and bring wood for the arrangement [on the altar].18In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:5), the Rambam refers to Nechemiah 10:35 which speaks of casting lots for the wood offering. Implied is that different families were allotted the responsibility for bringing wood for the altar and were given different days to bring that wood. On that day, in addition to the wood, they would bring other sacrifices, as the Rambam continues to explain. On the day designated for this family to bring their sacrifices, they would bring voluntary burnt offerings. This was called the sacrifice of the wood. It was like a festival for these families and they were forbidden to have eulogies delivered, fast, and perform work on that day. This was a custom.
Even a private individual who gave wood or logs for the arrangement [of the altar]19For bringing wood is considered equivalent to bringing a sacrifice and the day on which a person brings a sacrifice is considered as his private festival. is forbidden to have eulogies delivered, fast, and perform work on that day. This was a custom.
The men of the ma'amad are forbidden to have their hair cut and to launder [their clothes] throughout the week [they serve in the Temple]. On Thursday,20And certainly on Friday (Rambam LeAm). they were permitted in honor of the Sabbath. Why were they forbidden to have their hair cut and to launder [their clothes]? So that they would not enter their ma'amad while they were unkept. Instead, they would have their hair cut and launder [their clothes] beforehand.21See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:17,12.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
There were fifteen officers in the Temple and similarly, an officer would always be appointed over these fifteen matters.1Shekalim 5:1 mentions officers for these fifteen positions. The Rambam explains that this was not merely the situation at one specific time, but represented the ongoing division of responsibilities in the Temple. The officers They are [responsible for]:a) the time [for the offering of the sacrifices],2See Halachah 2.b) the locking of the gates,3See Halachah 3.c) the guards,4See Halachah 4. The Ra'avad offers a different interpretation of this officer's function. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Ra'avad's view is based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 5:1), while the Rambam's opinion is based on the Babylonian Talmud. He questions why the Ra'vad favors the Jerusalem Talmud when generally, if there is a difference of opinion between the two, the halachah follows the Babylonian Talmud.d) the singers,5See Halachah 5.e) the cymbals and the other musical instruments,6See Halachah 7.f) the lotteries,7See Halachah 8.g) the pairs [of doves],8See Halachah 9.h) the seals,9See Halachah 10.i) the wine libations,10See Halachah 12. The Radbaz notes that the Mishnah (loc. cit.) refers to this person as being appointed over the flour. He explains that since flour would accompany the wine libation, the same person was appointed over both.j) the sick,11See Halachah 14.k) the water,12See Halachah 15.l) the preparation of the showbread,13See Halachah 15.m) the preparation of the incense offering,14See Halachah 15.n) the preparation of the curtains,15See Halachah 16.o) the preparation of the priestly garments.16See Halachah 20.
Each one of these officers has many men under his command in order to arrange the task over which he is appointed.The one [appointed] to supervise the times: He and his men watch the times. When the time comes for a sacrifice to be offered,17Actually, the announcement would be made slightly before the time for the sacrifice. For example, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 1:2; 3:8), the Rambam writes that this announcement was made at (or before) dawn. he or one of the men under his charge announce: "Priests arise to the [Temple] service. Levites [go] to the platform,18Where they would stand to sing. Although they would not sing until the wine offering was brought and that was after the limbs of the sacrifice were offered (see Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 6:5), they would proceed to their posts at the same time as the priests. Israelites, to the ma'amad." When his voice was heard, everyone would proceed to his task.
The one [appointed] to supervise the locking of the gates: At his command, the gates would be locked19At sunset. and opened.20At dawn. Those who sound [the trumpets] every day for the opening of the gates sound them only by his instruction. Every day, [the trumpets] were sounded three times at the opening of the gates [in the following manner]: a tekiah,21A prolonged and drawn out blast. a teruah,22A series of staccato blasts. and a tekiah.
The one [appointed] to supervise the guards: He is "the officer of the Temple Mount" who would walk around [checking] the Levites23The priests would also stand watch in three places. The commentaries discuss why they are not mentioned. [who would guard the Temple] every night. Whenever anyone would sleep at his post, he would strike him with his staff and burn his garment.24See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 8:10 where the function of this officer is also mentioned.
The one [appointed] to supervise the singers: Each day, he would chose singers to stand on the duchan to sing melodies. At his command, [the trumpets] would be sounded for the sacrifices. There were never less than 21 trumpet blasts sounded each day in the Temple: three at the opening of the gates [of the Temple Courtyard],25As mentioned in Halachah 3. nine for the daily offering of the morning,26See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 6:5, 7. and nine for the daily offering of the afternoon. On a day when a Musaf offering is brought, nine trumpet blasts are added for the Musaf offering. If Rosh Chodesh or a festival falls on the Sabbath27And thus two different Musaf offerings are brought: one for the Sabbath and one for the festival or for Rosh Chodesh. or Rosh HaShanah falls on the Sabbath - in which instance three Musaf offerings are brought28One for the Sabbath, one for Rosh HaShanah, and one for Rosh Chodesh.- we do not sound the trumpets for each Musaf offering individually. Instead, nine trumpet blasts are sounded for all the Musaf offerings.
On Friday, six trumpet blasts are added: three29I.e., a tekiah, teruah, tekiah series. to [notify] the people [when] to cease work30As explained in Hilchot Shabbat 5:18-20, these trumpet blasts were sounded beginning one and a quarter seasonal hours before sunset. The first three were not sounded together. On the contrary, each represented a further stage in the imminent approach of the Sabbath. The second set of three were sounded close to sunset as a unit of three. and three to make a distinction between the holy and the mundane. On the pilgrimage festivals, three are added [to announce] the opening of the lower gate, i.e., the gate to the Women's Courtyard,31See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:7 for a description of this courtyard. and three [to announce] the opening of the upper gate, i.e., the Gate of Nicanor.32See ibid. 5:5 for a description of this gate.Why is it called the upper gate? Because it is higher than the Women's Courtyard.3322 ½ cubits higher, as indicated by ibid. 6:2. On Sukkot, three trumpet blasts are added [to announce] the filling of [a vessel with] water which is used for a libation on that holiday.34The water libation and these trumpet blasts are described in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:6-7. The trumpets are not sounded for the filling of the water on the Sabbath. Three trumpet blasts are added upon the altar while the water libation is being offered.All of these trumpet blasts were sounded under the direction of the officer in charge of the singers and at his command. All of these blasts were sounded with trumpets.35This represents a reversal in the Rambam's thinking from his earlier views in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 3:8) where he states that it was the shofar that was sounded.
The one [appointed] to supervise the cymbal: He would arrange all the musicians who would help the Levites together with their instruments, as we explained.36See Chapter 3, Halachah 3.
The one [appointed] to supervise the lotteries, he would conduct the lotteries between the priests every day until each one would perform the work that he acquired through the lotteries. There were four lotteries conducted every day. In Hilchot Temidim,37Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:1, 3. I will explain how these lotteries were conducted.
The one [appointed] to supervise [the sale of] the pairs of doves:38The Rambam in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 5:1) notes that the most renown figure to fill this post was Mordechai, the hero of the Purim Megilah. The Radbaz, in his gloss to Halachah 13, feels it necessary to emphasize the extent to which our Sages cherished the service in the Temple. For Mordechai abandoned all the wealth and leisure of the of the Persian court to provide doves for pilgrims to the Temple. He is the one with whom a price is determined to sell pairs [of doves] for the sacrifices, so-and-so many doves for a sela. Everyone who was obligated to [bring] turtle doves39A smaller, wild variety of the dove family. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:2 for more particulars. or doves40Ordinary domesticated doves. [as a sacrifice]41Many different people would have to bring doves as a sacrifice (see examples in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:3). Hence, it was necessary that the Temple provide a source for them. would bring the money for them to the Temple. This officer would give the pairs [of doves] to the people bringing the sacrifices. He would make a reckoning with the treasurers and they would provide him with [the doves].42Note the explanation given by the Rambam with regard to the wine libations and meal offerings. In a similar manner, the Temple treasury would purchase doves and sell them to this officer. He would then sell them to those people required to bring them.Every thirty days, a price was established with him. If the price decreases [during that month], [the Temple treasurers] supply him with them according to the lower price. If it increases, they provide them at the price established [originally], for the Temple is always given the upper hand [in business transactions]. Similarly, if a pair of doves is discovered to be unacceptable or was disqualified before it was offered, [this officer] must provide another in its place.43And suffer the loss from his own funds.
The one [appointed] to supervise [the sale of] the seals: He would receive the money for the wine libations from those obligation to bring libations and give them seals. The one [appointed] to supervise the wine libations would sell the wine libations.44And the accompanying flour and oil offerings, as explained in the notes to the following halachah.
What is implied? There where four seals in the Temple, one which had "calf" written on it,45This referred to the wine libations brought when offering a bull, a half of a hin of wine. Together with the wine were brought three esronim of flour and half a hin of oil. a second which had "male" written on it,46This referred to the wine libations brought when offering a male ram, a third of a hin of wine. Together with the wine were brought two esronim of flour and third of a hin of oil. a third which had "kid" written on it,47This referred to the wine libations brought when offering a ewe, a fourth of a hin of wine. Together with the wine were brought one isaron of flour and fourth of a hin of oil. and a fourth that had "sinner" written on it.48This refers to the wine libations brought by a wealthy person afflicted by tzara'at (a mystic affliction similar to leprosy). He is called a sinner because the affliction was brought about by his sins [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 5:3), i.e., because tzara'at is brought about by gossip. (See the conclusion of Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at.)Such a person would bring three animals as a sacrifice, accompanied by three revi'ot of wine, together with three esronim of flour and three revi'ot of oil (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:6).
Whoever would bring his sacrifices to the Temple would give the money for the wine libations to the officer in charge of the seals. He would give him seals according to the number of sacrifices he brought. If a person afflicted with tzara'at was wealthy, he should give him one seal with "sinner" written upon it.49If, however, a person afflicted with tzara'at is poor, he is only required to bring a ewe as an offering. Hence, he only purchases a "kid" seal. The recipient then takes the seals to the officer in charge of the wine libations and he gives him wine libations according to the number of seals he has and what is written upon them. In the evening, [the two officers] meet and one gives the other seals and receives money in exchange for them.If there is extra money, it is given to the Temple treasury.50We do not accept the claim that the officer's own money became mixed together with the money he received. If there is less money, the officer in charge of the seals must pay from his own resources. When a person loses a seal, he should wait until the evening. If there is found an extra amount of money equivalent to the seal that he claims, it is given to him. If not, it is not given to him.The date of each day is written on the seal [to protect against] deceivers [to prevent] one from keeping a seal in his possession until the price of the libations increases.51I.e., the prices of agricultural commodities fluctuate seasonally. Were it not for this safeguard, a person could purchase a seal in the summer (when the prices are relatively cheap, because it is the time of the harvest) and use it in the winter, when the prices had increased.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 5:4), the Rambam added another reason. Perhaps, the seal was lost and found by another person. The Radbaz states that the latter is an inferior rationale, because we do not usually take safeguards against such occurrences.
Every thirty days, a price for the wine and the flour is established with the officer in charge of the wine libations. If the price of the wine libations increases, he must supply them according to the price established beforehand. If their price decreases, he must supply them according to the lower price.52For as stated above, the Temple treasury is given the upper hand in all financial transactions.The profit the Temple treasury makes on these [fluctuations in] price is called "the windfall of the libations." It is used to purchase burnt offerings as "the dessert of the altar."53Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 4:4), where he explains that the term kayitz refers to the time of the fig and grape harvest. These fruits are served as desert, after a person has eaten his major meal. Similarly, these offerings do not represent the fundamental "food" of the altar, but instead, are offered only when the altar is free. Burnt offerings of doves are not used for this purpose, because doves are not used for communal offerings.54See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:4.
Since the priests stand on the floor at all times,55While barefoot, so nothing would separate between their feet and the Temple's floor (Radbaz; see Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:17). eat much meat,56See the Rambam's statements in Hilchot De'ot 4:9, where he lists certain types of meat as unhealthy food. and during their Temple service, they are not covered by any garments other than one cloak, they [often] suffer digestive ailments.57As the Rambam mentions, this officer was in charge of healing all the priests' medical ailments. He singles out their digestive ailments here, because they were the most prevalent (Radbaz). Therefore an officer is appointed to check them and heal all their illnesses. He and the people in his charge are involved with them at all times.58The Radbaz continues explaining that their health situation would have been far more serious except that they were watched over by unique Divine providence.
Similarly, an officer is appointed to dig cisterns and reservoirs59The Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 5:1) explains that these officers had intimate knowledge of the earth and knew how to determine under which rocks there was a spring of cold water and where a spring of hot water could be found. and fix the cisterns for people at large so that there will be water available in Jerusalem for all of its inhabitants and for all those who come on the pilgrimage festivals.60As the Rambam explains in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 5:1), this person's activity was not confined to Jerusalem. Instead, he would dig wells throughout Eretz Yisrael so that water would be available to the pilgrims.And there was one appointed for all the craftsmen who prepare the showbread and he supervises all their work.61These were the elders of the House of Garmu. The Jerusalem Talmud (loc. cit.) criticizes these priests, because they were unwilling to teach others their unique craft. And there is one appointed over the craftsmen who prepare the incense offering and he supervises all their work.62These were the elders of the House of Avtinas. The Jerusalem Talmud (loc. cit.) explains that they also would not teach their craft to others. At first, the Sages considered this to be undesirable. Later, they discovered that the House of Avtinas refused to do so in order that the information not be used to prepare incense offerings for idols. The Sages then deemed their conduct praiseworthy.
The one [appointed] to supervise [the making of] the curtains would be in charge of all those who wove the curtains and embroidered [designs]63The Kessef Mishneh understands the Rambam's wording as implying that the embroidery was not part of the original weave of the curtain, but needle work done afterwards. Nevertheless, he quotes other sources that indicate that the designs were made within the pattern of the weave itself. on them so that they would be prepared for the Temple and the gates.Each year, they would make two curtains64Each year, new curtains were made, because the smoke from the incense offerings would discolor the old ones (Rabbenu Asher to Tamid 29b). See also Hilchot Shekalim 4:2 which describes additional points concerning these curtains. to separate between the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies.65See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:2 for an explanation regarding the use of these two curtains. The strands of these curtains were all six-fold. They were of four types of fabric: linen, sky-blue dyed wool, purple dyed wool, and crimson dyed wool. Each one was six fold. Thus there were 24 strings.66I.e., each string had four strands and each strand had six threads. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the term sheish, the word the Torah uses for linen implies a strand of six threads. See Chapter 8, Halachah 14. From this, we learn that the strings of the other three fabrics were made in a similar manner. The curtains were a hand-breadth678 centimeters in contemporary measure thick. thick. They were woven with 72 heddles.68For there were 72 strings used to weave it. Its length was forty cubits and its width was 20 cubits.69For the Holy of Holies was 20 cubits wide and 40 cubits high.
There were thirteen curtains in the Second Temple: Seven over the seven gates to the Temple Courtyard,70See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:4 for an explanation regarding the gates to the Temple Courtyard. one over the opening of the Entrance Porch,71The Entrance Porch did not have a gate (ibid. 4:8). one over the entrance to the Sanctuary, two72The two mentioned in the previous halachah. to serve as the d'vir73See the notes to Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:2 for an explanation of this term. between it and the [most] holy chamber, and two corresponding to them in the upper storey.74For it was necessary to make a distinction between the place of the Sanctuary and that of the Holy of Holies on the second storey as well (Rashi, Yoma 54a; see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:13, 7:23).
When a curtain becomes impure [due to contact] with a derivative of impurity,75I.e., an entity that is not inherently impure, but rather contracted impurity because of contact with another impure entity. More specifically, the commentaries explain that the curtain came into contact with liquids that contracted impurity which render utensils impure (see Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTuma'ah 7:1-2). Also, it is speaking about a time when the curtain was not hanging in its place. For if it is hanging in its place, it is considered as part of the structure and it does not contract ritual impurity. it should be immersed within [the Temple Courtyard].76It was immersed in "the Sea of Solomon," a large copper receptacle in the Temple Courtyard. That immersion was acceptable, because that receptacle received its water directly from underground springs. It was brought into [the Temple] immediately, because there is no need to wait until the evening.77This type of impurity was instituted by Rabbinic decree and they did not impose the stringency of waiting until sunset (see Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTuma'ah 9:1; 12:6). If it became impure because of contact with a substance that is a source of impurity, it should be immersed [in a mikveh] outside [the Temple Courtyard]78For an article that is ritually impure may not be brought within the Temple Courtyard (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 3:17). and it is spread out in the chayl,79The rampart surrounding the wall of the Temple Courtyard (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:3). because it must wait until sunset [for its impurity] to depart. If it was new, it would be spread over the colonnade80See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:1. so that the people could see its embroidery for it was attractive.
All of the utensils in the Temple had copies and copies of the copies so that if the original contracted impurity, the second could be used in its place.
The one [appointed] to supervise [the making of] the priestly garments: He is occupied with the preparation of the garments of the ordinary priests and the garments of the High Priests and their being woven.81The Ra'avad maintains that this officer was in charge of dressing the priests (and not necessarily preparing their garments). In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 5:1), the Rambam writes that this officer would perform both functions. Everything [necessary for them] is done under his authority. He had a chamber in the Sanctuary.82In the Temple Courtyard, next to the Gate of Nicanor. See Midot 1:4.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
There are three types of priestly garments: the garments of an ordinary priest, [the High Priest's] golden garments and his white garments. An ordinary priest has four garments: a tunic, leggings, a hat, and a sash. They are all made from white linen with six-fold threads.1As mentioned in the notes to the previous chapter, the Radbaz explains that this is implied by the very Hebrew term used for linen sheish, for that term also means "six." See Halachah 14.The sash2The Torah (Exodus 39:29  mentions the use of woolen fabrics only with regard to the sash of the High Priest, but through the process of Biblical exegesis, our Sages (Yoma 12b) also derived that the sash of an ordinary priest also contains these fabrics. alone was embroidered with wool.3Although the combination of these fabrics violates the prohibition against shaatnez (see Hilchot Kilayim, ch. 12), the positive commandment of wearing the Priestly Garments overrides the negative commandment of shaatnez. Nevertheless, this applies only when it is a mitzvah to wear them, i.e., when involved in the Temple service. Otherwise, it is forbidden to wear them (Hilchot Kilayim 10:3).
The golden garments are the garments of the High Priest.4As the Rambam continues to explain, these garments were not all golden. Nevertheless, they are called golden because certain garments were golden. There were eight garments: The four of an ordinary priest, the cloak, the ephod, the breastplate, and the forehead plate. The sash of the High Priest was embroidered5Exodus 28:39. and was made in a similar manner as that of the ordinary priest. Similarly, the turban [the Torah] mentions with regard to Aaron6Exodus 28:4. corresponds to the hat mentioned with regard to his sons.7Ibid.:40. [The difference is that the] turban of the High Priest is worn like fabric swathed around a hernia. The hat of the ordinary priest, by contrast, is worn like an ordinary hat;8The Kessef Mishneh cites the Ramban who states that the headgear of both the ordinary priests and the High Priests were turbans. This is also indicated by Halachah 18 which speaks of their length. The turban of the High Priest, however, was round, while those of the ordinary priests were cone-shaped like hats. Other authorities (Rashi and the Ra'avad) differ and maintain that the ordinary priests wore hats and not turbans. hence, its name.9With regard to this point as well, the Kessef Mishneh cites the Ramban who states that the letters kuf and gimmel can be interchanged. Thus migba'at parallels mikva'at that relates to the word kova, hat.
The white garments are the four garments that the High Priests would wear on Yom Kippur.10More particularly, they are the garments that he would wear when he performed the service unique to Yom Kippur. For he would also wear his golden garments on that day and carry out the service that was also peformed on other days while wearing them. See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 2:1. They are: a tunic, leggings, a sash, and a turban. They are all white, their threads are six-fold, and they are made from linen alone.11I.e., even the sash was made from linen alone. On this day, it was not of sha'tnez. The High Priests had two other tunics for Yom Kippur: one he would wear in the morning12To perform the sacrificial service of Yom Kippur. and one he would wear in the evening.13To remove from the Holy of Holies the ladle that had carried the incense. Both of them cost 30 maneh.14A maneh is 100 silver pieces. Thus these were very expensive garments, made of fine fabric. The commentaries note that Yoma 35a states that the garments the High Priest would wear in the morning were more valuable than those he would wear in the evening and question why the Rambam does not mention this point. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Yoma 3:7) which states that the only difference between the two was their cut. They were purchased with communal funds.15I.e., funds from terumat halishkah, the Temple treasury collected to purchase the communal sacrifices and all their needs. See Halachah 7 and Hilchot Shekalim 4:2. If he wished to add to their value, he must add from his own funds. He would consecrate the additional money and then use it to have the tunic made.
It is a mitzvah for the priestly garments to be new, attractive, and to hang low like the garments of the men of stature, as [implied by Exodus 28:2 which states that they must be made]: "for honor and for beauty." If they were soiled,16Our translation is based on Rashi's commentary to Zevachim 18b. torn,17The commentaries have drawn attention to an apparent contradiction in the Rambam's words, for in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:14, he rules that, after the fact, when a priest performs service in torn garments, although he is liable to die at the hand of heaven, his service is acceptable. Among the resolutions offered is that here, the Rambam is speaking about clothes that remain torn. Hence, it is as if he is no longer wearing that garment. In Hilchot Bi'at Hamikdash, by contrast, he is speaking about torn garments that were mended. As the Radbaz explains (in his gloss there), the Rambam is speaking about a tear like the tear made when one rends his garments in mourning which can be mended. Here, he is speaking about a garment that was torn in many places. longer than his appropriate measure,18I.e., they should reach slightly above the ground, extending until above the priest's heel (Halachah 17). If they drag along the ground, they are disqualified. That is the intent of the phrase "too long" mentioned later (Kessef Mishneh). shorter than his appropriate measure, hoisted up by the sash,19It is as if the material hoisted up by the sash was cut off (Zevachim 18b). and a priest performed service while wearing them, his service is invalid.20It is as if he performed the service without wearing priestly garments at all. If they were worn-out or they were too long and he hoisted them with the sash so that they would be appropriate to his measure, his service is valid.
Whenever any of the priestly garments become soiled, they are not bleached or laundered. Instead, they are left to be used for wicks and he should wear new ones.21For there should be no expressions of poverty in a place of wealth (Zevachim 88b). When the garments of the High Priest22I.e., the golden garments. become worn out, they should be entombed.23Although this is not stated explicitly, it is deduced from a comparison to the white garments (Yoma 12b). The white garments which the High Priest wears on the day of the fast should not be worn a second time at all. Instead, they are entombed in the place where he removes them, as [Leviticus 16:23] states: "And he shall leave them there." It is forbidden to benefit from them.
They would make wicks from the leggings and the sashes of the ordinary priests that wore out.24These were not used for the Menorah. The rationale is that since the sash contains wool, it will not serve as an effective wick (see Shabbat 20b-21a). And it is improper to use the leggings for that purpose since the priest wore them on his lower body (Tifferet Yisrael, Sukkah 5:3). They were used to kindle lamps in the Temple for the rejoicing that accompanied the water libation.25See the conclusion of Hilchot Lulav where this rejoicing is described. Significantly, however, there the Rambam does not connect the rejoining with the water libation. The tunics of the ordinary priests26The Kessef Mishneh asks why the Rambam does not mention the hats of the ordinary priests. He offers two possible resolutions: a) their fabric was thin and not suitable for wicks at all;b) they were in fact used for the Menorah. that wore out were used to make wicks for the Menorah which lit continually.27In contrast to the lamps for the water libation rejoicing which took place only during the Sukkot holiday.
All of the priestly garments come from communal funds. When one individual donates one of the priestly garments, he may donate it to the community and then it is permitted to be used. Similarly, the sacrificial vessels and the wood for the altar arrangement that an individual donated to the community are acceptable.28I.e., generally, we think of the community purchasing these items by using funds from the Temple treasury. If, however, an individual donates these substances to the Temple treasury they also become communal property and then can be used for whatever purpose the community desires. Even all the communal sacrifices which an individual donates from his own resources to the community are acceptable, provided he gives them to the community.
They would make many sets29I.e., a set with four garments: leggings, a tunic, a sash, and a hat. of clothes for ordinary priests. There were 96 lockers in the Temple30In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sukkah 5:6), the Rambam speaks of 24 lockers. Rambam LeAm suggests that each watch had one large locker which in turn had four compartments. in which to place the clothes, four lockers for each watch. The name of each watch was written on the lockers and they were all closed. When the men of the watch began their priestly service on the Sabbath, they would open their lockers throughout their week and take their garments. When they departed, they would return the clothes to their lockers and close them.
Why did they make four lockers for each watch? So that the garments would not be intermingled.31Having the garments sorted individually made it easier for the priests to put on the garments in the proper order: first, the leggings, then, the tunic, the sash, and the hat [see Chapter 10, Halachah 1; see also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 5:3)]. Instead, all of the leggings were [stored] in one locker on which was written: Leggings. Similarly, the sashes were [stored] in one locker on which was written: Sash. Similarly, the hats and the tunics each had their own locker.
The High Priest would leave his golden garments in his chamber32The Chamber of the High Priest. See Chapter 5, Halachah 7.Har Hamoriah writes that since the Talmud does not mention that there was a locker for the High Priest's garments, we can assume there was none and that he would leave them in his chamber. at night or when he left the Temple.
It is permitted to derive benefit from the priestly garments.33Tosafot, Yoma 69a, suggests that as an initial preference, a priest should not benefit from them. In practice, however, that is not possible, because "the Torah was not given to the ministering angels" and it is impossible for the priests to remove the priestly garments immediately after their Temple service was completed (Kiddushin 54b). Hence they were consecrated with the stipulation that the priests would derive personal benefit from them. Therefore [the priests] wear them on the day of their Temple service even when they are not performing service with the exception of the sash, because it is shaatnez.34A prohibited mixture of fabrics. During the Temple service, however, it may be worn, because then it is a mitzvah to do so and the observance of a positive mitzvah supersedes the observance of a prohibition. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the sash may be worn throughout the day, as long as the priest is in the Temple.Rav Yosef Corcus mentions that the ephod and the breastplate of the High Priest also involved a forbidden mixture of fabrics. He explains, however, that according to the Rambam, the prohibition against mixed fabrics does not apply to them, because they are not worn to provide the body with warmth, and if a garment is worn for a purpose other than that, this prohibition does not apply (Hilchot Kilayim 10:19).
It is, however, forbidden for an ordinary priest to wear it except during his service. The [clothes] the priests wear for their service are of wool and linen alone.
Whenever the Torah uses the word sheish or bad, it is referring to flax, i.e., linen. Whenever the term techeilet is used, it refers to wool which is dyed sky-blue, i.e., lighter35See Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 1:4 where the Rambam defines patuch as a color mixed with white. See also Hilchot Tzitzit 2:1. than dark blue. The term argaman refers to wool that is dyed red.36There are some who interpret the term as referring to a purplish dye. Others explain that it is mixture of several dyes of thread. See Ra'avad and Kessef Mishneh. And tola'at sheni refers to wool dyed with a gnat.37See Hilchot Parah Adumah 3:2 where the Rambam writes that this dye is produced from a seed that has a small gnat in it that produces a scarlet color.
Whenever the Torah uses the term sheish or "spun sheish," it is necessary that the strand be sixfold.38I.e., one strand made up of six thinner threads. Where the term bad is used, it is valid, if one strand alone is used. [Even in such situations,] the most desirable manner of performing the mitzvah is that it be sixfold. Whenever the term meshizar39Often translated as twisted. is used alone, the intent is a thread that is eightfold.
Whenever the Torah uses the term "a work of embroidery," the intent is that the design which is woven will be seen on one side of the fabric. When it uses the term "a work of craft," the intent is that the design will be seen on both sides of the fabric, front and back.
How are the clothes made? The tunic - whether of the High Priest or an ordinary priest - was made with a boxlike knit. The knit had sequences of squares as is the structure of an animal's maw,40See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 3:1). The boxes were indented slightly, like small pockets. in the manner which weavers make firm garments. Its sleeve was woven separately and then sown to the body of the tunic.
The length of the tunic extended until slightly above the heel.41For as mentioned in Halachah 4, the priests' garments should be fit to their measure, neither too long or too short. Compare to the description of the clothes of Torah scholars in Hilchot De'ot 5:9. The length of the sleeve extended until his wrist and its width was the width of his hand.
The leggings - whether of the High Priest or an ordinary priest - extend from the loins until the thighs, i.e., from above the navel, close to the heart, until the end of the thigh, i.e., until the knee. They had straps.42To tighten them around the priest's waist. They did not have a special feature for the anus, nor for the male organ. Instead, they would surround the body like a pouch.
The turban - whether of an ordinary priest or a High Priest - was sixteen cubits long.43As explained in Halachah 2, according to the Rambam, the difference was the manner in which they wrapped the turbans. The actual cloth was the same. The sash was about three fingerbreadths44A fingerbreadth is about 2 cm according to Shiurei Torah. wide and 32 cubits long. [The priest would] wrap it around himself, winding after winding. The priestly garments were not sown, rather they woven, as [Exodus 39:22] states: "weavers' craft."

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
How is the forehead plate made? We make a plate of gold two fingerbreadths1A fingerbreadth is about 2 cm according to Shiurei Torah. There is no measure according to Scriptural Law. The Rabbis chose a measure of two fingerbreadths, because this is the ordinary width of a High Priest's forehead. wide that extends [over the forehead of the High Priest] from one ear to the other. Upon it is written, קדש לה'ה2"Sanctified unto God." in two lines, קדש on the lower line and לה'ה on the upper line.3The standard published text of Sukkah 5a states that God's name should be on the upper line and קדש on the lower line. Apparently, the Rambam's text of the Gemara followed a different version. Alternatively, the Rambam favored the Jerusalem Talmud (Yoma 4:1) which follows the version stated. There it is explained that although the wording is opposite that of the verse, it is like a king (God's name) sitting on his throne (the word "sanctified"). If [the words] were written on one line it was valid. There were times when they were written on one line.4Shabbat 63b and Sukkah 5a quote Rabbi Eliezar bar Yossi as saying: "I saw it in Rome (where it had been taken after the Temple's destruction) and the words קדש לה'ה were written in one line."Likutei Sichot, Vol. 26, p. 200ff., explains that the fact that despite Rabbi Eliezar's testimony, the halachah is that the words should be written in two lines indicates that our Sages had received orally the tradition that this was the acceptable way of preparing the forehead plate. Accordingly, we must say that the reason the second view is accepted is not because of Rabbi Eliezar's testimony, but because there was an oral tradition that it was acceptable.
The letters would project outward. How was this done? [A craftsman] would engrave the letters on the back of the plate5Exodus 39:30 states: "They engraved on it writing, [like that of] a signet ring." Now the letters of a signet ring project outward and so it was required that the letters of the forehead plate project outward. On the other hand, since the verse mentions writing, the letters could not be made using a mold (Kessef Mishneh; this rebuts the Ra'avad's objection). See Gittin 20a. while it was pressed to beeswax6Beeswax was used so that it would be firm enough to support the gold and prevent it from being pierced, but flexible enough to allow it to be shaped. until they project.It had holes on each of its ends. There was a strand of sky-blue wool below it that ran from hole to hole so that it could be tied with this strand at the nape [of the neck].7The Ra'avad (following the line of thinking found in Rashi's commentary to the Torah) states that there was a third hole in the center of the forehead plate and a strand extending from it over the High Priest's head. This would prevent the plate from slipping down. The Rambam (and his view is supported by the Ramban in his commentary to the Torah) maintains that only two holes were made. Apparently, the plate was held in place by the pressure generated by tying it tightly.
The cloak was made entirely of sky-blue colored wool.8As stated in Exodus 39:22. Its strands were twelve-fold. Its opening was woven, and that is where its weave began.9As ibid. 28:32 states: "Its opening for the head shall be folded over within it. Its opening shall have a border of weaver's work." It did not have an opening for his arms.10The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's source for this statement. In his commentary to the Torah, the Ramban also questions the Rambam's view. The Radbaz explains that were it to have had an opening for the High Priest's arms, there would have been no difference between it and the tunic. Instead, it was divided into two flaps from below the throat and downward like all cloaks.11It did not surround the High Priest on all sides, but instead hung down over the front and back of his body, with openings on either side. Here also, the Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's understanding and the Ramban supports it.According to the Rambam's conception, the cloak bore somewhat of a resemblance to the garments worn today as a tallit kattan (except that it was much longer than those garment). Indeed, for that reason, the Radbaz questions why there was no obligation to attach tzitzit to it. He explains that since the neck portion of the garment did not extend over the High Priests' shoulders, it is not considered as a four-cornered garment. It is joined only directly below the throat.One who tears the border of the opening of the cloak is liable for lashes, as [Exodus 28:32] states: "It shall not be torn."12Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 88) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 101) includes this prohibition among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This applies to all the priestly garments. One who tears them with a destructive intent is liable for lashes.13If, however, he tears them with an intent to mend the article, no prohibition is involved (Radbaz).
He should then bring sky-blue wool, red wool, and scarlet wool, the strands of each of these spun eight-fold. [This is necessary,] because [Exodus 39:24] states that [the pomegrantes on the cloak's] hem [should be made from strands that are] "twisted."14And as stated in Chapter 8, Halachah 14, that term implies a strand made up of eight threads.Thus there are twenty four threads used for the hem of the cloak.15Eight threads from each type of fabric. They should be fashioned into shapes resembling pomegranates whose mouths are not open16Pomegranates have a crown-like bud on their top and these spheres would not.and hung from the cloak. He brings 72 cups with 72 clappers that are made entirely of gold and suspends them from the hems, 36 from the hem of one flap and 36 from the hem of the other flap.17See Exodus 28:33-34. The cup with the clapper hanging in it are together called a bell. From the hems on both sides of [the flaps of the cloak are suspended series of] bells and pomegranates, bells and pomegranates.
The gold that is woven in the ephod and the breastplate which is mentioned in the Torah18Ibid.:5, 15; 39:2, 8. was made in the following manner. A strand of pure gold was taken and placed together with six strands of sky-blue wool and [then] the seven strands were spun as one. He would do the same with one strand of gold and six of red wool, with one strand [of gold] with six of scarlet wool, and with one strand of gold with six of linen. Thus there would be four strands of gold and there would be a total of 28 strands.19I.e., four times seven.[This is reflected by Exodus 39:3]: "And they hammered out thin sheets of gold [and cut strands] to fashion into the sky-blue wool, into the red wool, into the scarlet wool, and into the linen." This teaches that there was a strand of gold woven in them.
How was the breastplate made? He would weave a garment that was a work of craft20The design embroidered on it could be seen from both sides. from gold, sky-blue wool, red wool, scarlet, linen, with 28 strands, as we explained.21In the previous halachah. It is a cubit long and zeret22Half a cubit. wide and it should be folded into two.23Note the comments of the Radbaz who infers that according to the Rambam, the breastplate would be woven while elongated and then folded. Others maintain that it should be sewn folded at the outset.Between the folds of the breastplate were placed the Urim and Tumim. See Chapter 10, Halachah 10, for a description of them. Thus it was a square a zeret long and a zeret wide.24As stated in ibid. 28:15-16. In it should be affixed four rows of stones as described by the Torah.25Ibid. 28:17-20: 39:10-13. Each stone should be square and set in a setting of gold that encompasses it from below and from the four directions.26As will be explained in the notes to Chapter 10, halachah 10, according to the Rambam, the stones of the breastplate were called the Urim and Tumim and, in the First Temple era, served as oracles.
He should engrave on the stones the names of the tribes according to their order of birth. Thus on the ruby, the name Reuben is engraved and on the jasper,27Our translation is based on R. Aryeh Kaplan's Living Torah. There are some other renditions of this term. Benjamin is engraved. At the outset, above Reuben,28On the ruby itself (Shmot Rabbah, the conclusion of sec. 38). Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son writes that these inscriptions were made with smaller letters so that all the names would fit on the stone. The Radbaz suggests that they were embroidered into the breastplate. he should write [the names] Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and below Benjamin,29On the jasper itself (ibid.). he should write, שבטי יה30"The tribes of God." According to Yoma 73b and other sources, the inscription was "the tribes of Jeshuron." The Jerusalem Talmud states that the inscription was "the tribes of Israel." so that all the letters are found there.
Four golden rings are made on the four corners of the breastplate. In the two upper rings from which the breastplate is suspended, two golden cords are placed.31See Exodus 28:22-24. These golden cords extend from the ephod and secure the breastplate from above as explained in the following halachot. They are called chains. In the two lower rings that are opposite [the High Priest's] breast32For the breastplate is placed above the heart (ibid.:30). are placed two cords of sky-blue wool.33To secure the breastplate to the ephod from below, as stated in Halachah 11.
The width of the ephod is the width of a person's back from shoulder to shoulder. Its length extend from one's elbows to his feet. It has two bands extending from it on either side34As Exodus 25:8 states, the belt was made in the same manner as the ephod itself. with which it is fastened. They are called the belt of the ephod. The entire garment is woven with gold, sky-blue wool, red wool, scarlet wool, and linen with 28 threads as described with regard to the breastplate.35See Halachah 5.He should sew36In contrast to the other priestly garments which are woven, these shoulder straps are sewn to the ephod. to it two shoulder straps so that it will extend to [High] Priest's shoulder. He should affix to each shoulder a square37Kiryat Sefer suggests that the stones were rectangular rather than square, for otherwise it would be difficult to fit six lines on a square stone. sardonyx stone38A crypto-crystalline quartz, related to agate with alternating red and white bands. Here also, our translation is based on R. Aryeh Kaplan's Living Torah. There are some other renditions of this term. set in a setting of gold. The names of the tribes should be engraved on the two stones, six on one stone and six on the other39In this way, he can fulfill the charge (Exodus 28:12 : "Aaron shall carry their names on his shoulders before God as a remembrance." according to the order of their birth.40The order the Rambam chooses - as reflected in the accompanying drawing [which is also included in his commentary to the Mishnah (Yoma 7:5)] - has attracted the attention of the commentaries. Although it follows the simple meaning of the verse, there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in Sotah 36a-b and the Rambam's view does not follow either of the opinions mentioned there. The Kessef Mishneh, however, offers a resolution that enables the Rambam's understanding to conform to the Talmud's text. Joseph's name would be written as יהוסף.41Psalms 81:1 writes Joseph's name in this manner. The Radbaz states that the extra letter was added to Joseph's name, because he was a king, and it was appropriate to include the first three letters of God's name in his name. Thus there would be 25 letters on one stone and 25 letters on the other stone. They would be written in this manner.42The accompanying drawing is a copy of one included in the Mishneh Torah by the Rambam himself.The stone on which Reuven's name was written was placed on his right shoulder and the stone on which Shimon's name was written was placed on his left shoulder. On each shoulder, he should make two rings: one above, one the top of the shoulder and one below the shoulder above the belt. The two golden cords should be placed in the the two upper rings, they are called chains.43These are the same chains described in Halachah 8. This is the form of the ephod.44The accompanying drawing was copied from drawings by the Rambam that were included in the original manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah.
Afterwards, he places the ends of the cords of the breastplate in the upper rings that are on the shoulders of the ephod and he should place the two strands of sky-blue wool that are on the hem of the breastplate45See Halachah 8. into the rings that are above the belt of the ephod. The chains that are in the rings on the shoulders of the ephod should descend until they reach the upper rings of the breastplate so that they will cleave to each other and thus the breastplate will not be separate from the ephod.46Since the breastplate is tied firmly from above and from below, it will not be separated from the ephod. Anyone who separates the breastplate from the ephod and disrupts their connection47The Radbaz implies from this wording that even if the two are not separated entirely, as long as they are moved slightly, the prohibition applies.with a destructive intent48If, however, his intent is to readjust their connection, there is no prohibition against separating them. is worthy of lashes.49Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 87) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 100) include the prohibition against separating the breastplate from the ephod among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.
Thus when he wears the ephod together with the breastplate, the breastplate will be flat over his heart and the ephod will be behind him. The belt of the ephod is tied over his heart50The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the belt of the ephod was tied below the High Priest's waist. The Radbaz explains that the belt is to be positioned below the breastplate on the same level as its top. The breastplate should lie on the High Priest's heart. Nevertheless, he also explains that the Rambam's wording has to be clarified, because as stated in the following chapter (Halachot 1-2), the sash is tied over the High Priest's heart. The Radbaz therefore suggests that the sash was tied over the upper portion of the heart and the belt of the ephod slightly lower. below the breastplate. The two shoulders of the ephod lie on his two shoulders. The two cords of gold extend down from his shoulders on either side from the shoulders of ephod to the rings of the breastplate. The two strands of sky-blue wool are tied below his elbows from the two lower rings of the breastplate to the two lower rings of the shoulders of the ephod which are above the belt.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
What is the order in which the priestly garments should be put on? [The priest] should put on the leggings first,1From Leviticus 6:2, one might presume that the tunic is put on first, because it states: "And the priest shall put his fitted [tunic] and he shall put on linen leggings." Nevertheless, through the process of Biblical exegesis, Yoma 23b derives that nothing should be put on before the leggings. tying them above his navel, over his loins. Afterwards, he puts on the tunic and then puts on the sash at elbow height. He should wind it fold after fold2The sash was 32 cubits long, so that it will obviously be wound around him several times. until it ends and then tie it.
With regard to the sash, [where it should be placed can be understood from] the received tradition. [Ezekiel 44:18] states: "They shall not gird themselves bayeza, [interpreted3By Zevachim 18b. to mean] "in a place where one perspires."4I.e., a place like the armpits or loins where flesh covers flesh leading to perspiration. Yonason, the son of Uziel,5A renowned student of the Sage Hillel, who translated the Tanach into Aramaic. received the same tradition from the prophets6See Megilah 3a which ascribes this translation to the prophets Chaggai, Zechariah, and Malachi who accompanied the Jews back from the Babylonian exile to Jerusalem. and translated the phrase: "They will gird themselves over the heart."7At elbow height.Afterwards, he should arrange the headpiece as a hat.8See Chapter 8, Halachah 2. The order in which the ordinary priests put on the priestly garments is taken from Leviticus 8:13.
After the High Priest girds himself with the sash,9I.e., he puts on the first three garments in the same manner as an ordinary priest does. he puts on the cloak, and on the cloak, the ephod and the breastplate. He girds himself with the belt of the ephod over the cloak, below the breastplate. Therefore [the cloak] is called "the cloak of the ephod,"10Exodus 28:31. the cloak that is girded closed with the ephod.Afterwards, he winds the headgear like a turban. He ties the forehead plate [behind his head,] above the turban.11The bracketed inclusion is necessary, because in front of his head, the turban was above the forehead plate, as the Rambam proceeds to state. The order in which the High Priest put on his priestly garments is taken from Leviticus 8:7-9. His hair was visible between the forehead plate and the turban and it is in that place that he would wear his tefillin between the forehead plate and the turban.12See Halachah 6.
It is a positive commandment to make these garments and for the priests to serve in them,13Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 33) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 99) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The wording in Sefer Hamitzvot implies that the fundamental mitzvah is for the priests to wear these garments for their Temple service. Making the garments is merely a preparatory phase that enables that mitzvah to be fulfilled. as [Exodus 28:2] states: "And you shall make holy garments,"14This refers to the garments of the High Priest. and [ibid. 29:8] states: "And drew near his sons and dress them in tunics."15This refers to the clothes of an ordinary priest.When a High Priest serves with less than these eight garments or an ordinary priest serves with less than these four garments, he is called lacking garments. His service is invalid and he is liable for death at the hand of Heaven, like a non-priest who serves. [This is indicated by ibid.:9 which states:] "And you shall gird them with a sash... and their priesthood shall be for them...." [Implied is that] when their garments are upon them, their priesthood is upon them. [Conversely,] if their garments are not upon them, they are like non-priests, concerning whom [Numbers 1:51] states: "A non-priest who draws close [to the service of the Sanctuary] shall die."16See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:1.
Just like a priest who is lacking garments is liable to die and invalidates the service he performs, so too, one who wears extra garments17From the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 2:1), it appears that wearing any extra garment, not only an extra priestly garment, causes one to be liable. - e.g., he wears two tunics, two sashes, or an ordinary priest who wears the garments of the High Priest and performs service - profanes his service and is liable for death at the hand of Heaven.18We see this concept in several other contexts. When there is an extra entity, it is as if it and the entity that is required to be present is lacking. See Hilchot Shechitah 6:2.
It is said with regard to the priestly garments:19The Rambam is not quoting a verse exactly. Similar phrase exist in Leviticus 6:3 and 16:4. "on his flesh and he shall wear them." [Implied is that] nothing should intervene between his flesh and the garments. Even if there is one thread, earth, or a dead louse between his flesh and the [priestly] garment, it is considered an intervening substance and his service is invalid. Therefore a priest cannot serve [in the Temple wearing] his arm tefillin, because they intervene. The head tefillin, by contrast, do not intervene20See Halachah 3. and if he desires to wear them at the time of his Temple service, he may.21One can infer that he is not obligated to wear tefillin. We apply the principle: One who is occupied in the observance of a mitzvah - the priestly service - is exempt from another mitzvah, wearing tefillin.The tefillin are not considered as an extra garment, because tefillin are not considered a garment (Kessef Mishneh).
[A priest] must be careful at the time that he puts on [the priestly garments] that there be no dust, nor a louse - even if it is alive - between his flesh and the garment. Nor should air enter between his flesh and his garment during the time of service so that the garment will become distant from his flesh. He should not place his hand in his bosom under his tunic. He should not remove his hair from the garment, nor should there be a strand hanging loose from the garment. [Although] one these factors occurs, his service is acceptable.22Zevachim 19a questions whether these situations are acceptable and does not arrive at a conclusion. Accordingly, the Rambam rules that as an initial preference, one should be concerned with these matters, but the difficulty is not great enough to disqualify the service. For unless the Torah or our Sages explicitly ruled that a sacrifice is unacceptable, one cannot bring another one in its place for it is possible that one will be committing the transgression of slaughtering an ordinary animal in the Temple Courtyard (see Hilchot Shechitah 2:3). The slaughter of the animal might be placed in that category, because one is bringing it as a sacrifice under the conception that he is obligated to do so, when in fact that might not be so.The Kessef Mishneh states that one may not bring a sacrifice and make a conditional stipulation: "If the previous sacrifice was unacceptable, may this be considered as my obligation and if the previous sacrifice was acceptable, this is a freewill offering." There are some sacrifices - e.g., sin offerings, guilt offerings, and communal offerings - where such a stipulation cannot be made. Hence, our Sages enforced uniformity and prevented conditional offerings in these instances.
[The following rules apply if a priest] wrapped a cloth on his flesh in a place [untouched by the priestly] garments, e.g., he wrapped it on his finger or on his heel. If it is three fingerbreadths by three fingerbreadths,23The minimum size of a garment (see Hilchot Keilim 22:12; 23:7; et al). it is considered as an intervening substance and it invalidates [the service]. If it is smaller than that, it is not considered as an intervening substance.24It is too small to be considered as entity of consequence.A small belt, since it is considered as an independent garment, invalidates [one's service] even if it is not three fingerbreadths by three fingerbreadths in area.
When the finger of a priest is wounded, he is permitted to tie a reed or a cloth that is not three fingerbreadths by three fingerbreadths around it on the Sabbath and perform his service.25Since he is not tying a permanent not, there is no prohibition against tying. Nor is there a prohibition against performing an act of healing on the Sabbath (as is prohibited in certain instances), because such prohibitions were not applied in the Temple. If he intends to release blood, it is forbidden.26For this is a transgression of the Sabbath laws and it does not aid the Temple service (Rashi, Eruvin 103b). [Leniency is granted,] provided the reed or the cloth does not intervene between his flesh and a sacred utensil27See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:17. at the time of service.28For in this instance, even if the article is not significant, an interposition invalidates the service. The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, claiming that it is a contradiction to his ruling in the previous halachah. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's position, explaining that in the previous halachah, the garment was not considered a garment because of its size. Nevertheless, that does not mean that it is not considered an interposition. As long as it intervenes, it disqualifies service regardless of its size.
In the Second Temple,29Kiddushin 31a relates that the Sages sought to purchase the stones for the High Priest's breastplate in the era of the Second Temple. they made the Urim and the Tumim30As mentioned in the notes to Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:1, the Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam considers the term Urim and Tumim as referring to the stones of the High Priest's breastplate. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sotah 9:20. The Ra'avad and others differ and interpret it as referring to the script of mystic names of God that were placed in the folds of breastplate. to complete the eight garments [of the High Priest]31For the stones were an integral part of the structure of the breastplate. even though inquiry was not made of them. Why was inquiry not made of them? Because the Holy Spirit32The spirit of prophecy. was not vested there.33Yoma 21b explains that this is one of the five differences between the holiness of the First Temple and that of the Second Temple. And whenever a priest does not speak with the Holy Spirit and the Divine Presence does not rest there, inquiry is not made.
How was inquiry made?34I.e., in the era of the First Temple. The [High] priest would stand facing the Ark. The person making inquiry was behind him, facing the [High] Priest's back. The inquirer would ask: "Should I go up [to war] or not?" He would not ask in a loud voice, nor would he merely think about the matter in his heart. Instead, [he would speak] in a low voice, like someone praying to himself.35As in the classic example of Chanah's prayer (I Samuel 1:13 , which is accepted as the paradigm for our Shemoneh Esreh prayers. Immediately, the Holy Spirit will enclothe the [High] Priest. He will look at the breastplate and with the spirit of prophecy see "Go up" or "Do not go up" written in letters emerging from the breastplate toward his face. The [High] Priest would then answer [the inquirer], telling him: "Go up" or "Do not go up."
Two matters should not be asked about at once. If they are, one replies only to the first. Inquiry should not be made [of the Urim and Tumim] by an ordinary person, only by a king, the court, or one who the community at large requires. [This is derived from Numbers 27:21:] "Before Elazar the priest shall he stand... [he and all the children of Israel with him, and the entire congregation]." "He" refers to the king;36For the verse is referring to Joshua whose position was that of a king. "all the children of Israel" to the priest anointed to lead the people in war,37I.e., a person upon whom the future of the entire Jewish people depended. or someone whom the people need to make inquiry for them; and "all the congregation" refers to the High Court.
The statements found in the words of the prophets38See I Samuel 22:18. that the priests would wear an ephod of linen does not mean that they were High Priests. For the High Priest's ephod was not of linen [alone].39Instead, it also contained sky-blue wool, scarlet wool, red wool, as related in Chapter 9, Halachah 9. For the Levites would also wear such a garment, for the prophet Samuel was a Levite, and [I Samuel 2:18] describes him as "a youth, girded with a linen ephod." Instead, this ephod was worn by the students of the prophets40See Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 7:4-5 with regard to the preparations a person would make for the spirit of prophecy to rest upon him. and those who were fit to have the Holy Spirit rest upon them to make it known that such a person reached a rung equivalent to that of the High Priest who speaks with the Holy Spirit via the medium of the ephod and the breastplate.Blessed be the Merciful One Who grants assistance.
