=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
דיני ממונות – that is admissions (according to Tractate Shevuot 6:1 – worth at least one Perutah) and loans.
בשלשה – commoners/lay persons, for the Rabbis did not require three specialists, in order not to lock the door before loans, lest the borrower confess and specialists are not found to force him to court, but rather, or one [judge] would be a specialist or [all] three are commoners; but cases of theft and mayhem [require] three specialists, for [the word] אלהים/”God” (which means judges) is written in the section of the guardians in [the Torah portion] of “And these are the statutes” (Exodus, chapter 21 and beyond; specifically, the verses are: Exodus 22:6-8) , and from it we derive three specialists.
נזק – [damage caused] by man or by a warned bull , who damaged him for which they pay complete damages.
חצי נזק – an innocuous bull, who caused damage (and even though this is mayhem) , since it was necessary to teach in the Mishnah “double fines, and four and five-times payment, which he doesn’t pay like what he damages, when he pays more. The Tanna [our Mishnah] also taught half-damage in which he does not pay what he damaged, for he pays less. And since the Mishnah taught half-damage, it also taught [full] damages.
ומוציא שם רע – “I did not find your daughter a virgin” (Deuteronomy 22:17); “and they shall fine him one hundred shekels of silver [and give it to the girl’s father for the man has defamed a virgin in Israel…]” (Deuteronomy 22:19).
דיני נפשות – and if the matter was found to be true that she was unfaithful [to her husband] and they stoned her. And capital cases [are judged] by twenty-three, as seen further, and Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
כהן גדול. אינו יוצא אחר המטה – Perhaps he would come to touch [the corpse] in the midst of his troubles. And the All-Merciful One said (Leviticus 21:11): “He shall not go where there is any dead body.”
הן נכסין והוא נגלה – since those who carry the bier are covered from the entrance to a group of buildings/alleyway that is to say, when they left him; he was revealed and went inside within, but all the while that they were revealed and appeared in the alleyway, he was covered from them and did not enter into their midst.
ויוצא עמהן עד פתח העיר – that in the city were found alleyways and he can cover himself from them, but outside of the city, there is no recognition.
שנאמר: "ומן המקדש לא יצא" – Rabbi Yehuda expounds [on the verse – Leviticus 21:12]: “He shall not go outside the sanctuary,” at all. And Rabbi Meir expounds that he shall not leave from his holiness, that is, he should be careful that he not come in contact [with the bier] and within the city there are alleys where there is recognition and he is careful. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
וכשהוא מנם את אחרים – that is of a dead person that is not his (family), everyone admits that he is able to go and not go to the trouble that he won’t come in contact [with the bier]. And when they return from the graves and stand in a line to comfort the mourners and all the people pass one after another and comfort the mourner who stands at his standing post [to receive the consolation of the others in attendance] , and everyone says to him: “May you be comforted from Heaven.”
הממונה – he is the deputy [High Priest] , who is appointed to serve in place of the High Priest, lest something occur to him that would make the High Priest unfit for service on Yom Kippur.
והממונה מנצעו – who walks to the right of the High Priest and all the people are to his left, so that the High Priest is in the middle.
אנו כפרתך – though us you will be forgiven – you and we under you for all that is appropriate to come upon you.
וכשמברין אותו – for a mourner is forbidden to eat the first meal of his own [possessions], but his relatives and loved ones/friends feed him.
מסובין על הארץ – they distress themselves and mourn in his grief/pain.
והוא מיסב – with honor on his bench.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
זה בורר לו אחד – One of the litigants selects for himself one judge for adjudicate for him and change his verdict to innocence. And similarly, the second [litigant] chooses for himself a judge, and two of the litigants together choose another third judge, and through this, a faithful and truthful judgment will result, for both litigants will listen the judgment and they will say that truth was adjudicated for us. For the guilty party will hold: “Behold, on my own, I chose the one, and if he is able to change the verdict to innocence, he would change it. And the third judge on his own is willing to change the verdict to innocence for both of them , because both of them (i.e., the litigants) chose him.
וחכמים אומרים: שני הדיינים בוררים להם אחד – without the knowledge of the litigants, in order that the heart of the third judge would not lean towards one of them. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
זה פוסל דיינו של זה – He can say, I will not judge before the Jewish court that you have selected
בזמן שהביא עליהן ראיה – for this one brings evidence on one judge that he selected to invalidate him.
אבל אם הם כשרים ומומחים – This is how it should be understood: But if they were worthy in that they are neither relatives nor invalid, even though they sit on street corners, they became like specialists and he cannot invalidate them. The Halakhic decision on this is that when the litigants accepted who would judge them, whether for an individual or for the public, and he made a legal decision for them, his judgment is law and they cannot reverse his judgment even though he is not a specialist recognized by the public, and if it is known that he erred, if it is something from the Mishnah that he erred in or something explicitly written in the Gemara, they revoke the matter and re-judge it according to Halakha. But if it is impossible to revoke the matter such as the case that the person who took the money illegally went abroad, the judge is exempt form payment after they had accepted him [as judge] over them, for even though he caused for damage [to be done], he did not intend to cause damage. And if he had erred in his weighing between opposing views, and this is a matter that the Tannaim or Amoraim or Gaonim disputed about, but the general practice is like one off them, and the judge adjudicated like according to the words of that Gaon whose opinion was not like the general practice, if he did not engage in give and take by hand, he should retract the judgment, but if it is impossible to retract, he should pay from his own estate, and if he engaged in give-and-take by hand , what is done is done and he should pay from his own estate. But a judge whom the litigants did not accept but stood up on his own [to be a judge] or a king appointed him or some of the elders of the community appointed him, if he is not a specialist recognized by the public, even though he received permission from the Exilarch his judgments are not law, whether he erred or whether he did not err. And he is not amongst the judges but rather amongst those who act by force, and each one of the litigants if he wants, he reverses the decision and the judgment returns before the Jewish court. And if he erred and did not engage in give-and-take by hand, the judgment should be reversed, and if it is impossible to reverse it, he should pay from his estate according to the law of all who cause damage, and if he engaged in give-and-take by hand he should pay from his estate and return from what the litigant gave him which was not according to Halakha. But specialist recognized by the public whom the litigants accepted or that he received permission [to judge] from the Exilarch even though the litigants did not accept him, for such he is a specialist, if he erred in a matter whether from the Mishnah or from making a decision after weighing between opposing views, and it is impossible to reverse the decision, he is exempt from making payment. And a specialist who received permission from the Exilarch must force the litigants before him that they will adjudicate before him, whether they wanted to or did not want to, whether in the land of Israel or outside the land of Israel. And whomever received permission from the Nasi in the land of Israel cannot force the litigants other than only in the land of Israel. And he who is a specialist, is one who learned the Written Torah and the Oral Torah and knows how to think, to make analogies and to understand a thing from the midst of another thing (and he is called a specialist). And when he is recognized and known and his character/substance has gone out [and become known] among the men of his generation, he is called an expert recognized by the public, and he may judge singularly (i.e., alone) and even if he did not receive permission from the Exilarch.
זה פוסל עדיו של זה – This is a dispute between Rabbi Meir and the Rabbis which is maintained in the Gemara, for when a litigant said: “I have two sets of witnesses in the manner” and he brings the first set and the opposing litigant stands with one another [person] and says, they are invalid, Rabbi Meir states he and another [person] may invalidate them, and he is not an interested witness, for he said that he has another set [of witnesses], but if he requested and did not find [them] he loses. And the Rabbis think that even though he said at first: “I have two sets of witnesses,” he can retract and say “I do not have ought of these, and the person who comes to invalidate them is an interested witness but they are not invalidated by his mouth. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
אחד דיני ממונות ואחד דיני נפשות – And regarding capital cases, it is written (Deuteronomy 13:15): “ You shall investigate and inquire [and interrogate thoroughly]…,” and this is the law of the Torah. But the Sages said that we do not lengthen in investigations and inquiries in monetary cases so that we don’t shut the door before borrowers, other than if the Jewish court saw that the proceedings in court which bear evidences of fraudulent claims or statements (see Sanhedrin 32a). For investigations and inquiries are the question in its own accord, such as: “how much [money] did you lend him?” and “when did you lend him?” and “for what purpose did you lend him?,” and “in what place did you lend him?” But there is another type of question which is called examination and it is not related to the matter, such when they ask him: “What was he wearing? Black utensils or what utensils? Was he standing or sitting at the time you lent him?
פותחים – the give-and-take of the judgment case, whether for acquittal or for guilt.
מחזירין – they reverse the decision after they have completed the deliberations and knew that they had erred.
ואין הכל מלמדין חובה – that if one of he students said: “I am able to argue about him that he is guilty,” we do not listen to him.
דנים ביום וגומרין בלילה – As it is written (Exodus 18:22): “Let them judge the people at all times…” and it is written (Deuteronomy 21:16): “When (i.e., “on the day”) he wills the property to his sons, [he may not treat as first-born the son of the loved one in regard of the son of the unloved one who was older].” In what manner? The daytime is the beginning of the proceedings and the night time is the conclusion of the judgment.
דנין ביום וגומרין ביום – As it is written (Numbers 25:4): “[The LORD said to Moses, ‘Take all the ringleaders] and have them publicly impaled before the LORD (i.e., during the sunlight), [so that the LORD’s wrath may turn away from Israel.’]”
גומרים בו ביום בין לזכות בין לחובה – As Scripture states (Isaiah 1:21): “[Alas, she has become a harlot, the faithful city] that was filled with justice, where righteousness dwelt – [but now murderers].”
לפיכך אין דנים לא בערב שבת – as it will be found that the completion of the legal proceedings will be on Shabbat [proper] and to delay it until after Shabbat is impossible because of the delay in executing judgment [is illegal], and to judge him on that [selfsame] day is impossible, for the four forms of capital punishment do not override the Sabbath, as it says (Exodus 35:3): “You shall kindle no fire throughout your settlements on the sabbath day,” it taught regarding those who were liable for burning, that we do not burn them on the Sabbath, and this same law applies to the other forms of capital punishment.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
היו בודקין אותו – After they had forewarned them, they would examine/investigate them in seven examinations, corresponding to seven expressions, as it is said in the Bible regarding those liable to the death penalty at the hands of the Jewish court (Deuteronomy 13:15): “You shall investigate and inquire and interrogate thoroughly…” These are three (i.e.ודרשת וחקרת ושאלת היטב ) But, [the word] "ושאלת" (you shall interrogate) is not part of the number for from it, we learned "בדיקות" /cross-examinations of witnesses as to minor circumstances. But in another place, He (i.e., God) says (Deuteronomy 17:4): “And you have been informed or have learned of it, then you shall make a thorough inquiry…” There are two others [here] – hence you have five. And in another place, He (I.e., God) says (Deuteronomy 19:18): “And the magistrates shall make a thorough investigation…” [which are] two more, hence you have seven.
באיזה שבוע – of the Jubilee
באיזה שנה – of the week (i.e., the seven year cycle)
באיזה יום – of that week
באיזו שעה – of the day, for all seven cross-examinations [referring to date, time and place] bring them into the refutation/conviction of [false] witnesses by proving an alibi, and lest there are no witnesses to prove them to be false for the entire day, but there are witnesses to prove them as false for that hour.
רבי יוסי אומר – There is no need other than three forms of cross-examination: on which day, at which hour and in which place. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yosi, but even if the witnesses stated that x killed y yesterday, we examine him with seven cross-examinations to unbalance their minds so that they will admit that there is a disqualification in their testimony.
מכירין אתם אותו – the murdered individual. Perhaps he was a heathen. But this is not from the cross-examinations that will lead to the conviction of false witnesses, but like the other examinations which are not designed other than to prove contradiction of testimony lest one does not state like the words of his fellow, and [hence] he and them will be exempt.
את מי עבד – Pe’or (i.e., the Moabite deity) or Mercurius (i.e., the name of the Roman divinity, identified with the Greek Hermes).
ובמה עבד – slaughtering [of a sacrifice) or prostration [for prayer].

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
נגמר הדין. חוץ לבית בין – far from the Jewish court, perhaps all the while that they bring him to the House of Stoning, they will find him for acquittal and he will be freed.
והסודרין בידו – to wave, and it is a sign to return him.
ובלבד שיהא ממש בדבריו – but if there is no substance in his words, the first and second time alone they return him, perhaps as a result out of fright he declared that he had nothing to say (i.e., he was intimidated), and perhaps his mind became clearer and he would remember his pleas; more than this, we don’t return him, and we transmit to him two Sages who would investigate if there is substance to this words, and then they would return him four or five times.
ופלוני ופלוני עדיו – that he transgressed such-a-sin on a certain day at a particular time and in a certain place; perhaps there are those who would refute them as false witnesses.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
ארבע מיתות. סקילה שריפה הרג וחנק – stoning is more severe than burning and both of them [are more severe] than decapitation and the three of them [are more severe] than execution by strangulation. And we derive from it that he who is liable for two death [penalties], we establish that he is judged by the more severe [of the two].
רבי שמעון אומר וכו' – but Halakah is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
זו מצות הנסקלין – this is explained in the above chapter (i.e., Chapter six, Mishnah four).

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
בן סורר ומורה. משיביא שתי שערות – when he brings forth two [pubic] hairs, and he is thirteen years of age and one day old, for before this, the hairs are not a sign, but rather an estimation.
עד שיקיף זקן התחתון – this “beard” that the Rabbis speak about, the lower one they spoke about that the hair surrounds the membrum virile.
ולא העליון – the beard itself.
שנאמר בן ולא איש – where the lower “beard” surrounds it, it is a man, and even though from his youth he is called a son, we do not find him to be liable before he brings for two [pubic] hairs for a minor is exempt [from being a stubborn and rebellious son], for he has not come in to the general [category] of the commandments; therefore, they obligate him after this. And this is what the Bible (Deuteronomy 21:18) states: “When a man has a [wayward and stubborn] son…,” a son who is close to his might as an adult male, at the beginning of his manhood, the Bible makes liable, and when his lower “beard” surrounds [it], he is a complete [adult] man.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
אלו הן הנשרפין. הבא על אשה ובתה – on a woman whose daughter has already married, that is his mother-in-law.
ובת כהן – and the daughter of a Kohen who ran about as a prostitute/was unchaste, [whose punishment] is by swallowing molten liquid.
יש בכלל אשה ובתה – that is to say, with a mother and her daughter, it is explicitly written "שריפה"/burning (Leviticus 20:14): “If a man marries a woman and her mother….they shall be put to the fire/"באש תשרפו" …,” and from it we derive that all of these also and it is they are [punished] by burning.
בתו – from an outraged woman, for she is not the daughter of his wife, and he is liable on her because of his wife’s daughter, but she is not his wife’s daughter.
בת בתו ובת בנו – for they were his from his being a victim of unavoidably prevented accident.
בת אשתו – whether she is his daughter or whether she is his step-daughter.
וחמותו – even though that it [the Mishnah] explicitly taught at the first section – he who has relations with a woman who has married her daughter, and it is does not come from a derivation, for since it was taught regarding these a general principle – for the mother of his mother-in-law and the mother of his father-in-law, that come from a derivation, the Mishnah also taught, by the way,  regarding his mother-in-law with them.
כבש עליו – he grabbed the head of his fellow and held him firmly in the water so that he wasn’t able to raise his head.
שיסה – incite/let loose
השיך – that he held the snake in his hand and led him and the tenth of the snake reached the body of his fellow.
רבי יהודה מחייב – that he holds that the poison of the snake in its teeth stands, and since that the tenth of the snake arrived in the skin of his fellow, it is as if he had killed him, and is liable.
וחכמים פוטרין – for they hold that the snake himself vomits his poison; therefore, it was not he that killed him but rather a mere indirect effect and he is exempt. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ואמדוהו למיתה – but we appraise him first for life. Even to the Rabbis, he is exempt.

שרגלים לדבר – that he didn’t die on account of that wound.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
כל ישראל יש להם חלק לעולם הבא – even those who were convicted for death by the Jewish court because of their wickedness, they have a share in the World to Come. And the World to Come spoken of here is the World to Come after the Resurrection of the Dead, who would be destined to live and to stand with their bodies and souls living eternally, like the sun, and the moon and the stars, as is brought in the Gemara in this chapter (Sanhedrin 90b), the dead who are destined to live do not return to the dust. And in the World to Come, there is no eating or drinking, and even though it has a body and inner-body (i.e., membrum), but the Righteous sit and their crowns are on their heads and they enjoy the splendor of God’s presence. And because all Israel is not equivalent in this, but rather the great according to their greatness and the small before his smallness. Because of this, it is taught that they have a share [in the World to Come].
האומר אין תחיית המתים מן התורה – In the Gemara (Sanhedrin 90a) it states, and so much why, as it is taught: he denied the Resurrection of the Dead. Therefore, he will not have a share in the Resurrection of the Dead. And from here, I prove that the World to Come that is mentioned in this Mishnah is not the world in which the souls are placed at this time, but rather, the world of the Resurrection of the Dead as I have mentioned.
אפיקורוס – that despises the Sages and all the more despises the Torah itself.
בספרים החיצונים – the books of the sectarians, such as the books of Aristotle the Greek and his colleagues. And included in this – a person who reads the chronicles of the heathen kings, “songs of sensuality” [=erotic poems], and “writings of desire” [=novels] that have no wisdom in them or purpose other than a waste of time alone.
והלוחש על המכה – and with spitting alone that he has not share in the World to Come, for he does not mention the name of Heaven on the spitting (Sanhedrin 101a).
וההוגה את השם – of four letters like it is written.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
אלו הן הנחנקין. ממרא על פי בית דין – he rebels against the words of the Great Jewish court that was in the Chamber of the Hewn Stones.
זוממי בת כהן – even though they come to make her liable for [the punishment] of burning [by drinking a molten-liquid], they are not judged other than through the death that they were making liable those who engaged in sexual intercourse with her, which is by strangulation, like the others who come upon a married woman, as it is written (Leviticus 21:9): “she shall be put to the fire,” she and not the person who engaged in sexual intercourse with her, and those who falsely testified [through scheming] against her, we derive from (Deuteronomy 19:19): “[You shall do to him] as he schemed to do to his fellow,” but not to his sister.
ובועלה – the daughter of a Kohen when she is married, but an engaged one, he and her sexual partner [are punished] by stoning.
שהמקלל לאחר מיתה חייב – as it is written (Leviticus 20:9): “he has insulted his father and his mother. [His bloodguilt is upon him].” And the extra verse is to include after death.
והמכה לאחר מיתה פטור – for he is not liable until he makes in him a wound, but there is no wound after death.
עד שיכניסנו לרשותו – as it is written (Exodus 21:16): “or if he be found in his hand”, and “his hand” means his domain.  And similarly, it says (Numbers 21:26): “and taken all his land out of his hand,…”
וישתמש בו – usage that has the value of the equivalent of a Perutah/penny. And the first Tanna obligates him even with usage tha tis less than the equivalent of a penny. And the Halakha is according to the First Tanna.
הגונב את בנו – the reason that the Rabbis exempt him, as it is written (Exodus 21:16): “or is still holding him,” and it is an extra verse, for it is written (Deuteronomy 24:7): “If a man is found [to have kidnapped a fellow Israelite…]”, to extrapolate from it, and exclude this one, who is  already in his power. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
רבי יהודה מחייב – as it is written (Deuteronomy 24:7): “of his brethren of the children of Israel” – “of his brethren”, to exclude slaves, “of the children of Israel” – if it had written “of Israel”, we would have excluded someone who is half a servant and half a free-man. Now that it is written, from “of the children of Israel”, this is another exclusion, and where there is a double exclusion it indicates an exemplification (see Bava Kamma 86b). But the Rabbis hold, that “of his brethren” does not come to exclude slaves, for they are “brothers” in the commandments. Rather, the words “the children of Israel” excludes slaves; “of [the children of Israel]” excludes someone who is half-slave and half a free-man (see Mishnah Eduyot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 13 and Mishnah Gittin 4:5 which deals specifically with the case of someone who is a half-slave and half a free-man). And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
