=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
יציאות השבת – transferring an object from one domain to [another] domain (i.e., removing taking out of the house – see Talmud Shabbat 2b) that are mentioned concerning the Sabbath and carrying in are also called transferring since one takes out from one domain to another domain. And the fact that [the Mishnah] teaches יציאות /carrying (on the Sabbath) and it does not teach הוצאות /transferring, is because it uses the language of the Bible, as it is written (Exodus 16:29): “Let no one leave his place [on the seventh day],” and from it, we derive transferring, that a person should not leave with a utensil in his hand to collect the Manna.
שתים שהן ארבע – two from the Torah, transferring an object and carrying [it] in to the house owner who stands inside in the private domain, and on these two, a person is liable for a sin-offering for his inadvertent violation, and divine punishment by premature/sudden death for a willful violation, and stoning for his being warned, like in all the rest of the prohibited labors of Shabbat.
שהן ארבע – from their words (i.e., the Rabbis), they added two, to prohibit ab initio a case where the work is done by two people – this one uprooting and this place setting it down, for two who did it are exempt, as it states (Leviticus 4:27): “by doing any of the things which by the LORD’s commandments ought not to be done, [and he realizes his guilt].” The one who does all of it, but not the one who does part of it, and similarly, in all the labors of Shabbat we say that an individual who did it is liable; two who did it are exempt.
שתים שהן ארבע בחוץ – two from the Torah, taking out and carrying in for the poor person who stands outside in the public domain.
שהן ארבע – from their words (i.e., the Rabbis), they added two to prohibit ab initio, as this person uproots it and the other person sets it down.
פשט העני את ידו – and in it is a box or a basket that he receives in it loaves of bread from the owner of the house, and for this reason, [the Mishnah] took hold of the language of הוצאה /removal in the language of the poor person and the rich person, for it incidentally comes to teach us that a commandment that comes through a transgression is prohibited and they are liable upon it.
ונתן לתוך ידו של בעל הבית – that he performs uprooting from the public domain and placement in the private domain.
או שנטל מתוכה והוציא – the object, and placed it in the public domain, and performed uprooting and placing down.
העני חייב – as he did complete work, for it is two from the Torah for the person standing outside, and even though we require uprooting from the place where he will be four handbreadths by four handbreadths and setting down in a place where he will be four-by-four [handbreadths] and there isn’t found there [that amount] for the hand of the poor person and the owner of the house, there isn’t there a place where there will be four-by-four [handbreadths] , we say in the Gemara (Talmud Shabbat 5a) that the hand of a person is considered as four-by-four [handbreadths], since it is made to place it down and to take from it objects and even many large ones.
ובעל הבית פטור – he (i.e., the owner of the house) is exempt and it is completely permitted, for he had not done anything.
פשט בעל הבית כו' בעל הבית חייב – for this is two from the Torah for the person who stands inside.
פשט העני כו' – for the poor person made an uprooting from the public domain.
ונטל בעל הבית מתוכה – and placed it inside, for the owner of the house did a placing down [of the object] in the private domain.

והוציא – the poor person [removed it] and placed it down in the public domain.
שניהם פטורים – for neither of them had done a complete [cycle] of work/labor. But it is prohibited to do this lest everyone come on his own to do a complete [cycle of] work on the Sabbath day. There are two [forms of work] “from their words” (i.e., from the Rabbis), one for the poor person outside and one for the owner of the house inside. But it is not considered two for each one of them, uprooting for the poor person and uprooting for owner of the house, placing down for the poor person and placing down for the owner of the house, because it is not considered other than uprooting [of things] which are the beginning of the work and there is a fear lest he complete it, but placing down, which is the end of the work, is not considered.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
במה מדליקין – the Shabbat candle – from what does not make the wicks and oils to kindle [them].
לא בלכש – a kind of wool that is in cedar, whether he scraped the tree and it is called the wooly substance of cedar twigs [used for wicks].
בחוסן – flax which is not beaten.
בכלך – the refuse of silk.
בפתילת האידן – a kind of wool that is [in the willow-branch] between the peeling/husk and the wood.
בפתילת המדבר – the leaves of long grass that grow them and kindle them.
בירוקה שעל פני המים – a kind of wool that grows on the walls of the ship when it is delayed a long time in the water. Until here are the wicks that are forbidden; from here onwards are the oils that are forbidden.
לא בזפת ולא בשעוה – he should not give melted pitch or smelted wax in a candle in the place of oil and kindle it but to a sort of long wick which is made from wax is permitted.
ולא בשמן קיק – oil that comes out from seeds that are within the wool of the vine which is called “cotton.” And there are those who explain (Tractate Shabbat 21a) the oil of Jonah’s Ricinus tree (Kikayon), and it is a grass whose leaves are large and is called in Arabic “Kru’ah” and the oil that comes out from it is the thickest. And those wicks which the Sages stated that we don’t kindle with them, what is the reason? Because the flame nibbles at them (producing sputtering sparks), that is to say - that the flame does not enter into the wick [other than] from around it from the outside. And those oils that the Sages we should not kindle with them because they are not drawn after the wick and because the candle is not kindled properly lest he tilt the oil onto the candle in which he would be found to be starting a fire. Alternatively, he should not set the candle down and leave. But we hold that the Shabbat candle is obligatory.
ולא בשמן שריפה – oil of Terumah/priest’s due that became defiled. And why do we call it defiled heave-offering deemed to be burned? For since it stands to be burned and is prohibited to be consumed. And we are dealing with a Jewish holy day that occurs on a Friday, for we kindle the candle while it is still daylight, we find that it burns impure oil from Terumah on the Jewish holy day and we hold that we may not kindle holy things on the Jewish holy day, as it is written (Exodus 12:10): “And any of it that is left until morning you shall burn in the fire.” And we explain this Biblical verse as such: And that which is left from it until the first morning until the second morning, stand and burn it for we don’t burn that which is left over on the Jewish holy days. And the same law applies for all other Holy things that require burning.
וחכמים אומרים אחד מבושל ואחד שאינו מבושל אין מדליקין בו – and the first teacher [of the Mishnah] also said and no it tallow – which implies all tallow/fat. But there is a dispute between the Sages and the first teacher [of the Mishnah] as one of them thought that it is permitted to kindle with cooked fat that is mixed with oil and the other forbids it even through a mixture with oil. But it is not clear to the Sages in the Talmud which of the two prohibits and which is the one that permits it, but the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
כירה – a place made on the ground open to two pots and fire passes underneath the two pots.
בגבבא – thin wood like straw that they gather/rake in from the field.
נותנים עליה תבשיל – from the eve of the Sabbath (i.e., Friday) to tarry there on Shabbat.
גפת – refuse of olives and sesame (see Talmud Shabbat 47b) after the oil is pressed out.
לא יתן – from the eve of the Sabbath in order to have it tarry there on Shabbat.
עד שיגרוף – the coals and remove them from the double oven.
או שיתן האפר – on top of the coals to cover them and cool them off and the reason for the decree is lest he rake the coals under the ashes (Talmud Shabbat 34b) to speed up its cooking. And specifically, for a cooked dish that was not completely cooked, or even if it was completely cooked, and it reduced in size and it is improved by it, for they decreed lest he rake but the a dish that was not properly cooked at all or was completely cooked and which is deteriorated by boiling down (Talmud Shabbat 37b), it is permissible to have it tarry on the double oven even though it was not raked and folded, we don’t fear lest he rake it since he has removed it from his mind and similarly, a dish that was cooked completely and he cast into it raw meat prior to Twilight, everything was made like a dish that had not been cooked at all for he had completely removed it from his mind.
בש"א – they put hot water on top of the double stove after he has raked it for it is not necessary to cook it and there is no need to decree lest he stir it/rake [the coals underneath the ashes].
אבל לא תבשיל – even though he had removed the ashes and coals from the stove for it is impossible to remove all of the ashes/coals until there no longer remains even one spark and one would come to stir the embers after he is pleased with the cooking.
בש"א נוטלים וכו' – even hot foods for we are permitted to have them tarry on top of the double stone that has been cleared of ashes and when he placed the ashes after he removed them, he doesn’t return them/put them back because it appears like cooking on the Sabbath.
וב"ה אומרים – whether hot or cooked, one can put them (i.e., the ashes) back after having removed them, but the School of Hillel did not permit returning them other than while they are still in his hand that he had not placed them on another thing, but after he placed them in the ground or on another thing, it is forbidden to return them, even according to the School of Hillel because it is like hiding something ab initio on Shabbat.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
במה טומנין – A person who comes to remove a pot from on to of a double stove on the Eve of the Sabbath and to cover it (i.e., put dishes in the chafing stove to keep them warm) with another thing, and the Sages said that we don’t cover them with something that adds vapor but rather with a thing that preserves the vapor. What is the thing that adds and is prohibited?
לא בגפת – the refuse of olives and sesame when gathered together very hot.
לחים – they have a lot of vapor, more than when dry.
זגין – grape peels, the pomace/shells of grapes, and seeds of grapes.
מוכין – every soft thing is called מוכין/soft, spongy substance – like wool of a vine, detached pieces of soft wool of an animal and the scrapings-off of outworn garments.
בזמן שהן לחין – all of these refer to straw and pomace of grapes and soft-spongy substance and grasses, and moist things that they mentioned [but] moist on account of themselves, not moist on account of liquids that fell upon them after they had dried and moist soft-spongy substances on account of themselves which we find like wool that is close to the tail or wool that is between the thigh of cattle.
נסורת – the fine saw-dust/chips that the carpenters saw/plane from the tree when they saw it with a saw.
נעורת – very thin, when they thoroughly beat the flax (Talmud Shabbat 49a), and they empty it out.
ר"י אוסר בדקה – thin hatchelled flax, but with fine chips/saw-dust he admits that they permit it whether they are thin or thick, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda. For what they (i.e., the Rabbis) prohibited to cover up while it was still day is a something that increases/adds vapor as a decree lest they cover it with hot ashes and he will come to stir the coals when it gets dark, and they forbid to cover it up on the Sabbath with something that does not increase vapor, and even though they do not nullify the decree lest they find his pot that has cooled off and heat it up with fire on the Sabbath. But at twilight [on Friday], it is permissible to cover it up with something that does not increase vapor as we said at the end of the chapter [two of Tractate Shabbat] “במה מדליקין ] – “With what may we kindle the Sabbath lights” for we are not able to make the decree lest he find that his pot has cooled off and he will heat it, for mere pots at twilight are hot. And Maimonides explained that mere pots at twilight are hot, as he explains, that the opinion does not suffer it because of the confusion of textual versions, for the textual versions are opposite each other, for he found in the Gemara that was before him in the chapter במה מדליקין/With what may we kindle the Sabbath candles – that he had the reading – for what reason did they say that we don’t cover it up with a thing that does not increase vapor once it becomes dark, as a decree lest he cover it with hot ashes, and for what reasons did they say that we don’t cover it with something that increases vapor while it is still daylight (on Friday) , decreed lest it becomes hot, and the readings are not such, but rather, for what reason did they say that we don’t cover them with a thing that does not increase vapor once it becomes dark as a decree lest it become hot and we don’t cover it with a thing that adds vapor while it is still daylight, as a decree lest he cover it with hot ashes.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
במה בהמה יוצאה – since a person is commanded regarding the resting of his animal on the Sabbath and anything that guards through it the animal is not like a burden and anything that does not guard it is like a burden.
אפסר – a rope which ties the mouth of the animal.
והנאקה – In the Gemara (Tractate Shabbat 51b), it establishes it specifically as a white camel which requires greater guarding/watching.
בחטם – they take a kind of iron ring and pierce the nose of the camel and place it inside it.
ולובדקס – a donkey that comes from Libya and they are hard and strong and need greater watching/guarding than other donkeys found in the settlement.
בפרומביא – an iron bridle.
בשיר – a kind of clasp/brooch around its neck and a ring is fixed within it and they bring in a rope through the ring and pull the animal.
וכל בעלי השיר - such as hunting dogs and small animals.
יוצאים בשיר – tied on their necks with a rope set in the clasp.
ונמשכין בשיר – and if he wants he pulls the animal with the rope in the clasp/brooch.
ומזין עליהן – in their places as they are in the neck of the animal if it became ritually defiled through [contact with] a dead corpse.
וטובלין במקומן – they have the animal enter the water to ritually immerse the brooch/clasp and even though we hold that all utensils unique to the animal do not receive ritual defilement. The brooch/clasp and other things like it receive ritual defilement and require ritual immersion since they are made for humans to lead with it an animal as it is like a utensil made for usage by a human being.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
במה אשה. שבראשה – it refers to all with threads of wool and flax and a strap that plaits/twists on them the hair of her head. And what is the reason that she should not go out with them on the Sabbath? Because the Sages stated that she should not immerse in them on weekdays until they become weak/decay, therefore on the Sabbath, she should not go out in them lest perhaps she remove it when she is engaging in the commanded ritual immersion and unties them and comes to carry them four cubits in the public domain
עד שתרפם – to permeate/penetrate them a bit and that they would be softened and that water could enter between them so that they would not leave a space between the partitions during the ritual immersion.
בטוטפת – a fringe that they tie on the forehead from ear to ear.
סנבוטין – hanging on the forehead ornament and comes on the temples until the jaw. Poor women make them of kinds of colors/dyed stuff; the rich make them of silver or gold and because they are important, they suspect lest they loosen and point to its neighbor.
בזמן שאינן תפורין – with her head-dress on her head but if they are sewn on, one doesn’t have to fear to include it for one does not take the head-dress/netting from her head in the public domain, for she would reveal her hair.
בכבול – a piece of cloth like a small turban that we tie on the forehead and place the fringe on it so that one would not damage the fringe on the forehead, but sometimes the woman is decorated with it without the fringe.
לרה"ר – but to the courtyard, it is permitted, and everything mentioned above is prohibited, even in the courtyard, for they decreed concerning this that a woman should not decorate herself on Shabbat at all, neither in the courtyard nor in the public domain, but the hair-net they permitted so as to not prohibit all of her ornaments and become repulsive to her husband. But Maimonides explained that the public domain refers to all of the ornaments that are mentioned in our Mishnah and all of them are not forbidden but as a decree lest a woman bring them four cubits within the public domain.
עיר של זהב – a golden crown made like the shape of Jerusalem.
ולא בקטלא - an ornament that is placed on the neck in an emergency and a woman chokes herself with it in order that she shows that she shows her flesh, and in Arabic, “Makneka.”
ולא בנזמים – nose-rings, but earrings, one can out with them.
חותם – a form to seal letters or any secret thing and even though it is an ornament, it is forbidden lest she loosen it and point it out but if it has a seal, it is not an ornament for her, we say further on that she is liable for a sin-offering and even though she brings it out with her finger in the manner of clothing, because sometimes the husband removes it from his finger and gives it to his wife to hide it and she puts it on her finger and walks with it, and it is found that in the manner of removing it and similarly a ring that has no seal on it that is not an ornament for a man for it is not an ornament for a man, he would be liable for a sin-offering even though he removes it from his finger in the manner of clothing, for sometimes a woman will give it to him that he would take it to an artisan and he removes it with his finger.
ואם יצאת - if a woman went out with all of these that we forbid until here in our Mishnah, she is not liable for a sin-offering for all of these are ornaments and the Rabbis are the ones who decreed lest she loosen it and show it.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
כלל גדול. השוכח עיקר שבת– since he thought that Shabbat is not in the Torah, and even though that from the beginning, he had heard [about Shabbat] but now had forgotten it.
אינו חייב אלא חטאת – on all the Sabbaths that he had desecrated for all of it is one [inadvertent] error as it is written (Exodus 31:13): “you must keep my Sabbaths,” and which implies one observance for any Sabbaths.
היודע עיקר שבת – that is Shabbat in the Torah and creative work was forbidden on it, but he did many forms of creative work on many Sabbaths via the inadvertent error on Shabbat for he does not know that Shabbat is today, he is liable for each and every Shabbat one sin, and on this, it is stated (Exodus 31:16): “The Israelite people shall keep the Sabbath” that implies that observance of each and every Shabbat, that is to say that he is liable for a sin-offering on each and every Sabbath and even though that it was not known to him in the meantime and it is one act of forgetfulness, we say that the days that are in-between that is a knowledge that is impossible that he hadn’t heard [about Shabbat] in the meanwhile that this day was Shabbat but he was not reminded of the creative works that he did on it. Therefore, each and every Shabbat is one error.
היודע שהוא שבת ועשה מלאכות הרבה – that he did not know that the forms of creative work were forbidden and he performed them several times on several Sabbaths, he is liable for each of the chief labors that are forbidden on the Sabbath one sin-offering and even though he went back and repeated them (i.e., the forbidden labors) on several Sabbaths, each principal form of labor is one error and he was not informed about it in the interim and here one cannot say that the days in-between are considered knowledge [of them] to differentiate, for the days in-between he would not know which chief labor is forbidden and which is permitted other than if he sat and engaged before Sages in the laws of Shabbat. And the same law applies that he is liable on two derivatives of two primary forbidden forms of labor whereby each one is divided into one sin-offering apiece, but if he had done a principal form of forbidden labor and its derivative or two derivatives of one principal forbidden labor, he is not liable other than for one [sin-offering] as it is taught at the end of the Mishnah: A person who performs many forbidden actions of one prohibited labor [on the Sabbath], he is not liable for other than for one [sin-offering] such as two derivatives of one primary forbidden labor because it is like a person who performed an action and repeated it in one act of forgetfulness and there is no separation/division of sin-offerings with one act of forgetfulness but other than the actual transgression which is not similar or distinguished on [many] Sabbaths for the matter of an error on Shabbat.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
המוציא [יין] כדי מזיגת כוס – [of wine] for the Blessing after the Meal which is one-fourth part of a רביעית of pure wine in order that he would mix it to a percentage of one [part] of wine and three [parts] of water and he will become consistent with a quarter of a “log” (which equals the volume of six eggs) which is the measurement for a cup [of wine] for a blessing.
כדי גמיעה – what a person absorbs at one time but the milk of a ritually impure animal that is not proper for drinking, its measure is to paint the eyelids [for medical or for cosmetic purposes] of one eye (see Talmud Shabbat 78b and the end of Mishnah 3 of our chapter).
על הכתית – a wound on the back of horses and donkeys on account of the burden; and I found it written that the inflammation that comes out of the hide of the flesh that when it reaches a boiling point it makes a head about and it is called the “mouth” of a scab, and even though the honey is principally for eating, because its healing [capacity] is found, and it is “something,” we go according to the smallest measure possible for a strict [ruling].
אבר קטן – [smallest limb] of a one-day old baby which is the little toe of the foot.
לשוף – to rub and dissolve them.
קילור – that we put on the eye.
ושאר כל המשקין – that we don’t use for medicinal purposes.
שופכין – decaying waters and they are fit to stamp the clay.
ברביעית – even wine, milk and honey, whose measurements are not mentioned in the Mishnah other than those who set them aside (see Mishnah Shabbat, Chapter 10, Mishnah 1), but the rest of all people, they are not liable other than for a quarter of a “log”(i.e., the volume of six eggs), and Rabbi Shimon holds that when he himself sets something aside/stores away, he requires a small measurement and less than that amount he is not liable for it, for Rabbi Shimon does not hold that all that is not fit to set aside, we do not set aside/store it like him for he will become liable for it, but sets aside/store away a little bit, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
אמר ר"ע מנין לעבודת כוכבים שמטמאת במשא – since they are concerned above with an Asmakhta/a scriptural text used as a support for a rabbinic enactment and the Biblical verse of (Isaiah 30:22): “You will cast them away like a menstruous woman,” it is a support to the Biblical verse that was brought above (Isaiah 30:14 – see Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 8, Mishnah 7): “So that no shard is left in its breakage;” alternatively, because it was necessary to teach (Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 9, Mishnah 3), “from where do we learn that we wash the circumcised child on the third day if it falls on the Sabbath?,” they taught these which are compared to it.
מטמאה במשא – a person who carries it should wash his clothes and even if he didn’t touch it, such as it was in a box or something like that, and the Rabbis dispute on the statement of Rabbi Akiba and state that he does not become ritually defiled other than through contact like an unclean reptile, and the Halakha is according to the Sages.
תזרם כמו (אשה) דוה – that is to say, it should be in your eyes like foreigners like depressed like a menstruant woman, as it is written (Leviticus 15:33): “and concerning her who is in menstrual infirmity” and the Biblical verse is speaking about idolatry.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
המצניע – prior to Shabbat
לזרע ולדוגמא – to demonstrate that he has artist’s materials and that [people] will buy from him.
ולרפואה – and he forgot on Shabbat why he had stored them away and merely took them out, he is culpable however small the amount, for on the first thought he took it out and considering it.
Rather the amount of every measurement that is described here.
חזר והכניסו – he who stored it away less than its prescribed quantity and removed it, if he considered it that it wasn’t to sow it and then went back and brought it in.
אינו חייב – in his bringing this in other than if it has the complete prescribed quantity for since he had considered not to so it, his intention was nullified and he is like any person.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
הזורק מרשות היחיד לרשות הרבים – the private/individual domain is a place that is surrounded by four partitions ten handbreadths high and between them are four handbreadths by four handbreadths or more, even if there are several miles, if they surrounded for living such as a district/province/large town which is surrounded by a wall and its doors are locked at night and their alleys have three walls and a stake fastened in the ground by the side of a wall, serving as a mark or as fictitious partition/enclosure for the purposes of enabling those who live there to move objects on the Sabbath in the fourth direction, and similarly a large hill that is ten [handbreadths] high and four [handbreadths] wide or an incision/trench that is ten [handbreadths] deep and four [handbreadths] wide and even utensils such as a boat or a tower of wood and things like them, if they have [a circumference of four by four at a height of ten , all of these are the public domain. And the airspace of the private domain is like the private domain up to the sky. And the thickness of the walls of the private domain are judged as the private domain. But the public domain is like the marketplaces and the desert streets and the roads open to them and it should be that the width of the path is sixteen cubits and there should not be a ceiling upon it. And there is one who holds that it also requires that six-hundred thousand people pass through it every day like the marches of the Israelites in the desert (see Tractate Shabbat 98a). But the airspace of the public domain is not like the public domain other than up to ten handbreadths for above from ten [handbreadths] is free/exempt. But a place that lacks four by four [handbreadths] and is or higher than three [handbreadths] is the exempt/free space and even thorns and thistles and excrement in the public domain that are at least three [handbreadths] or higher but lack four by four [handbreadths] are considered an exempt place. But a place that is surrounded by four partitions whose height is from three [handbreadths] to ten and it has four by four [handbreadths] or more, or a hill/mound that has four by four [handbreadths] or more which is higher than three [handbreadths] up to ten or a ditch which has four by four [handbreadths] and is deep from three until ten [handbreadths] or an alley that is closed from three directions and lacks a mark as a fictitious partition/enclosure or a beam on the fourth direction, and the sea and the valley – all of these are a Karmelit. The explanation of a Karmelit (a marked-off plot in a public thoroughfare – which cannot be considered either private or public domain) is like a “widow” – that is to say, like a widow who is not a virgin, nor married to a husband. Such is this domain which is neither a private domain nor a public domain and the airspace of a Karmelit is like a Karmelit up until ten [handbreadths] and above that, it is considered an exempt space. A person who removes something from the private domain to the public domain or brings something in from the public domain to the private domain is liable for a sin-offering (see Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1). From a private domain to a Karmelite and/or from a public domain to a Karmelit, or from a Karmelite to either of them is exempt but it is forbidden. [A person who brings something] from a private domain or from a public domain to an exempt space or from the exempt space to both of them -it is ab initio permitted, and we don’t have to say, from a Karmelit to an exempt space and from an exempt space to a Karmelit it is permitted. But a person who transfers an object from the beginning of the four cubits to the end of the four cubits in the public domain is liable for a sin-offering. In a Karmelit, he is exempt, but it is forbidden. In the private domain and in the exempt place, it is permissible ab initio to carry and transfer throughout the entire domain and even if it several miles.
ר"ע מחייב – for he holds that since the object has passed in the airspace of the public domain, within ten [handbreadths], it is as if it has come to rest; but the Rabbis hold that something absorbed in the midst of the ten [handbreadths] of airspace of the public domain is not like someone who placed it there, but above from ten [handbreadths] it is an exempt space, and no disputes that he is exempt, and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
הבונה – that they mentioned in the [thirty-nine] chief labors – 
how much can one build and be liable? The smallest quantity.
מסתת – to make the stone quadrangular or to level it/smooth it, everything is according to the custom of the place, and this is a derivative of he who gives the final stroke with the hammer.
והמכה בפטיש – this is the conclusion of work of those who cut stones, for after he cuts stones from the mountain surrounding him and he has severed it, he strikes a large blow with his hammer and it breaks apart and falls, and all who complete [forbidden] work in Shabbat, it is a derivative of striking the final hammer blow.
מעצד – a small, curved cutting tool/hatchet.
הקודח – makes a perforation/hole.
כל שהוא – it refers to all of them – to the one who chisels, and to the one who strikes the final hammer blow and the adze and the one who perforates/digs out.
now that you've done what you did you don't need to any anything to it
קורנס – “Martil.”
סדן – “Ankizina” in the foreign language.
מפני שהוא כמתקן מלאכה – even though he does not strike on the work [itself] other than on the block, he is improving/fixing, for similarly, those who beat the gold foils of the Tabernacle who would strike the foils with three hits and on the block one hit to smooth the mallet/smith’s hammer so that it not split the foil which is thin, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
רבי אליעזר אומר האורג שלשה חוטין בתחלה – if this is the beginning of his weaving of a clothing, he is not liable [for violating the Sabbath] until he weaves three threads, but if he adds on to something woven, its measure of one combines with the rest, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
שמונה – the חלד/mole ,weasel and the עכבר /mouse, rat , the אנקה/gecko, house-lizard;כח /lizard, salamander; the לטאה/lizard; the חמט/sand lizard; the תנשמת/chameleon, newt; and the צב/great lizard/tortoise (all of which are found in Leviticus 11:29-30) which are enumerated in [the Torah portion of “On the eighth day”/ויהי ביום השמיני.
הצדן חייב – for there is of their species that is hunted.
והחובל בהן חייב – for they have hide and it has a wound that does not return [to health] (as the blood is collected and tied up in one place and is not reabsorbed– see Rashi on Talmud Shabbat 107b), one is liable because of severing which is a derivative of threshing; alternatively, since they have a hide, the hide is colored with the blood that is gathered and tied up, and he is liable before of dyeing.
ושאר שקצים ורמשים - such as worms and snails and scorpions, one who wounds them is exempt, as they lack a hide.
שלא לצורך פטור – for none of their species is hunted.
חיה ועוף ברשותו. הצדן פטור - for they are hunted and standing [alive].
החובל בהן חייב – for they have hide and the one who wounds them is not liable in all of these that are taught in our Mishnah other than when in need of blood , but if one didn’t wound them other than to damage them, we hold that (see Mishnah Shabbat, Chapter 13, Mishnah 3): “All those who perform an act (on the Sabbath) by which they do ruin, are exempt [from sin-offering].”

=== 15 | chapter 15 ===
אלו קשרים. קשר גמלים – they perforate the nose of a camel and place in it a strap and tie it an eternal knot and like this, they make a perforation at the head of as ship and place in it a rope and tie a durable knot in it can never be undone, that is similar to knots of threads of curtains that have torn in the Tabernacle, but a durable knot that is not the act of an artisan, or it is the act of an artisan but is not durable knot is exempt, but prohibited and it is not liable until it is one of durability and the action of an artisan.
וכשם שחייב על קשרן כך חייב על התירן – for just as those who hunt snail/conchiferous animal/purple-fish it would be necessary on occasion to undo/loosen the knots of the nets that exist in order to shorten them or widen them.
שיכול להתירו – without being squeezed/pricked.
אין חייבין עליו – and even if he did to make it durable, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

=== 16 | chapter 16 ===
כל כתבי קדש – even [the works of the] Prophets and Writings, we save them from a courtyard that a fire had fallen upon it [and bring them] to another courtyard that was in the same alley, even though they did not create a symbolic community of residence and this (i.e., the works of the Prophets and the Writings) which would be written in the modern form of Hebrew type and in the holy language.
בין שקורין בהן – such as the Prophet/Haftarah [portions] that we read on Shabbat in the synagogue.
בין שאין קורין בהן – such as the Writings, for even individuals should not read them on Shabbat because [it would lead to] being idle from the Bet Midrash/House of study as above when they would preach sermons to the people on the Sabbath where they teach them the laws of prohibitions and what is permitted, because on all of the weekdays, the people are engaged in their labors/work and they (i.e., the Rabbis) forbade the reading of the Writings on Shabbat at the time of the Bet Midrash/House of Study they pull at the hearts and come to prevent them to ear the sermon.
ואעפ"י שכתובים בכל לשון – and there is an opinion that states that they didn’t give [them permission] to read them and we don’t save them nevertheless they require the removal [and storage] of sacred object and it is forbidden to place them in an ownerless place.
למבוי שאינו מפולש – for it has three partitions and one stake [fashioned in the ground] in the fourth direction, this is an alley that is not open (i.e., not closed by a fourth partition) that is spoken of here. Three partitions without a stake = is an open alley and it is explained in the Gemara (Tractate Shabbat 117a) but the Halakha is not according to Ben Beteira.

=== 17 | chapter 17 ===
כל הכלים – that have doors.
ניטלים בשבת ודלתותיהן עמהן – and even though the doors were detached from the utensils prior to the Sabbath, they are taken on the Sabbath with the utensils.
ואינן דומין לדלתות הבית – and even if they were detached on the Sabbath, they are not taken because the doors of the house are not fashioned as such, that is to say, they were not made to be carried.

=== 18 | chapter 18 ===
מפנין – if one needs their space to sit guests to place divans around the table for a meal or students to hear the sermon, and specifically for a matter of a Mitzvah it is permitted and we don’t concern ourselves with the trouble of Shabbat.
ארבע וחמש – not specifically, for if he needs even more also.
אבל לא את האוצר – that is to say, only that he should no complete the entire hoarded up treasure until he reaches its bottom, for perhaps he will come to make holes/indentations.
מפנין תרומה טהורה – even an Israelite (i.e., non-Kohen) for whom it is not fit can carry it and clear it away because it is fit for a Kohen.
דמאי – because it is fit for the poor as is taught in the Mishnah (Tractate Demai, Chapter 3, Mishnah 1): “We feed the poor and to quarter given to troops on march/transient poor men produce about which there is a suspicion as to whether or not the tithes were appropriately taken,” and if he requires it he would make ownerless his possessions and would be poor and be fit for it; now also the poor is fit for it.
ותרומת מעשר שניטלה תרומתו – the tithe of the tithe which the Levite owes to the Kohen that was taken from it but he did not take the Great Tithe (i.e., the 2% that goes from an Israelite to a Kohen) such as the case where a Levite anticipated first and took the [First] Tithe in the ears of corn but had not yet occurred the obligation of Terumah/priest’s due, for the grain is not liable for Terumah until it becomes shaped into an even pile, and he (i.e., the Levite) advanced and took the [First] Tithe of the ears of corn does not separate anything other than the tithe of the tithe which the Levite owes to the Kohen alone, and he is permitted to consume it even though the Great Tithe was not yet separated out.
ומעשר שני והקדש שנפדו – the owners redeemed them and gave the principal but did not give the [added] one-fifth, and we derive from here that they are redeemed and the one-fifth is a loan to the owners.
אבל לא את הטבל – and even eatables forbidden pending the separation of priestly gifts according to the Rabbis such as that which is sown in a pot without a hole.
ולא את מעשר ראשון שלא נטלה תרומתו – if the Levite anticipated first and he took the [First] Tithe after the grain had been shaped into an even pile before the Great Terumah/priest’s due had been separated from it (i.e., the Israelite’s requirement to give a Kohen two percent), and he (i.e., the Levite) separate the tithe of the tithe (which the Levite owes to the Kohen) but he didn’t separate the Great Terumah – this is First Tithe where Terumah had not been taken which is spoken about here, for since [the grain] had been shaped into an even pile and had become liable for Terumah/priest’s due, when he (i.e., the Levite) takes the First Tithe, even though he separates from it the tithe of the tithe, all the while that he did not separate from it the Great Terumah, it is considered eatables forbidden pending the separation of priestly gifts and it is prohibited to carry it on the Sabbath.
ולא מעשר שני והקדש שלא נפדו – such as the case when they were redeemed, but not redeemed according to Halakha, such as when he redeemed the Second tithe out of fragments of vessels/broken ware, which is no longer a vessel or rubbish (see Tractate Shabbat 123a) and not Second Tithe which is redeemed with money that has upon them a shape/form, as it is written (Deuteronomy 14:25): “[You may convert them into money.] Wrap up the money [and take it with you to the place the LORD your God has chosen].” But sanctified things are not redeemed with land, as it is written (Leviticus 27:23): “and he shall pay the assessment as of that day”- a thing that is given from hand to hand.
לוף – a kind of a legume which is not appropriate raw even for animals. But Maimonides explained it is a from the species of onions.
לעורבין – like the rich people who raise ravens to adulthood, but the Halakha is not according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel.

=== 19 | chapter 19 ===
רבי אליעזר אומר אם לא הביא כלי – cutting tool/knife to circumcise the baby.
מביאו בשבת מגולה – to announce that this Mitzvah is beloved for we desecrate the Sabbath for it.
ובסכנה – when they (i.e., foreign powers) made a decree against circumcision.
מכסהו ע"פ עדים – that they will testify that this cutting tool/knife that he is bringing is for the Mitzvah and that they should not suspect him that he is carrying the rest of his belongings.
ולעשות ברזל –in order to make a cutting tool for the circumcision.
כל מלאכה שאפשר לעשותה - such as the requirements of a religious act of circumcision [to be performed on the Sabbath] since it is possible to perform them on the Eve of the Sabbath (i.e., on Friday), they do not override the [observance of the] Sabbath and he disagrees with Rabbi Eliezer.
שאי אפשר לעשותה מע"ש – such as the actual circumcision for it is impossible to do it for its [appropriate] time is the eighth day which overrides the Sabbath and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiba.

=== 20 | chapter 20 ===
רבי אליעזר אומר: תולין את המשמרת – they filter in it the sediment of the wine and stretch/extend its mouth over the entire side in a circle and it makes a “tent” over the hollow/cavity of the utensil but even though he made a “tent,” it is permissible on Jewish holy days, for Rabbi Eliezer holds that acts preliminary to the preparation of food where it is possible to do them from the eve of the Jewish holy day, it is permitted to do them on the Jewish holy day, but on the Sabbath, ab initio, he may not suspend [a strainer] , but if it is [already] suspended, he may place into it the sediments, and stretch it for this is not the manner of "בורר"/sifting (which is one of the primary forms of labor prohibited on the Sabbath).
אין תולין את המשמרת - for he is making a temporary tent and it appears like an act of the weekdays.
ואין נותנין לתלויה בשבת – for it is a derivative of "בורר"/sifting or "מרקד" /shaking in the sieve, and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 21 | chapter 21 ===
נוטל אדם את בנו – in the courtyard and the stone is in his hand, but we don’t say that he is carrying regarding the stone.
כלכלה – basket
והאבן בתוכה – and it is the case that there will be fruit/produce in the basket, for if there were no fruit in it, it would be made the basis for a prohibited thing for it is prohibited to carry it, and there needs also that there would be in it fruit so that if he casts them on the ground, they would be detestable, such as mulberries and grapes and similar things, but if there were no fruit in it, such as nuts and almonds, he would empty the fruit and they would fall, but the detestable fruit also such as mulberries and grapes, if it is possible to remove them to the sides of the basket and to remove the stone alone, and to cast it away, for it is prohibited to carry it with the stone. But our Mishnah is speaking about the case where it had broken through from the sides of the basket or its rim at the bottom of the vessel and the stone was a wall to it, that it is impossible to use the basket without [the presence] of the stone.
תרומה טמאה עם הטהורה ועם החולין – subsidiary to the pure produce and subsidiary to the non-holy produce but the unclean is separate and is not carried.
אף מעלין את המדומע באחד ומאה – A Se’ah of Terumah/priest’s due that fell into one-hundred Se’ah of non-holy produce, it is permissible to raise it up to a Se’ah of Terumah from them on Shabbat and all of it (i.e., the rest) would be non-holy produce, and it is permissible for foreigners (i.e., non-priests) and we don’t say that he is making things legally fit for use by giving the priest’s dues, for the Terumah that fell in the non-holy produce, we consider it as if it was placed alone, and didn’t become mixed up, and when it comes up as one-part in one-hundred and one, the Terumah itself that fell comes up. Therefore, it is not repairing, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

=== 22 | chapter 22 ===
מצילין מזון ג' סעודות – and even in many utensils, for if it was In one utensil, they said in the chapter [sixteen of Tractate Shabbat, Mishnah two] “all the [holy] writings,” that as many as is necessary, one saves.
לכם – food for everyone for three [Sabbath] meals.
ובלבד שלא יספוג – that he should not place a sponge to absorb the wine and to go back and to cause it to drip and even though one must sponge the handle, for there is no fear of a wringing/squeezing out they were brought iin, even to take in his hand oil or honey which are thick and are affixed and clean his hand on the rim of the utensil, it is prohibited that he do so in the manner that he does it on weekdays.
אין סוחטין את הפירות – for he is taking it apart/severing it which is a derivative of threshing.
אסורין – a decree lest he squeeze it out/wring it ab initio.
ר"י אומר אם לאוכלין – those same fruits were collected that which comes out from them is permitted, for it is not satisfactory for him with what flowed out and we cannot make a decree lest he wring them out/squeeze them.
ואם למשקין – they were collected for it was satisfactory for him what came out from them – that which comes out from them is prohibited as a decree lest he squeeze them, and with olives and grapes, Rabbi Yehuda agrees with the Sages that even though he brought them in to eat, that which comes out from them is prohibited since they exist for squeezing when they come to a drink, he would give his attention to this, but in regard to the rest of the kinds of fruits, the Sages agree with Rabbi Yehuda, since it was not the manner for squeezing, they didn’t dispute other than with mulberries and pomegranates, for Rabbi Yehuda compares them to the rest of the priests and the Sages compare them to olives and grapes, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
חלות דבש – when they are crushed/chopped, the honey flows on its own from the midst of the wax and it is not the manner to squeeze/wring it; therefore, Rabbi Eliezer permits it and the Sages forbid it, as a decree lest they are chopped/crushed; but the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer.

=== 23 | chapter 23 ===
שואל. ובלבד שלא יאמר הלוני – for it implies a loan for a long time and we hold that an undefined loan is for thirty days; therefore the lender comes to write on his writing tablet/merchant’s account book that I have loaned such-and-such to so-and-so in order that he would not forget it.
מניח טליתו אצלו – if he (i.e., the lender) doesn’t believe him (i.e., the borrower) and he takes it and dedicates it as Temple property on the Sabbath for [loan[ obligations that have a fixed time [for return] one can dedicate [them] on the Sabbath (though we learn in Tractate Arakhin, Chapter 7, Mishnah 5, that one does not dedicate to the Temple something that is not his).

=== 24 | chapter 24 ===
מי שהחשיך. נותן כיסו לנכרי – while it is still daylight, and even though he is the agent of an Israelite to carry his money-bag on the Sabbath, the Rabbis have established that a person will not restrain himself from defending his property (see Talmud Shabbat 72a), for if they don’t permit him, he will come to carry four cubits in the public domain [on Shabbat].
ואם אין עמו נכרי כו' – but if he has a heathen with him, he will give it to the heathen. What is the reason? A donkey, you are commanded to let his animals rest; but a heathen, you are not commanded to let him rest. For when he places his money-bag on the donkey when it gets dark [on Friday], he leaves it on her while she is walking, that is to say, after she has uprooted her leg to walk, she has not performed “uprooting” and when the animal wishes to stand, he takes it from upon her, but after she resumes and uproots her leg to walk, he places it upon her, in order that the animal not perform uprooting and placing down, for if he left her to perform uprooting and placing down, and he loads her or leads her, it is found that he is loading his animal on Shabbat and that is prohibited even though she is not loaded other than with something [minimal] , as it is written (Exodus 20:10): “You shall not do [any] work, you, [your son or daughter, your male or female slave,] or your cattle…” What is the work that is done whether by a person or the animal? One could say that it is loading/piling on.
הגיע לחצר החיצונה – it is thing that is taught separately for itself, and the law of his money-bag that we are speaking of.
לחצר החיצונה – of the city which a place where it will be guarded first when he comes to unload the donkey, he takes by his hand from it utensils that are handled on the Sabbath.
ושאינם ניטלים מתיר את החבלים – of the saddle which are tied up and the sacks fall.
