=== 1 | First Part of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas ===
ÉriflnMl


wwlw®'^
Mtomm/0M$m  m ,$$

$ Life p'

/ y wfifi  3Í  v;  A •¡•.,.  ■;■, : •■  ,••  •:•  .',  ;<  .


^mmsmim

«ÍM


¡ttSSÉÉP


;¡<!*«feí,  ¡j


UpH

H|

»y/o!‘k  fj


WfWiil
liwM  M Jp
rnmmMmmmm

HHmíPíM

i*4f|


Ü&8


y/.*.  v/>¿v>  »»>, « W4*  iWA

illil

^»iit
liliiili

MMWl

wMwMmmwMMi


Mili


P


~2-n/‘6  Lo


WORKS  ISSUED  BY

W\)t  l?aftlugt  j5>ocictg.


THE  ROYAL  COMMENTARIES

OF  THE  YNCAS.

VOL.  I.


M.DCCC.T.XIX.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2016  with  funding  from
Getty  Research  Institute


https://archive.org/details/firstpartofroyal01vega


FIRST  PART


OF  THE

ROYAL  COMMENTARIES

OF

THE  YNCAS


BY  THE

YNCA  GARCILASSO  DE  LA  VEGA.


TRANSLATED  AND  EDITED,

0otcs  ani)  an  íntroimctíon,


BY

CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM.


VOLUME  I.


(CONTAINING  BOOKS  I,  II,  III,  AND  IV.)


LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY.


M.DCCC.LXIX.


THOMAS  RICHARDS,  37,  GREAT  QUEEN  STREET.


COUNCIL


THE  HAKLUYT  SOCIETY.


SIR  RODERICK  IMPEY  MURCHISON,  Bart.,  K.C.B.,  G.C.St.S.,  F.R.S.,  D.C.I-.,  Corr
Mem.  Inst.  F.,  Hon.  Mem.  Imp.  Acad.  Sc.  Petersburg,  etc.,  etc.,  President.

Admiral  C.  R.  DRINKWATER  BETHUNE,  C.B.


The  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  DAVID  DUNDAS.

The  Right  Hon.  H.  U.  ADDINGTON.

Rev.  G.  P.  BADGER,  F.R.G.S.

J.  BARROW,  Esq.,  F.R.S.

Rear-Admiral  R.  COLLINSON,  C.B.

Sir  HENRY  ELLIS,  K.H.,  F.R.S.

General  C.  FOX.

W.  E.  FRF, RE,  EsQ.

R.  W.  GREY,  Esq.

JOHN  WINTER  JONES,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

R.  H.  MAJOR,  Esq.,  F.S.A.

Sir  CHARLES  NICHOLSON,  Bart.,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.
Captain  SHERARD  OSBORN,  R.N.,C.B.
Major-General  Sir  HENRY  C.  RAWLINSON,  K.C.B.
Hon.  H.  STANLEY.

The  Bishop  of  ST.  DAVID’S.

Colonel  YULE,  C.B.


CLEMENTS  R.  MARKHAM,  Esq.,  F.S.A.,  Honorary  Secretary.


INTRODUCTION.


The  first  part  of  the  Royal  Commentaries  of  Peru
describes  the  manners  and  customs  of  one  of  the  two
great  civilised  communities  of  the  New  World,  and
was  written  by  an  author  who  had  known  the  country
from  his  childhood,  and  had  peculiar  qualifications  for
his  task.  The  writer  was  not  one  of  those  travellers
or  explorers  who  set  out  from  Europe  in  search  of  ad-
ventures in  the  New  World.  He  had  even  greater
advantages  as  a describer  of  a distant  and  little  known
land  ; for  he  was  the  son  of  such  an  adventurer  by  a
native  mother,  and  thus  began  to  acquire  the  know-
ledge which  enabled  him  afterwards  to  write  this  in-
valuable work,  in  his  very  cradle.  So  that  his  travels
over  all  parts  of  Peru  were  not  commenced  until  he
had  learnt  the  traditions  and  customs  of  his  mother’s
people,  and  had  become  intimately  acquainted  with
their  language.  The  young  Ynca  had  a wonderful
start  of  all  other  contemporary  travellers,  for  he  was
born,  as  it  were,  in  the  midst  of  his  work,  and  began
to  store  his  material  as  soon  as  he  could  speak.

Our  author’s  father,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,*  was  a

* The  Spaniards  in  those  days  had  very  uncertain  rales  in  the
adoption  of  surnames.  One  brother  would  take  his  father’s,
another  his  mother’s,  .and  a third  his  grand mother’s.  Garcilasso

b


11


INTRODUCTION.


son  of  Don  Alonzo  de  Hinestrosa  de  Vargas  and  ins
wife  Doña  Blanca  Suarez  de  Figueroa.  His  paternal
ancestry,  the  lords  of  Sierrabrava,  descended  from  that
gallant  warrior  who  fought  by  the  side  of  St.  Ferdi-
nand at  the  capture  of  Seville  from  the  Moors — Garci
Perez  de  Vargas,  in  1348.  In  an  old  popular  song
the  famous  city  is  made  to  say  : —

Hercules  built  me
Julius  Caesar  encircled  me
With  towers  and  long  walls
The  sainted  King  conquered  me
With  Garci  Perez  de  Vargas  A

The  head  of  his  mother’s  family  was  her  cousin  the
Duke  of  Feria,  one  of  the  Spanish  courtiers  who  ac-
companied Philip  to  England,  and  the  only  one  who
gained  an  English  wife.  He  married  Miss  Jane  Dor-
mer, daughter  of  Sir  William  Dormer  by  Mary  Syd-
ney. The  famous  poet  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  was  of
the  same  family,  and  a first  cousin  once  removed  of
our  author’s  father.

So  that  the  ancestry  of  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  the
father  was  sufficiently  distinguished  and  noble,  as  will
be  more  clearly  seen  by  an  examination  of  the  pedi-
gree on  the  following  page.  He  was  born  in  the  city

de  la  Vega  was  a Vargas  on  liis  father’s  side,  and  a Suarez  de
Figueroa  on  his  mother’s.  His  own  name,  adopted  also  by  the
poet  and  others  of  his  relations,  was  that  of  a maternal  ancestor.

* Hercules  me  edificó
Julio  Cesar  me  cercó
De  torres  y cercas  largas
El  Rey  sancto  me  ganó
Con  Glarci  Perez  de  Vargas.


VI

be

c3

be

a

l>

oá

t>

<D

Tj

t>

<D

U

N

<D

<D

'rd  “

_ N —
<D

.ro

P

w '“'¡2

h^£  e-s

*¡£11 e If

o3 ge6*

«iñJS~2

!^i¿si


Gomez  Suarez  :Ie  Figueroa,  3rd  Duke  of  Feria,  Captain  General  of  Milan.


IV


INTRODUCTION.


of  Badajoz  in  Estremadura,  in  the  year  1506  ; and
was  a tall  handsome  young  man,  polished,  generous,
and  well  practised  in  the  use  of  arms  when,  in  1531,
he  set  out  for  the  New  World  as  a captain  of  infantry
in  company  with  Don  Alonzo  cle  Alvarado,  who  was
returning’  to  resume  his  government  of  Guatemala.
That  famous  chief,  on  hearing  of  the  riches  of  Peru,
sailed  with  a large  fleet  from  Nicaragua,  and  landed  in
the  hay  of  Caragues  in  May  1534.  Garcilasso  cle  la
Vega  accompanied  him,  and  shared  all  the  terrible
hardships  and  sufferings  of  the  subsequent  march  to
Riobamba.  After  the  convention  with  Almagro,  and
the  dispersion  of  Alvarado’s  forces,  Garcilasso  was
sent  to  complete  the  conquest  of  the  country  round
the  port  of  Buenaventura.  He  and  his  small  band  of
followers  forced  their  way,  for  many  days,  through
dense  uninhabited  forests,  enduring  almost  incredible
hardships,  and  finding  nothing  to  repay  their  labours.
He  displayed  much  constancy  and  perseverance,  but,
having  lost  eighty  of  his  men  from  hunger  and  fever,
he  was  at  last  obliged  to  retreat.  He  then  went  to
Lima,  at  the  time  when  Pizarro  was  closely  besieged
by  the  insurgent  Indians,  and  afterwards  marched  to
the  relief  of  Cuzco,  which  was  also  surrounded  by  an
Indian  army  under  Manco  Ynca.

Then  followed  the  civil  war  between  the  conquerors
of  Peru,  and  the  defeat  and  death  of  Almagro.  During
these  troubles  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  appears  to  have
settled  at  Cuzco,  where  he  received  a portion  of  a
palace  of  one  of  the  Yncas  as  his  share  of  the  spoils,


INTRODUCTION.


V

besides  grants  of  land  in  the  neighbouring  districts.*
After  having  reaped  the  fruits  of  his  warlike  exploits,
and  settled  himself  as  a citizen  of  Cuzco,  this  noble
cavalier,  like  many  of  his  comrades,  became  enamoured
of  a young  Ynca  princess.  Their  connection  must
have  commenced  in  about  the  year  1538,  when  the
Pizarro  faction  in  Peru  had  become  all-powerful,  through
the  defeat  and  death  of  Almagro.  The  name  of  the
young  Indian  was  Chimpa  Ocllo,  and  she  had  been
baptised  as  Doña  Isabel,  but  most  of  her  older  relations
were  still  worshippers  of  the  Sun.  A contemporary
picture  of  this  ñusta  or  princess  still  exists  at  Cuzco —
a delicate  looking  girl  with  large  gentle  eyes  and
slightly  aquiline  nose,  long  black  tresses  hanging  over
her  shoulders,  and  a richly  ornamented  woollen  mantle
secured  in  front  by  a large  gold  pin.  Her  father’s
name  was  Hualpa  Tupac,  brother  of  the  great  Ynca
Huayna  Ccapac,  and  son  of  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui.
Our  author,  the  Ynca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  was  born
in  1540  ; and  during  the  first  years  of  his  life  his
father  was  engaged  in  the  civil  wars  which  distracted
the  early  days  of  the  conquest.

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  the  father,  accompanied  Gon-
zalo Pizarro  in  his  expedition  to  Charcas,  and  on  the
arrival  of  the  new  Governor  Vaca  de  Castro  in  Peru,
he  joined  his  camp,  and  in  September  1542  was
wounded  in  the  bloody  battle  of  Chupas,  where  the
younger  Almagro  was  overthrown.  When  Gonzalo
Pizarro  rose  in  rebellion  against  the  Viceroy  Blasco
Nunez  de  Vela,  Garcilasso  appears  to  have  joined  the
* See  pages  101,  242.


VI


1 INTRODUCTION.


insurgents  in  the  first  instance,  and  his  brother  Juan
de  Vargas  was  slain  in  the  battle  of  Huarina  on  the
shores  of  lake  Titicaca,  on  October  26th,  1547.  After
this  battle  Gonzalo  Pizarro  marched  in  triumph  to
Cuzco,  and  his  entry  into  the  city  is  one  of  the  earliest
reminiscences  of  our  author,  who  was  then  but  seven
years  old.  The  day  before,  the  little  boy  had  gone
out  with  his  mother  to  meet  their  returning  lord,  as
far  as  the  village  of  Quispicancha,  three  leagues  south
of  Cuzco.  He  tells  us  that  he  walked  part  of  the  way,
and  was  carried  on  the  back  of  an  Indian  when  he
got  tired.  But  his  father  got  him  a horse  to  ride  back
on,  and  he  passed  under  all  the  triumphal  arches  of
gay  flowers,  with  the  victorious  cavalcade.*

Soon  afterwards  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  resolved  to
desert  the  cause  of  the  rebel  chief,  and,  with  several
other  knights,  he  fled  from  Cuzco  to  Arequipa,  and
thence  up,  by  the  deserts  of  the  coast,  to  Lima,  in
order  to  share  the  fortunes  of  the  Viceroy  Blasco
Nunez  de  Vela.  But  when  he  arrived  at  Lima,  that
ill-fated  and  wrong-headed  knight  was  gone,  so  the
fugitives  concealed  themselves  as  best  they  could.
Garcilasso  was  lodged  in  the  house  of  a friend,  and
afterwards  hid  himself  in  the  convent  of  San  Fran-
cisco. Through  the  intercession  of  friends,  Gonzalo
Pizarro  granted  him  a pardon,  but  detained  him  as  a
prisoner  until  he  escaped  to  the  army  of  Gasea,  on  the

* He  says  he  remembered  all  these  things  most  distinctly,
even  down  to  the  houses  where  each  of  Gonzalo’s  captains  lodged
in  Cuzco,  “ porque  la  memoria  guarda  mejor  lo  que  vio  en  su
niñez,  que  lo  que  pasa  en  su  edad  major.”  Comm.  Real,  ii,  v,  27.


INTRODUCTION.


vii

morning  of  the  battle  of  Xaquixaquana,  galloping
across  the  space  between  the  two  camps  at  early  dawn,
on  his  good  horse  Salinillas.  This  was  in  1548.  He
afterwards  resided  quietly  at  his  house  in  Cuzco  until
the  rebellion  of  Giron  broke  out  in  1553,  when  he
once  more  showed  his  loyalty  by  escaping  in  the  night,
and  joining  the  royal  camp.  The  insurrection  of  Fran-
cisco Hernandez  Giron  broke  out  at  Cuzco.  The  Cor-
regidor and  principal  citizens  were  assembled  at  supper
in  the  house  of  Alonzo  de  Loaysa,  a nephew  of  the
archbishop  of  Lima,  to  celebrate  a wedding,  on  the
3rd  of  November.  Amongst  others,  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega  and  his  little  half-caste  son,  then  fourteen  years
old,  were  present.  Suddenly  the  doors  were  burst
open,  and  Giron,  with  many  armed  followers,  rushed
into  the  room.  Garcilasso,  with  his  son  and  a few
friends,  got  out  by  a back  way,  and  over  the  roof  of
the  house,  and  so  into  the  street.  The  boy  was  then
sent  on  in  front  as  a sort  of  sentry,  to  whistle  if  the
coast  was  clear  at  each  turning.  In  this  way  Garci-
lasso and  his  friends  got  to  their  houses,  mounted
their  horses,  and  rode  off  to  Lima.*

Our  author’s  mother,  the  Ynca  princess,  was  pro-
bably dead  at  this  time,  for  he  speaks  of  his  step-
mother in  his  interesting  account  of  these  stirring
transactions.

After  the  fall  of  Giron,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  was
appointed  Corregidor  and  Governor  of  Cuzco,  where
he  appears  to  have  devoted  himself  to  the  duties  of
his  office,  and,  amongst  other  good  deeds,  he  restored
* ii,  lib.  vii,  cap.  ii,  iii.


VIH


INTRODUCTION.


the  aqueduct  which  brought  a supply  of  water  from
the  lake  of  Chinchira  for  a distance  of  two  leagues,  to
irrigate  the  valley  of  Cuzco.  His  house  was  a centre
of  hospitality  and  kindness,  where  the  conquerors
fought  their  battles  over  again  in  the  evenings,  and
where  numerous  charities  were  dispensed.  Both  he
and  his  wife  were  engaged  in  acts  of  benevolence,  and
in  collecting  subscriptions  for  charitable  purposes  during
the  time  that  he  held  office.  It  is  said  that  in  one
night  he  raised  34,500  ducats  for  a hospital  for  In-
dians. They  were  also  the  guardians  of  many  orphans,
and  Garcilasso  particularly  took  charge  of  the  children
of  his  old  companion-in-arms  Pedro  del  Barco,  who
was  ruthlessly  hanged  by  savage  old  Carbajal,  the
lieutenant  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro.*  When  Garcilasso  was
relieved  of  his  office,  the  Juez  de  Residencia  who  came
to  review  his  administration,  honourably  acquitted
him  of  the  charges  which,  in  those  days,  were  invari-
ably brought  against  retiring  officials.

The  future  historian  was  thus  brought  up  amidst
the  turmoil  and  insecurity  of  civil  wars  in  a newly
conquered  country  ; but  he  was  fortunate  in  having
one  of  the  few  honourable  cavaliers  of  noble  blood
among  the  conquerors  for  his  father ; while  he  learnt
much  from  the  gentle  Ynca  princess,  his  mother,  and
her  kindred.  His  education  was  not  neglected.  He
went  to  a day  school  at  the  house  of  the  good  Canon
Juan  de  Cuellar,  a native  of  Medina  del  Campo,  who
taught  grammar  to  the  half-caste  sons  of  the  citizens
of  Cuzco.  This  excellent  priest  undertook  the  work  of
* >Scc  page  295  (note).


INTRODUCTION.


IX


teaching  out  of  kindness,  and  at  the  request  of  the
hoys  themselves  ; for  as  many  as  four  previous  school-
masters had  forsaken  their  scholars  after  a few  months,
thinking  to  make  more  money  in  other  ways.  Men
were  unsettled  and  restless  in  those  early  days  of  the
discovery  of  the  New  World.  But  the  good  canon
read  Latin  with  his  pupils,  about  eighteen  in  number,
for  nearly  two  years,  amidst  all  the  turmoil  of  the
civil  wars.  Among  the  young  Ynca’s  schoolfellows
were  Diego  de  Aleobasa,  his  adopted  brother,  whose
father  was  guardian  to  our  author  when  his  warlike
sire  was  absent  in  the  wars;*  Pedro  Altamirano,  whose
eye  for  beauty  once  caused  him  to  lose  a race  ;f  a son
of  the  gunner  Pedro  de  Candia,  one  of  the  famous
thirteen  who  stood  by  Pizarro  on  the  isle  of  Gallo;
sons  of  Juan  Serra  de  Leguisano,^  Juan  Balsa,  and
Pizarro  by  Ynca  princesses,  and  the  children  of  Pedro
del  Barco.  There  was  also  a young  Indian  of  full
blood  at  the  school,  named  Felipe  Ynca,  who  was  an
excellent  scholar ; and  indeed  the  schoolmaster  was  so
pleased  with  them  all  that  he  used  to  say  : — “ 0 sons  !
what  a pity  it  is  that  a dozen  of  you  should  not  be  in
the  university  of  Salamanca.”

During  these  early  days,  while  our  author  was  learn-
ing some  of  the  lore  of  the  old  World  at  school,  his
mind  was  stored  with  the  history  and  traditions  of  his
native  land  at  home.  Almost  every  week,  he  tells  us,
some  of  the  relations  of  his  Indian  mother  came  to
visit  her  ; and  on  these  occasions  their  usual  conversa-
tion was  on  the  subject  of  the  former  grandeur  of  their
* See  p.  211.  f See  p.  104.  J See  p.  272  ( nute ).


X


INTRODUCTION.


fallen  dynasty,  of  its  greatness,  of  the  mode  of  govern-
ment in  peace  and  war,  and  of  the  laws  ordained  by  the
Yncas  for  the  good  of  their  subjects.  The  half-caste  boy
listened  eagerly  to  these  conversations ; and  at  last,  when
he  was  about  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  old,  he  began  to
put  questions  to  an  old  Ynca  nobleman,  who  was  his
mother’s  brother,  and  received  from  him  the  story  of
the  origin  of  the  Ynca  dynasty.'*  As  the  lad  grew
up,  his  father  employed  him  in  various  ways,  such  as
superintending  and  visiting  his  estates,  and  the  young
Ynca  appears  to  have  travelled  over  most  parts  of
Peru,  scaling  the  snowy  passes,  crossing  the  rapid
streams  in  balsas, j*  and  traversing  the  arid  deserts.
At  last,  after  a long  illness,  his  father  died  in  the
year  1550,  and  he  was  left  an  orphan.

Ynca  Garcilasso  de  la  Yega  was  just  twenty  years
of  age  when  he  found  himself  alone  in  the  world,  and
he  resolved  to  seek  his  fortune  in  the  land  of  his  father,
leaving  Cuzco  and  Peru  for  ever  in  the  same  year  that
he  became  an  orphan.  He  tells  us  that  on  his  voyage
he  was  becalmed  for  three  days  on  the  equator,  off
Cape  Passaos ;%  and,  when  at  last  he  landed  in  Spain,
lie  received  patronage  and  kindness  from  his  father’s
relations,  for  which  he  afterwards  expressed  exagge-
rated gratitude.  He  became  a captain  in  the  army  of
Philip  II,  and  served  in  the  campaign  against  the
Moriscos,  under  Don  John  of  Austria.  When  he  re-
tired from  active  service  the  Ynca  took  up  his  abode
in  hired  lodgings  (“  esta  pobre  casa  de  alquiler,”  as  he

Scc  p.  62.


t P.  259.


I NTRODUCTION.


XI


calls  them)  at  Cordova,  and  devoted  himself  to  literary
pursuits.  He  was  both  poor  and  in  debt  when  he  left
the  army,  and  his  father’s  implication  in  the  rebellion
of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  cast  a cloud  over  the  fortunes  of  the
Yuca.

His  first  literary  production  was  a translation  from
the  Italian  of  the  Dialogues  of  Love,  by  a Jew  named
Abarbanel,  who  wrote  under  the  name  of  “ El  Leon
Ebreo.”  The  Ynca’s  translation  was  published  in

1590.

His  next  work  was  a narrative  of  the  expedition  of
Hernando  de  Soto  to  Florida,  which  he  completed  in

1591.  He  is  said  to  have  got  his  information  chiefly
from  the  accounts  of  an  old  soldier  who  served  with
de  Soto,  and  Mr.  Bancroft  characterises  the  work  as
“ an  extravagant  romance,  yet  founded  upon  facts — a
history  not  without  its  value,  but  which  must  be  con-
sulted with  extreme  caution.”  It  was  first  published
at  Lisbon  in  1605,  with  the  following  title:  La  Florida
del  Ynca.  Historia  del  Adelantado  Hernando  de
Soto,  Gobernador  y capitan  general  del  reyno  de  la
Florida,  y de  otros  heroicos  cavalier  os  Españoles  é
Indios.  It  was  reprinted  several  times,  the  best
edition  being  that  of  1723,  uniform  with  the  Boyal
Commentaries ; and  was  translated  into  French  by
Pierre  Kichelet,  and  published  at  Leyden  in  1731.

A very  curious  manuscript  fragment,  in  the  hand-
writing of  Ynca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  is  in  the  pos-
session of  Don  Pascual  de  Gayangos.  It  appears  to
have  been  intended  for  a dedicatory  epistle  to  be  placed
at  the  beginning  of  the  Ynca’s  work  on  Florida,  and


INTRODUCTION.


xii

to  have  been  addressed  to  the  head  of  the  Vargas
family.  It  consists  of  a geneological  account  of  the
house  of  Vargas,  followed  by  an  abstract  of  the  contents
of  the  work,  and  an  explanation  of  the  system  adopted
by  the  author  in  its  division  into  six  books.

As  years  rolled  on,  the  Ynca  began  to  think  more
and  more  of  the  land  of  his  birth.  The  memory  of
his  boyish  days,  of  his  long  evening  chats  with  his
Indian  relations,  and  of  the  stirring  times  of  the  civil
wars  at  Cuzco,  came  back  to  him  in  his  old  age.  He
was  equally  proud  of  his  maternal  descent  from  the
mighty  Yncas  of  Peru,  as  of  the  noble  Castilian  con-
nection on  his  father’s  side.  So  when  at  last  he  resolved
to  write  the  story  of  his  native  land,  his  plan  was  to
divide  the  work  into  two  parts,  one  to  contain  a history
of  the  Yncas  and  their  civilisation — his  maternal  an-
cestry ; and  the  other  to  be  a record  of  the  mighty
deeds  of  the  conquerors,  amongst  whom  his  gallant
father  was  one  of  the  foremost.  It  was  a great  under-
taking, and  when  he  began  it  he  was  full  of  apprehen-
sion lest  he  should  not  be  spared  to  bring  it  to  a con-
clusion. Fortunately  for  posterity  the  Ynca  lived  to  a
good  old  age,  and  completed  both  parts  of  his  Royal
Commentaries  of  Peru.

As  soon  as  he  had  resolved  to  compose  a history  of
Peru  he  wrote  to  all  his  surviving  schoolfellows  for
assistance,*'  and  received  from  them  many  traditions
which  enabled  him  to  compile  a connected  history  of
the  deeds  of  the  different  Yncas.  He  then  carefully
collated  his  own  account  with  those  given  by  Spanish

* P.  77.


INTRODUCTION.


XI 1 1


historians,  such  as  Ciera  de  Leon,  Zarate,  Gomara,  and
Acosta.  He  was  also  fortunate  in  getting  possession
of  the  papers  of  a missionary  named  Bias  Valera,  who
had  been  in  Peru  during  the  first  years  of  the  conquest,
and  had  taken  great  trouble  in  collecting  all  the  tradi-
tions  of  the  Indians,  and  in  observing  their  laws  and
customs,  at  a time  when  the  generation  which  had  seen
the  Yuca  empire  in  its  glory  was  still  living.  Bias
Valera  was  evidently  a man  of  learning  and  a keen
observer,  and  it  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  more  than
half  his  papers  were  destroyed  when  the  English  sacked
Cadiz  in  1596.*  The  rest  were  given  to  the  Ynca,
after  their  author’s  death,  and  the  information  which
had  been  so  carefully  collected  was  preserved  in  the
pages  of  the  Royal  Commentaries.

The  Ynca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  is,  without  any
doubt,  the  first  authority  on  the  civilisation  of  the
Yncas  and  on  the  conquest  of  Peru.f  His  intimate
knowledge  of  the  Quichua  language,  his  recollections  of
discourses  with  his  mother’s  relations,  and  the  corre-
spondence he  kept  up  with  Peruvian  friends  in  after

* P.  33.

t Mr.  Prescott,  in  liis  Conquest  of  Peru,  quotes —

Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  no  less  than  89  times
Polo  de  Ondegardo  (MS.)  - 41  „

Sarmiento  (MS.)  - - - 25  „


Cieza  de  Leon  -
Acosta


20  „
19  „
14  „
8 „
7 „


Pedro  Pizarro  (MS.)


Montesinos
Zarate
Herrera  -
Gomara  -


2


T NTRODUCTTOX.


xiv

life,  gives  his  testimony  a weight  and  authority  such
as  no  Spaniard  could  lay  claim  to.  The  conversations
he  had  heard  at  his  father’s  house,  where  the  old  soldiers
of  Pizarro  fought  their  battles  over  again,  and  his  own
personal  recollections,  also  give  his  version  of  the  con-
quest and  of  the  subsequent  civil  wars  a peculiar  value.

The  first  part  of  the  Royal  Commentaries  of  Peru,
divided  into  nine  books,  which  has  been  selected  by
the  Council  of  the  Hakluyt  Society  for  translation,
contains  a detailed  history  of  the  origin  of  Ynca  civi-
lisation in  Peru,  of  the  deeds  and  conquests  of  the
successive  sovereigns,  and  of  the  religion,  institutions,
and  customs  of  the  people.  The  story  of  the  origin  of
the  Yncas,  as  given  by  their  descendant,  was  un-
doubtedly the  one  generally  received  by  his  mother’s
relations  ; and  although  both  it  and  the  reigns  of  the
earlier  Yncas  are  fabulous,  yet  they  contain  some
foundation  in  fact,  and  are  beyond  dispute  more  au-
thentic, as  traditions,  than  the  versions  given  by  any
of  the  Spanish  historians.  I have  already,  in  the  In-
troduction to  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,*  given
my  reasons  for  believing  that  the  historical  period  of
Ynca  history  commences  with  Uira-ccocha  (or  Huira-
ccocha),  the  eighth  Ynca  in  our  author’s  list.  From  his
time  the  succession  of  sovereigns  given  by  Cieza  de
Leon  agrees  with  the  more  detailed  narrative  of  Gar-
cilasso  de  la  Vega.  The  Ynca  will  be  found  a pleasant
though  rather  a garrulous  companion.  His  long  his-
torical narratives  of  the  battles  and  conquests  of  the
early  Yncas  often  become  tedious,  and  of  this  the

* P.  1.


INTRODUCTION.  XV

author  is  himself  well  aware.  He,  therefore,  inter-
sperses them  with  more  entertaining  chapters  on  the
religious  ceremonies,  the  domestic  habits  and  customs
of  the  Peruvian  Indians,  and  on  the  advances  they  had
made  in  medicine,  poetry,  music,  astronomy,  and  other
arts.  He  also  frequently  inserts  an  anecdote  from  the
storehouse  of  his  memory,  or  some  personal  reminis-
cence called  forth  by  the  subject  on  which  he  happens
to  be  writing.  He  prided  himself  on  being  a strict
Catholic,  but  at  the  same  time  he  zealously  and  boldly
defends  his  people,  and  shows  a loving  and  tender
regard  for  the  reputation  of  his  gentle  mother’s  kindred,
and  their  subjects,  which  does  him  honour,  and  cannot
fail  to  enlist  the  sympathy  of  the  reader.

The  first  part  of  the  Royal  Commentaries  of  Peru
received  the  approbation  and  license  of  the  Inquisition
in  1604,  and  was  published  at  Lisbon  in  160.9,  dedi-
cated to  the  Duchess  of  Braganza.  The  second  part
was  first  published  at  Cordova  in  1617,  “by  the  widow
of  Andres  Barrera,  and  at  her  cost.’’

Our  author,  the  Ynca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  died
and  was  buried  at  Cordova,*  in  the  year  1616,  at  the
age  of  seventy-six,  having  just  lived  long  enough  to
accomplish  his  most  cherished  wish,  and  complete  the
work  at  which  he  had  steadily  and  lovingly  laboured
for  so  many  years.  Without  it  our  knowledge  of  the
civilisation  of  the  Yncas,  the  most  interesting  and  im-
portant feature  in  the  history  of  the  New  World,  would
indeed  be  limited.

* He  was  buried  in  the  cathedral  at  Cordova,  in  a chapel
called  Garcilasso,  where  a monument  was  erected  to  his  memory.


XVI


INTRODUCTION.


A second  edition  of  the  Royal  Commentaries  was
published  at  Madrid  in  1723  ; and  a third  (the  two
parts  in  four  volumes  1 2mo.)  appeared  in  Madrid  in  1 829.

The  present  translation  has  been  made  from  the
original  Lisbon  edition  of  1 6 09,  collated  with  that  of  1 723.

An  abridged  English  version  of  the  Royal  Commen-
taries appeared  in  London  in  1688,  having  been  “ren-
dered into  English  ” by  Sir  Paul  Rycaut,  Kt.,*  and
dedicated  to  James  II.  The  worthy  knight  had  a very
slight  knowledge  of  the  Spanish  language,  and  he  did
not  scruple  to  make  wild  guesses  at  the  meaning  of
sentences,  and  to  omit  whole  chapters.  Thus  he  only
gives  fourteen  out  of  the  twenty-six  chapters  in  the  first
book,  and  sixteen  out  of  the  twenty-six  in  the  second.
Besides  this  very  imperfect  abridgment,  there  is  no
previous  translation  of  the  Royal  Commentaries  in
English,  though  they  have  been  published  in  French,
German,  and  Italian.  The  French  edition  was  trans-
lated by  M.  J.  Bardouin,  and  was  published  at  Amster-
dam in  1737.  The  German  version,  by  G.  C.  Bottger,
is  in  two  volumes  8vo.  It  was  published  at  Nord-
liausen  in  1798.  It  has  been  thought  that  the  work
of  the  Ynca,  furnishiug  as  it  does  the  best  account  of
the  most  civilised  of  the  aboriginal  American  races,
will  form  an  acceptable  additon  to  the  Hakluyt  Society’s
series.

* Sir  Paui  Rycaut  was  a Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society,  and
eighteen  years  consul  at  Smyrna.  After  dedicating  his  mutilated
version  of  the  Royal  Commentaries  to  James  II,  he  was  appointed
Resident  at  Hamburg.  He  also  wrote  a continuation  of  Knolles’s
Turkish  History  down  to  the  peace  of  Carlowitz  in  1699,  which
was  published  in  1700,  and  dedicated  to  William  III.


FIRST  PART


OF  THE


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES,

Which  treats  of  the  Origin  of  the  Yncas,
Kings  of  Peru  in  former  times,  of  their  idolatries,
laws,  and  government  in  peace  and  war,
of  their  lives  and  conquefts,  and  of
all  things  relating  to  that  Empire
and  its  affairs,  before  the
Spaniards  arrived
there.


Written  by


THE  YNCA  GARCILASSO  DE  LA  VEGA,


A Native  of  Cuzco,  and  Captain  in  His  Majeity’s  Service.


Dedicated  to

The  Moil  Serene  Princefs,  the  Lady  Catharine  of  Portugal,
Duchefs  of  Braganza,  etc.


With  Licenfe  from  the  Holy  Inquifition.


IN  LISBON

In  the  Office  of  Peter  Crasbeeck.

In  the  Year  1609.


TO  THE  MOST  SERENE  PRINCESS


THE  LADY  CATHARINE  OF  PORTUGAL,

DUCHESS  OF  BRAGANZA,*  ETC.


The  usual  custom  of  ancient  and  modern  writers  is  always
to  dedicate  their  works,  the  fruits  of  their  genius,  to  gener-
ous monarchs  and  powerful  kings  and  princes,  that,  owing
to  their  countenance  and  protection,  they  may  be  more

* This  lady  was  the  daughter  of  the  Portuguese  Infant  Dom  Duarte,
and  grand-daughter  of  Manuel  King  of  Portugal,  who  died  in  1557.
She  was  married  to  John  Duke  of  Braganza.  After  the  terrible  rout  at
Alcazar,  and  the  death  of  Dom  Sebastian  (grandson  of  King  John  III,
and  great  grandson  of  King  Manuel)  in  1578,  that  unfortunate  youth’s
uncle,  the  old  Cardinal  Henry,  succeeded  to  the  throne  of  Portugal.
During  his  short  reign  of  two  years  the  various  claimants  to  the  Portu-
guese throne  were  heard.  The  one  who  had  the  best  right  was  young
Ranuccio  of  Parma,  whose  mother  was  the  eldest  sister  of  the  lady
Catharine,  Duchess  of  Braganza.  Next  came  the  Duchess  herself,  next
the  King  of  Spain,  who  claimed  by  right  of  his  mother  the  Infanta  Isa-
bella, a sister  of  the  Infant  Dom  Duarte.  The  Duke  of  Savoy  claimed
through  his  mother  Beatrice,  a sister  of  the  Infanta  Isabella ; and
Antonio,  Prior  of  Crato,  had  the  worst  claim  of  all.  He  was  an
illegitimate  son  of  Dom  Luis,  a brother  of  Dom  Duarte.  The  claim  of
Catharine  de  Medicis  was  absurd.

When  the  old  Cardinal  King  Henry  died  in  1580,  Portugal  fell  to  the
strongest  claimant,  and  was  seized  by  Philip  II.  The  Duchess  of
Braganza,  instead  of  being  Queen,  had  to  be  satisfied  with  a private
station,  and  the  patronage  of  authors.  When  the  Tnca  dedicated  his
Commentaries  to  her  in  1609,  she  must  have  been  about  fifty  years  of
age.  Her  son  Theodore,  Duke  of  Braganza,  had  a son  John,  who,  when
the  Portuguese  threw  off  the  yoke  of  Spain  in  1641,  became  their  king,
and  founded  the  dynasty  of  Braganza.

Mariana  says  that  when  Philip  II  came  to  take  possession  of  Portugal,
he  was  received  with  great  splendour  at  Yelves  by  the  Duke  of  Braganza,
and  that  the  king  afterwards  visited  his  cousin  the  Duchess  Catharine.
Historia  de  España,  x,  lib.  viii,  cap.  6.


IV


favoured  by  the  virtuous,  and  more  free  from  the  calumnies
oí  evil  speakers.  I am  minded,  0 most  serene  Princess,  in
imitation  of  the  example  of  other  writers,  to  dedicate  these
Commentaries  to  your  Highness,  that  they  may  find  shelter
under  your  royal  protection.  Your  Highness  is  known,  not
only  in  Europe,  but  even  in  the  most  remote  parts  of  the
east,  the  west,  the  north,  and  the  south,  wherever  the  glori-
ous princes,  your  Highness’s  ancestors,  have  planted  the
standard  of  our  well-being  and  of  their  glory,  at  so  great  a
cost  of  blood  and  of  lives,  as  is  notorious.  It  is  also  known
to  all  how  great  is  the  generosity  of  your  Highness,  for  this
generosity  is  the  child  and  descendant  of  the  distinguished
kings  and  princes  of  Portugal;  and  although  your  Highness
may  not  think  much  of  this  virtue,  yet  when  over  the  gold
of  such  lofty  rank  the  enamel  of  so  heroic  a virtue  is  cast,  it
should  be  valued  very  highly.  When  we  behold  the  grace
with  which  God  our  Lord  has  enriched  the  soul  of  your
Highness,  we  find  it  to  be  even  greater  than  the  natural
qualities,  the  piety,  and  the  virtue,  of  which  the  whole
world  speaks  with  admiration ; and  I would  say  somewhat
more  without  any  sign  of  flattery,  if  your  Highness  did  not
hate  these  praises  as  much  as  you  desire  silence  concerning
your  virtues.  Those  who  have  been  or  may  be  favoured  by
your  royal  countenance  in  the  whole  of  these  kingdoms,  and
in  those  abroad,  are  proclaimed  in  so  many  languages  that
neither  they  nor  the  favours  of  your  royal  hand  can  be
numbered.  Judging  from  this  experience,  I hope  to  re-
ceive favour  and  countenance  for  these  my  books,  in  pro-
portion to  my  necessity.  I confess  that  my  audacity  is
great,  and  my  whole  service  very  small,  though  my  wish  to
serve  is  sincere.  This  I also  offer,  protesting  that  if  I should
be  deemed  worthy,  I am  most  ready  to  serve  your  High-
ness, whose  royal  person  and  house  may  our  Lord  watch
over  and  bless.  Amen.  Amen.

i he  Ynca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega.


PREFACE  TO  THE  READER.


Although  there  have  been  curious  Spaniards  who  have
written  accounts  of  the  commonwealths  of  the  New  World,
such  as  that  of  Mexico,  that  of  Peru,  and  those  of  other
kingdoms  of  heathendom,  yet  these  accounts  have  not  been
so  complete  as  they  might  have  been.  I have  remarked
this  particularly  in  the  accounts  which  I have  seen  written
of  affairs  in  Peru,  concerning  which,  as  a native  of  the  city
of  Cuzco,  the  Rome  of  that  empire,  I have  a fuller  and
clearer  knowledge  than  has  hitherto  been  supplied  by  any
writer.  It' is  true  that  former  writers  touch  upon  many  of
the  great  events  which  occurred  in  the  empire  of  Peru,  but
they  write  them  so  briefly  that  (owing  to  the  manner  in
which  they  are  told)  I am  scarcely  able  to  understand  them.
For  this  reason,  and  influenced  by  a natural  love  of  my
country,  I undertook  the  task  of  writing  these  Commen-
taries, in  which  the  events  that  happened  in  that  land,  before
the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  are  clearly  and  distinctly  set
forth,  as  well  touching  the  rites  of  their  vain  religion,  as  the
government  of  their  kings  during  peace  and  war,  and  all
other  things  that  relate  to  those  Indians,  from  the  lowest
affairs  of  the  vassals  to  the  highest  matters  touching  the
royal  crown.  I only  write  concerning  the  events  of  the
empire  of  the  Yncas,  without  entering  upon  those  of  other
monarchies,  respecting  which  I have  no  knowledge.  In  the


VI


text  of  the  history  I protest  concerning  its  truth,  and  that  I
affirm  no  important  circumstance  that  is  not  authorised  by
the  Spanish  historians,  either  in  part  or  altogether.  My  in-
tention is  not  to  contradict  them,  but  to  supply  a commen-
tary and  gloss,  and  to  interpret  many  Indian  words  which
they,  as  strangers  in  that  land,  gave  a mistaken  meaning  to,
as  will  be  seen  fully  in  the  course  of  the  history,  which  I
offer  to  the  piety  of  those  who  may  read  it,  with  no  other
desire  than  that  it  may  be  of  service  to  Christendom;  giving
thanks  to  our  Lord  Jesu  Christ  and  to  the  Virgin  Mary  his
mother,  for  their  merits  and  intercession,  through  which  the
eternal  majesty  was  pleased  to  draw  so  many  great  nations
out  of  the  abyss  of  idolatry,  and  to  bring  them  under  the
yoke  of  his  Roman  Catholic  church,  our  mother  and  mis-
tress. I trust  that  it  will  be  received  in  the  same  spirit  as
I offer  it,  for  it  is  the  return  which  my  intention  deserves,
although  the  work  may  not  merit  it.  I am  still  writing  two
other  books  touching  the  events  which  took  place  in  that
land  of  mine,  among  the  Spaniards,  down  to  the  year  1560,
when  I left  it;  and  I desire  to  see  them  finished,  that  I may
make  the  same  offering  of  them  as  I do  of  this.


NOTES  TOUCHING  THE  GENERAL  LANGUAGE
OF  THE  INDIANS  OF  PERU.


In  order  that  the  subject  which,  with  the  Divine  blessing,  we
are  about  to  treat  of  in  this  history  may  be  better  under-
stood (for  we  shall  have  to  use  many  words  in  the  general
language  of  the  Indians  of  Peru),  it  will  be  well  to  give
some  account  of  the  language  of  the  Indians.  The  first
thing  worthy  of  remark  is  that  their  language  has  three
different  ways  of  pronouncing  certain  syllables,  very  differ-
ent from  the  way  in  which  Spanish  is  pronounced ; and  in
this  difference  of  pronunciation  lie  the  differences  in  the
meaning  of  a single  word.*  They  pronounce  some  syllables
with  the  lips,  others  on  the  palate,  others  in  the  throat,
and  we  shall  point  out  examples  of  this,  as  they  occur.
In  accentuating  their  words,  it  must  be  known  that  they
almost  always  place  the  emphasis  on  the  penultimate
syllable,  seldom  on  the  antepenultimate,  and  scarcely  ever
on  the  final  syllable.  I say  this  in  spite  of  those  who  de-
clare that  barbarous  words  should  have  the  accent  on  the
last  syllable,  for  they  make  this  assertion  because  they  do
not  understand  the  language.  In  the  general  language  of

* Thus  Tanta  is  a crowd,  Tlianta  (with  the  t and  h sounded  separ-
ately) means  ragged,  and  Ttanta  (a  double  sound)  is  bread.  Again,
Ppacha  means  time,  Paccha  a fountain,  Pacha  the  earth,  and  Pachha
cloth.


VIH


Cuzco  (for  it  is  respecting  this  that  I desire  to  speak,  and
not  concerning  the  dialects  of  each  province,  which  are  in-
numerable) the  following  letters,  B,  D,  F,  G,  J,  and  L
single  are  wanting,  but  they  have  the  double  sound  LI.
On  the  other  hand  they  have  no  sound  like  the  double  B,r,
either  at  the  beginning  or  in  the  middle  of  a word,  but
that  letter  is  always  pronounced  singly.  Nor  have  they  the
letter  X,  so  that  altogether  they  want  six  letters  of  the
Spanish  a b c ; indeed  it  may  be  said  that  they  are  without
eight,  counting  the  single  L and  the  double  Hr.  When
the  Spaniards  add  these  letters,  they  corrupt  the  language,
and,  as  the  Indians  do  not  use  them,  they  themselves  do  not
pronounce  properly  the  Spanish  words  which  contain  them.
I,  being  an  Indian,  may  properly  avoid  this  corruption,  and
write  this  history  as  an  Indian,  and,  in  writing  Indian
words,  may  use  the  letters  with  which  they  ought  to  be
written.  Those  who  may  read  this  history  should  not  take
it  in  bad  part  that  I have  adopted  this  novelty,  in  opposition
to  the  incorrect  system  previously  introduced,  but  should
rather  rejoice  at  being  able  to  read  these  words  written
correctly  and  with  purity.  As  I shall  have  to  quote  many
things  from  the  Spanish  historians,  to  illustrate  what  I my-
self shall  say,  and  as  I shall  have  to  write  out  their  words
with  their  corruptions  just  as  they  have  written  them,  I de-
sire to  give  notice  that  it  cannot  be  considered  a contradic-
tion that  I should,  in  these  instances,  write  the  letters  which
do  not  exist  in  that  language,  because  I only  do  so  in  order
to  quote  faithfully  what  the  Spaniards  have  written.

It  is  also  worthy  of  remark  that  there  is  no  plural  number
in  this  general  language  of  the  Indians,  although  there  are
particles  which  denote  plurality.*  If  I place  any  Indian

* The  Ynca  of  course  means  that  the  plural  is  not  formed  in  the
same  way  as  it  is  in  the  European  languages  with  which  he  was  ac-
quainted, namely  Spanish,  Italian,  Portuguese,  and  Latin.  The  ordi-
nary form  of  the  plural  in  the  general  language  of  the  Yncas  (or


word  in  the  plural,  it  will  be  a Spanish  corruption,  and  will
be  done  because  it  would  not  sound  well  to  place  the
Indian  words  in  the  singular,  and  the  Spanish  adjectives  or
relative  pronouns  in  the  plural.

There  are  many  other  things  in  this  language  which  are
very  different  from  Spanish,  Italian,  and  Latin.  They  have
been  noted  by  learned  Creoles  and  Mestizos,  and  I now
point  some  of  them  out  that  the  language  may  be  preserved
in  its  purity,  for  it  is  assuredly  a pity  that  so  elegant  a lan-
guage should  be  lost  or  corrupted,  especially  as  it  is  one  in
which  the  Fathers  of  the  Holy  Society  of  Jesus  have  worked
(as  well  as  other  Fathers),  that  they  may  be  able  to  speak
it  well:  and  by  their  good  examples  (which  is  of  more  con-
sequence) the  Indians  have  benefited  much  in  the  faith.*

Quichua),  for  nouns  and  participles,  is  the  particle  cuna  added  to  the
word ; as  runa  (a  man),  runa-cuna  (men).  But  ñaui-cuna  means  the
eyes  of  several  people,  not  those  of  one.  A pair  of  eyes  would  be  formed
by  pura  (both),  as  purap  ñauiy  (my  eyes).  When  the  number  is  given,
it  is  not  necessary  to  use  the  particle  cuna,  as  chunca-punchau  (ten
days),  not  chunca-punchau-cuna,  although  the  use  of  cuna  is  admissible.

Chac,  chaquen  is  a comparative  plural,  as  Anac-chac  (harder  things),
Llallac-chac  (more  timid  people).  Chicachac  is  a plural  particle  solely
referring  to  size,  chica  meaning  “as,”  or  “as  large  as.”  Ntin  is  a termi-
nation for  forming  plurals  when  two  or  more  persons  or  things  are
spoken  of  collectively,  as  Aylluntin  (those  of  one  family),  Cosantin
(husband  and  wife).  Another  form  of  plural  is  the  repetition  of  the
noun  itself,  as  runa  (a  man),  runa-runa  (a  crowd),  hacha  (a  tree),
hacha-hacha  (a  forest).  Markham’s  Quichua  Grammar,  p.  22.

* The  Dominican  Friar  Don  Domingo  de  Santo  Tomas,  who  laboured
for  many  years  among  the  Peruvian  Indians,  published  the  first  gram-
mar of  the  Quichua  language.  It  was  printed  at  Valladolid  in  1569,
with  a vocabulary.  This  friar  was  the  first  doctor  who  graduated  in  the
university  in  Lima.  He  supplied  Cieza  de  Leon  with  much  information
respecting  the  Peruvian  coast  valleys,  and  that  excellent  author  com-
mends him  as  a notable  searcher  into  the  secrets  of  the  Indians.  He
founded  a Dominican  monastery  in  the  coast  valley  of  Chacama.  (See
my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society.)
Another  Quichua  grammar  and  vocabulary  by  Antonio  Ricardo  was
printed  at  Lima  in  1586,  another  by  Diego  de  Torres  Rubio  at  Seville


X


It  must  also  be  noted  that  the  word  vecino  is  understood
in  Peru  to  apply  to  those  Spaniards  who  have  repartimientos*
of  Indians,  and  in  that  sense  it  will  always  be  used,  when-
ever it  occurs  in  this  history.

in  1603,  a vocabulary  by  the  Friar  Juan  Martinez  at  Lima  in  1604,  and
another  by  the  Jesuit  Diego  Gonzalez  Holguin  in  1608,  also  at  Lima.

All  these  appeared  before  the  Ynca  published  the  first  part  of  his
Commentaries.  Torres  Rubio  went  through  a second  edition  in  1619,
a third  in  1700,  and  a fourth  in  1754.  Holguin  published  a grammar
in  1614,  of  which  a second  edition  appeared  at  Lima  in  1842.  Don
Alonzo  de  Huerta  published  a Quichua  grammar  at  Lima  in  1616;
Diego  de  Olmos  at  Lima  in  1633;  Don  Juan  Roxo  Mexia  y Ocon,  a
native  of  Cuzco,  at  Lima  in  1648 ; Estevan  Sancho  de  Melgar  at  Lima  in
1691;  and  another  Quichua  grammar  was  published  by  Juan  de  Vega,
the  physician  who  effected  the  first  recorded  cure  by  the  use  of  Chin-
chona bark,  which  he  administered  to  the  Countess  of  Chinchón,  Vice
Queen  of  Peru,  in  about  1637.  Von  Tschudi  published  his  Kechua
Sprache  at  Vienna  in  1853,  being  a Quichua  grammar  and  dictionary,
with  specimens  of  the  language.  A missionary  friar  named  Honorio
Mossi  published  a Quichua  grammar  and  dictionary  at  Sucre,  in  Bolivia.
He  gives  no  date,  but  dedicates  it  to  Don  José  Maria  Linares,  who  was
President  from  1858  to  1861.  Finally,  the  present  editor  contributed
something  towards  the  study  of  the  rich  and  copious  language  of  the
Yncas  in  1864.  (Contributions  towards  a Grammar  and  Dictionary  of
Quichua , the  Language  of  the  Yncas  of  Peru,  by  Clements  R.  Markham.
Triibner,  1864.)

* Vecino  means  a neighbour,  inhabitant,  or  citizen.  In  Peru,  accord-
ing to  the  Ynca,  the  word  was  applied  to  Spaniards  who  received  grants
of  land  and  of  Indians.  Pizarro,  in  1529,  was  empowered  to  grant
encomiendas  of  land  and  repartimientos  of  Indians  to  his  fellow  con-
querors, the  Indians  being  bound  to  pay  tribute  or  personal  service  to
these  holders  of  grants.  In  1536  these  grants  were  extended  to  two
lives.  In  consequence  of  the  intolerable  exactions  and  cruelties  of  the
Spaniards,  Las  Casas,  and  other  friends  of  the  Indians,  induced  Charles  V
to  enact  the  code  known  as  the  “Hew  Laws”  in  1542,  by  which  the
grants  were  to  pass  to  the  crown  on  the  deaths  of  the  actual  holders ;
those  who  had  been  engaged  in  the  civil  wars,  and  all  Government  offi-
cials being  deprived  at  once.  A fixed  sum  was  settled  to  be  paid  as
tribute  by  the  Indians,  and  all  forced  labour  was  absolutely  prohibited.
But  the  “Hew  Laws”  were  of  course  so  unpopular  among  the  conquerors
that  they  were  revoked  in  1545.  The  President  Gasea  redistributed
the  encomiendas  and  repartimientos  in  1550,  and  they  were  granted  for
three  lives  in  1629.


XI


It  must  also  be  understood  that  in  my  time,  which  lasted
down  to  the  year  15G0,  and  for  twenty  years  afterwards,
there  was  no  coined  money  in  my  country.  In  place  of  it
the  Spaniards,  in  buying  and  selling,  weighed  the  gold  or
silver  by  the  marc  or  the  ounce.  And  as  in  Spain  they
speak  of  ducats,  so  in  Peru  they  speak  of  pesos  or  Castel-
lanas.* Each  peso  of  silver  or  of  gold,  reduced  according
to  the  correct  rule,  would  be  worth  450  maravedís  ; so  that
in  reducing  the  pesos  into  ducats  of  Spain,  every  five  pesos
is  worth  six  ducats.  Thus  the  system  of  counting  by  pesos
in  this  history  will  cause  no  confusion.  The  system  of
counting  the  quantity  of  pesos  of  silver  in  a peso  of  gold
varies  much,  as  it  does  in  Spain ; but  the  value  is  always
the  same.  In  exchanging  gold  for  silver  they  give  interest
at  so  much  per  cent.  There  is  also  interest  charged  in  ex-
changing assayed  silver  for  silver  which  they  call  current,
being  that  which  is  to  be  assayed.

The  word  galpón  is  not  in  the  general  language  of  Peru,
but  in  that  of  the  windward  islands.  The  Spaniards  have
adopted  it,  with  many  others  which  will  be  pointed  out  in
the  history.  It  means  a large  hall.  The  kings  Yncas  had
halls  of  this  description,  which  were  so  large  that  festivals
were  held  in  them  when  the  weather  was  rainy,  and  they
could  not  be  held  in  the  open  squares. f And  this  will  suf-
fice for  preliminary  notices.

* A castellano  or  'peso  de  oro  was  worth  £2  : 12  : 6 of  our  money.

t These  vast  halls  are  to  be  seen  in  the  great  adobe  ruins  at  Hervay
and  Pachacamac  on  the  coast,  as  well  as  at  and  near  Cuzco.  The
Spaniards  called  them  galpones.  Hence  the  villages  of  slaves  on  modem
haciendas , which  are  enclosed  by  high  walls,  are  also  called  galpones.


THE  FIRST  BOOK


OF  THE


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES  OF  THE  YNCAS,

WHICH  TREATS  OF  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  NEW  WORLD,  THE
DERIVATION  OF  THE  WORD  PERU,  THE  IDOLATRY  AND
CUSTOMS  OF  THE  INDIANS  IN  FORMER  TIMES,

THEIR  ORIGIN,  THE  LIFE  OF  THE  FIRST
YNCA,  WHAT  HE  DID  WITH  HIS  FIRST
VASSALS,  AND  THE  MEANING  OF
THE  ROYAL  TITLES.


IT  CONTAINS  TWENTY-SIX  CHAPTERS.


It


THE  FIRST  BOOK.


CHAPTER  I.

WHETHER  THERE  ARE  MANY  WORLDS  I ALSO  TREATING
OF  THE  FIVE  ZONES.

Having  to  treat  of  the  New  World,  or  of  the  best  and  most
important  parts  of  it,  which  are  the  kingdoms  and  provinces
of  the  empire  called  Peru,  of  whose  antiquities  and  of  the
origin  of  whose  kings  we  intend  to  write  ; it  seems  proper,
and  in  conformity  with  the  usual  custom  of  authors,  to  treat
here,  at  the  beginning,  of  the  question  whether  there  is  one
world  or  many,  if  it.  is  flat  or  round,  and  also  whether
heaven  is  flat  or  round,  whether  the  whole  earth  is  habit-
able or  only  the  temperate  zones,  whether  there  is  a way
from  one  temperate  zone  to  the  other,  whether  there  are
antipodes,  and  other  like  matters.  The  ancient  philosophers
treated  very  largely  and  curiously  on  these  subjects,  and
the  moderns  do  not  fail  to  argue  and  write  on  them,  each
following  the  opinion  which  best  pleases  him.  But  as  this
is  not  my  chief  subject,  as  the  powers  of  an  Indian  cannot
enable  him  to  presume  so  far,  and  as  experience,  since  the
discovery  of  what  they  call  the  New  World,  has  undeceived
us  touching  most  of  these  doubts,  we  will  pass  over  them
briefly,  in  order  to  go  on  to  the  other  part  of  my  subject,
the  conclusion  of  which  I am  fearful  lest  I should  not  reach.
I may  affirm,  however,  trusting  in  the  infinite  mercy,  that,
in  the  first  place,  there  is  only  one  world ; and  though  we
speak  of  the  Old  World  and  the  New  World,  this  is  because
the  latter  was  lately  discovered  by  us,  and  not  because


16


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


there  are  two,  but  one  only.  And  to  those  who  still  ima-
gine that  there  are  many  worlds,  there  is  no  answer  to  be
given  except  that  they  can  remain  in  their  heretical  persua-
sions until  they  are  undeceived  in  hell.  Those  who  doubt,
if  there  be  any  such,  whether  the  world  is  flat  or  round,
may  be  convinced  by  the  testimony  of  men  who  have  gone
round  it,  or  round  the  greater  part,  as  those  belonging  to
the  ship  Victoria ,*  and  others.  Respecting  the  heavens,

* The  Victoria  of  90  tons  and  45  men  was  one  of  the  five  vessels
which  formed  the  squadron  commanded  by  Magalhanes.  She  sailed,
with  her  consorts,  from  San  Lucar,  on  September  20th,  1519,  on  the
memorable  expedition  to  discover  a way  to  the  Spice  Islands  by  the
South  Sea.  The  Victoria  returned  to  San  Lucar  on  the  6th  of  Septem-
ber, 1522,  and  was  thus  the  first  ship  that  ever  circumnavigated  the
globe.  She  brought  home  a cargo  of  533  quintals  of  cloves,  cinnamon,
nutmegs,  and  sandal  wood.  Magalhanes  had  been  killed,  in  the  pre-
vious year,  at  Zebu;  but  Sebastian  del  Cano,  the  pilot  who  brought
home  the  Victoria , received  from  Charles  V a pension  of  500  ducats ;
a coat  of  arms  charged  with  branches  of  clove,  cinnamon,  and  nutmeg
trees;  a globe  for  a crest;  and  the  motto  Primus  circumdediste me.  The
Victoria  afterwards  made  a voyage  to  Santo  Domingo,  in  the  West
Indies;  returned  safely;  made  a second  voyage  to  the  West  Indies;
sailed  on  her  return  to  Spain,  but  never  arrived,  “so  that  it  is  not  known
what  became  of  her,  or  of  those  who  went  in  her.”

The  men  who  formed  the  crew  of  the  Victoria , and  to  whose  testi-
mony, that  the  world  is  round,  our  author  appeals  in  the  text,  were : —

1.  Juan  Sebastian  del  Cano  (Captu.)

2.  Miguel  de  Rodas  (Master)

3.  Martin  de  Insaurraga  (Pilot)

4.  Miguel  de  Rodas  (Mariner)

5.  Nicolas  Griego  „

6.  Juan  Rodriguez  „

7.  Basco  Gallego  „

8.  Martin  de  J udicibus  „

9.  Juan  de  Santander  „

10.  Hernando  de  Bustamante  „

11.  Antonio  Pigafetta  „

12.  Francisco  Rodriguez  „

13.  Antonio  Fernandez  „

14.  Diego  Gallego  „

15.  Juan  de  Arratia  „


16.  Juan  de  Acurio  (Mariner)

18.  Lorenzo  de  Yruña  „

19.  Juan  de  Ortega  „

20.  Pedro  de  Indarchi  „

21.  Ruger  Carpintete  „

22.  Pedro  Gaseo  „

23.  Alfonso  Domingo  „

24.  Diego  Garcia  „

25.  Pedro  de  Balpuesta  „

26.  Ximeno  de  Burgos  ,,

27.  Juan  Martin  „

28.  Martin  de  Magallanes  „

29.  Francisco  Alvo  „

30.  Roldan  de  Argote  „

31.  Juan  de  Apega  „


ROYA  E COMM  EN  TA  RI  ES.


IT


whether  they  be  flat  or  round,  a reply  may  be  given  in  the
words  of  the  Royal  Prophet — Extendens  ccelum  sicut  pellem,
in  which  he  desires  us  to  see  the  form  and  method  of  the
work,  giving  one  as  a similitude  of  the  other,  and  saying: —
that  the  heavens  should  be  spread  out  like  a skin  ; that  is,
that  they  should  cover  this  great  body  of  the  four  elements,
even  as  a skin  should  cover  the  body  of  an  animal,  not  only
the  main  body  but  all  its  parts,  how  small  soever  they  may
be.  As  to  those  who  affirm  that  the  five  parts  of  the  world,
which  they  call  zones,  are  uninhabitable  excepting  the  two
that  are  temperate : that  the  central  one,  from  its  extreme
heat,  and  the  two  end  ones,  from  the  great  cold,  are  unin-
habitable ; and  that  it  is  impossible  to  pass  from  one  tem-
perate zone  to  the  other,  owing  to  the  extreme  heat  between
them  ; I am  able  to  assure  such  persons  that  I was  born  in
the  torrid  zone,  that  is  in  Cuzco,  and  was  brought  up  in  it
until  my  twentieth  year,  and  that  I have  been  myself  in  the
other  temperate  zone,  on  the  other  side  of  the  tropic  of  Ca-
pricorn, to  the  south,  at  the  extreme  end  of  Charcas,  where
the  Chichas  live.  I also  passed  through  the  torrid  zone  to
come  to  this  other  temperate  zone  where  I am  now  writing,
and  was  three  complete  days  under  the  equinoctial  line,  near
the  Cape  of  Pasan.*  I therefore  affirm  that  the  torrid  zone
is  habitable,  as  well  as  the  temperate  zones.  I wish  I could
speak  of  the  cold  zones  as  an  eye-witness,  as  I can  of  the
other  three  ; but  I must  hand  them  over  to  those  who  know
more  about  them  than  I do.  I would  reply  to  those  who
say  that,  owing  to  their  extreme  cold  they  are  uninhabitable,
that  they  also  may  be  lived  in,  like  the  rest.  For  it  cannot
reasonably  be  imagined  that  God  should  have  made  so  large

In  1847  the  Council  of  the  Hakluyt  Society  approved  of  the  drawing
of  the  ship  Victoria  taken  from  Hulsius,  and  compared  with  that  given
by  Amoretti  in  his  edition  of  Pigafetta’s  voyage  of  Magalhanes,  as  a
vignette ; and  this  famous  ship  has  ever  since  embellished  the  covers  of
all  the  volumes  printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society.

* Cape  Passaos  is  in  latitude  0°  20'  S.

B


18


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


a part  of  the  world  useless,  after  creating  all  to  be  inhabited
by  man  ; and  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  ancients  were  de-
ceived in  what  they  said  about  the  cold  zones,  as  they  were
about  the  torrid  zone.  It  ought  rather  to  be  believed  that
the  Lord,  as  a wise  and  powerful  Father,  and  Nature,  as  a
pious  and  universal  Mother,  have  remedied  the  extreme  cold
by  temperate  warmth,  just  as  they  have  tempered  the  heat  of
the  torrid  zone  with  so  much  snow,  and  so  many  fountains,
rivers,  and  lakes  as  are  found  in  Peru.  That  country  is
varied  by  many  changes  of  temperature,  some  parts  become
hotter  and  hotter  until  those  regions  are  reached  which  are
so  low  and  so  hot  as  to  be  almost  uninhabitable,  as  the
ancients  said.  Other  regions  get  colder  and  colder  until
such  a height  is  reached  that  that  land  also  becomes  unin-
habitable,  owing  to  the  cold  of  perpetual  snow.  This  is
contrary  to  what  the  philosophers  said  of  the  torrid  zone,
for  they  never  imagined  that  it  was  possible  to  have  per-
petual snow  under  the  equinoctial  line,  without  melting  at
all,  at  least  on  the  great  Cordillera,  whatever  it  may  do  on
the  slopes  and  ravines.  It  must,  therefore,  be  understood,
that  in  the  torrid  zone,  within  the  region  over  which  Peru
extends,  heat  and  cold  does  not  consist  in  proximity  to,  or
distance  from,  the  equinoctial ; but  in  the  height  or  lowness
of  the  land,  and  the  difference  is  seen  on  a very  short  dis-
tance, as  I shall  relate  more  at  length,  presently.  I say,
then,  that  this  would  lead  to  the  belief  that  the  cold  zones
are  temperate  and  habitable,  as  many  grave  authors  hold,
though  not  from  personal  knowledge  or  experience.  But  it
is  sufficient  that  God  himself  has  given  us  to  understand  as
much ; for  when  he  created  man  he  said,  “ Increase  and
multiply  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  subdue  it.”*  From
this  we  may  know  that  it  is  habitable  ; for  if  it  were  not,  it
could  not  be  subdued,  nor  filled  with  inhabitants.  I trust
in  His  Omnipotence  that,  in  His  own  time,  He  will  disclose
* Genesis  i,  27.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


] 9


these  secrets  (as  He  disclosed  the  New  World)*  for  the
great  confusion  and  dismay  of  those  audacious  ones  who,
with  their  natural  philosophies  and  human  understanding,
desire  to  measure  the  power  and  wisdom  of  God,  as  if  He
could  not  perform  His  works  in  a way  which  they  cannot
imagine,  there  being  as  much  disparity  between  one  intelli-
gence and  the  other,  as  there  is  between  the  finite  and  the
infinite.


CHAPTER  II.

WHETHER  THERE  ARE  ANTIPODES.

To  the  question  whether  there  are  Antipodes  or  not,  it  may
be  replied  that,  the  world  being  round  (as  is  notorious),  it  is
certain  that  there  are.  But  for  my  part  I hold  that,  the
lower  part  of  this  world  not  having  been  completely  dis-
covered, it  cannot  certainly  be  known  what  provinces  are
the  antipodes  of  those  on  this  side,  as  some  affirm.  This
may  be  said  more  truly  of  the  heavens  than  of  the  earth  ;
for  the  poles  are  opposite  each  other,  and  so  are  the  east  and
west,  at  any  point  on  the  equinoctial. t Nor  can  it  be  cer-

* This  advocacy  of  an  expedition  to  explore  the  unknown  Polar  re-
gions does  infinite  credit  to  the  Ynca.

t Most  of  the  old  writers  on  America  considered  it  de  ricjueur  to  com-
mence their  books,  on  what  subject  soever  they  might  treat,  with  a disser-
tation on  the  shape  of  the  earth,  on  the  question  whether  there  be  anti-
podes, or  on  the  peopling  of  the  different  continents.  Father  Acosta  de-
votes two  chapters  to  the  antipodes,  one  to  disprove  the  idea  of  Lactantius
that  there  are  no  antipodes,  and  the  other  to  explain  away  a similar  heresy
on  the  part  of  St.  Augustine.  Lactantius  derided  the  idea  of  men  being
able  to  stand  on  their  heads ; while  the  objection  of  St.  Augustine
merely  rested  on  the  vastness  of  the  ocean,  and  on  the  very  natural
belief  that  it  could  not  be  crossed,  a belief  which  he  shared  with
Gregory  Nazianzen,  and  other  writers.  Historia  natural  y moral  de
las  Indias  compuesta  por  el  Padre  Joseph  de  Acosta,  lib.  i,  cap.  7 and  8,
Madrid,  1608.


20


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THK


tainly  known  whence  so  many  tribes  of  such  different  lan-
guages and  customs,  as  are  found  in  the  New  World,  can
have  come  from.  For  if  it  be  said  that  they  came  by  the
sea  in  ships,  there  arise  difficulties  touching  the  animals  that
are  found  in  the  New  World,  for  how  and  in  what  manner
could  they  have  been  embarked,  some  of  them  being  more
noxious  than  useful.  If  it  be  supposed  that  they  came  by
land,  still  greater  difficulties  arise ; for  if  the  domesticated
animals  of  the  Old  World  were  brought  that  way,  how
is  it  that  others  were  not  brought  which  have  since  been
conveyed  to  the  New  World?  If  it  be  that  they  could
not  bring  so  many,  how  is  it  that  they  did  not  leave  behind
some  of  those  that  are  met  with  ? The  same  may  be  said  of
the  corn,  pulses,  and  fruit,  which  are  so  different  from  those
of  the  Old  World,  that  with  reason  they  named  this  a New
World.  For  it  is  so  in  all  things,  as  well  as  regards  the  tame
and  wild  animals  and  the  food,  as  the  men,  who  are  gene-
rally beardless.  Therefore,  in  a matter  of  such  uncertainty,
the  trouble  that  is  taken  to  solve  it  is  wasted;  so  I will  leave
it  alone,  especially  as  I possess  less  competence  than  another
to  inquire  into  it.  I shall  only  treat  of  the  origin  of  the  Kings
Yncas,  and  of  their  succession,  conquests,  laws,  and  govern-
ment in  peace  and  war  ; but  before  we  enter  upon  these
subjects,  it  will  be  well  that  we  should  say  how  this  New
World  was  discovered,  and  presently  we  will  discourse  more
particularly  of  Peru.


CHAPTER  III.

HOW  THE  NEW  WORLD  WAS  DISCOVERED.

Near  the  year  1484,  one  year  more  or  less,  a pilot,  native
of  the  town  of  Huelva,*  in  the  county  of  Niebla, f named

* A seaport  of  Andalusia,  close  to  Palos,  whence  Columbus  sailed  on
his  first  voyage  to  America.  It  will  be  remembered  that  when  Columbus,
on  his  arrival  in  Spain,  asked  for  charity  at  the  door  of  the  convent  of


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


2L


Alonzo  Sanchez  de  Huelva,  had  a small  ship,  with  which
he  traded  on  the  sea,  and  brought  certain  merchandise  from
Spain  to  the  Canaries,  where  he  sold  it  profitably.  And  in
the  Canaries  he  loaded  his  ship  with  the  fruits  of  those
islands,  and  took  them  to  the  island  of  Madeira,  and  thence
he  returned  to  Spain,  laden  with  sugar  and  conserves.  While
he  was  engaged  in  this  triangular  voyage,  on  the  passage
from  the  Canaries  to  Madeira,  he  encountered  so  heavy  a
squall  that  he  was  obliged  to  run  before  it  for  twenty-eight
or  twenty-nine  days,  during  the  whole  of  which  time  he
could  not  take  an  altitude,  either  for  his  latitude  or  his
course.  The  crew  of  the  ship  suffered  the  greatest  hard-
ships in  the  storm  ; for  they  could  neither  eat  nor  sleep.
At  the  end  of  this  long  time  the  wind  went  down,  and  they
found  themselves  near  an  island.  It  is  not  known  for  cer-
tain what  island  it  was,  though  it  is  supposed  to  have  been
the  island  which  is  now  called  St.  Domingo.  It  is  very
worthy  of  note  that  the  wind  which  drove  that  ship  with  so
much  fury  and  violence  could  not  have  been  other  than  the
Solano,  as  the  east  wind  is  called  ; for  the  island  of  St.
Domingo  is  to  the  westward  of  the  Canaries,  and  the  wind
in  that  quarter  usually  appeases  rather  than  raises  a storm.
But  the  Almighty  Lord,  when  he  wishes  to  show  his  mercy,
takes  the  most  mysterious  things  for  their  opposites : thus
he  took  water  from  a rock,  and  sight  for  the  blind  from  the
mud  placed  in  his  eyes,  in  order  that  these  works  might  the
more  evidently  show  the  Divine  mercy  and  goodness.  He
also  displayed  his  piety  in  sending  his  Evangelist  and  true
light  over  the  whole  of  the  New  World,  which  was  in  so
much  need  of  it.  For  the  people  were  living,  or  rather

Rabida,  near  Palos,  he  was  on  his  way  to  the  neighbouring  town  of
Huelva,  to  seek  his  brother-in-law.

+ Niebla  is  a town  of  Andalusia,  on  the  river  Tinto,  not  far  from
Huelva.  Don  Juan  Alonzo  de  Guzman  was  created  Count  of  Niebla  by
Henry  II  in  1371  ; and  this  title  was  always  assumed  by  the  eldest  sons
of  his  descendants  the  Dukes  of  Medina  Sidonia.


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


OO

<ViV

perishing,  in  the  darkness  of  a heathenism  and  idolatry
most  barbarous  and  bestial,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  course  of
this  history.

The  pilot  went  on  shore,  took  an  altitude,  and  wrote
down  all  the  particulars  of  what  he  saw,  and  what  happened
at  sea,  both  going  and  coming  Having  taken  in  wood  and
water,  he  returned  in  much  doubt,  without  knowing  the
direction  he  should  take,  and  he  lost  much  time.  Owing  to
the  length  of  the  voyage,  the  failure  of  water  and  provisions,
and  the  great  hardships  they  had  suffered,  many  of  the
crew  began  to  fall  sick  and  die,  insomuch  that,  out  of  seven-
teen men  who  sailed  from  Spain,  only  five  reached  Terceira,
among  whom  was  the  pilot  Alonzo  Sanchez  de  Huelva.
They  went  to  the  house  of  the  famous  Genoese,  Christoval
Colon,  the  great  Pilot  and  Cosmographer,  who  constructed
sea  cards.  Colon  received  them  with  much  kindness,  and
was  glad  to  learn  all  that  had  happened  in  so  strange  and
long  a voyage  as  that  which  they  said  they  had  undergone.
But  they  arrived  so  shattered  by  their  past  hardships  that,
in  spite  of  the  attentions  of  Christoval  Colon,  he  could  not
restore  them  to  health,  and  they  all  died  in  his  house,  leaving
him  heir  to  the  work  which  had  caused  their  death.  The
great  Colon  accepted  the  work  with  zeal  and  vigour,  having
suffered  even  greater  hardships  himself  (for  they  lasted
longer),  and  he  started  on  the  enterprise  of  giving  a New
World  and  its  riches  to  Spain,  as  was  blazoned  on  his  arms,
saying,—

To  Castilla  and  to  Leon

A New  World  has  given  Colon.

Whosoever  wishes  to  learn  the  great  deeds  of  this  worthy,
should  read  the  General  History  of  the  Indies  which  Fran-
cisco Lopez  de  Gomara  wrote ; for  this  same  work  of  the
conquest  and  discovery  is  the  one  which  gives  most  praise
and  renown  to  the  most  famous  amongst  famous  men.  I


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


23


have  only  added  this,  because  it  was  wanting  in  the  narra-
tive of  that  ancient  historian,  who  wrote  at  a distance  from
the  places  where  the  events  took  place,  receiving  tidings
from  those  who  came  and  went,  who  related  many  things
that  happened,  but  imperfectly.  But  I heard  them  in  my
country  from  my  father  and  his  contemporaries;  for  in  those
days  their  most  common  conversation  was  concerning  the
notable  events  which  happened  in  their  conquests.  On  these
occasions  they  related  what  I have  said,  and  other  things
that  I shall  recount  presently  ; for,  as  they  had  met  many  of
the  first  discoverers  and  conquerors  of  the  New  World,  they
heard  from  them  the  full  account  of  these  events ; and  I,  as
I have  said,  though  but  a boy,  heard  them  from  my  elders.
Thus  the  slight  attention  I then  gave  to  them,  will  enable
me  now  to  write  concerning  many  events  of  great  importance,
which  relate  to  this  history.  I shall  say  all  that  I have  re-
tained in  my  memory,  with  sorrow  for  that  which  I have
forgotten.  The  very  Reverend  Father  José  de  Acosta  also
relates  this  history  of  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  with
regret  that  he  cannot  give  it  complete ; for  his  paternity  also
wanted  a portion  of  the  narrative,  like  some  more  modern
authors,  the  ancient  conquerors  had  already  passed  away
when  his  paternity  visited  these  parts ; concerning  whom  he
says  these  words  in  his  first  book  and  nineteenth  chapter: —
“ Having  shown  that  there  is  no  ground  for  thinking  that
the  first  inhabitants  of  the  Indies  have  reached  them  by  na-
vigation undertaken  for  that  end,  it  follows  that,  if  they
came  by  sea,  it  must  have  been  by  chance,  and  by  the  force
of  tempests,  that  they  arrived  at  the  Indies  ; and  this,  not-
withstanding the  vastness  of  the  ocean,  is  not  incredible.
For  the  same  thing  happened  in  the  discovery  of  our  own
time,  when  that  mariner  (whose  name  even  is  unknown  to
us,  that  so  great  a business  may  not  be  attributed  to  any
other  author  but  God)  having,  by  reason  of  a terrible  and
long  continued  storm,  reached  the  New  World,  left  as  pay-


24


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


ment  of  the  hospitality  of  Christoval  Colon  the  news  of  so
great  an  event.  So  it  may  be,”  etc.

Thus  far  is  from  the  Father  Acosta,  taken  word  for  word,
whence  it  appears  that  his  paternity  had  heard  a part  of  our
information  in  Peru,  though  not  all.  This,  then,  was  the
origin  and  first  beginning  of  the  discovery  of  the  New
World,  of  which  honour  the  little  town  of  Huelva  may  boast,
having  produced  a son,  from  whose  narrative  Christoval
Colon  received  such  conviction,  that  he  insisted  all  the
more  in  his  demand,  promising  things  that  had  never  been
seen  or  even  heard  of,  but  preserving  the  secret  of  them  like
a prudent  man.  He,  however,  gave  his  account  of  it,  in
confidence,  to  some  persons  of  great  authority  about  the
persons  of  the  Catholic  kings,  who  aided  him  to  start  on  his
enterprise.  But  if  it  had  not  been  for  this  notice  given  by
Alonzo  Sanchez  de  Huelva,  he  could  not  have  promised  such
things  out  of  his  own  imagination  as  a cosmographer,  nor
have  started  so  readily  on  his  voyage  of  discovery.  For,
according  to  the  historian,  Colon  did  not  take  more  than
sixty-eight  days  in  his  voyage  to  the  island  Guanatianico,*
though  he  was  delayed  a few  days  at  Gomera  for  supplies.fi
Now,  if  he  had  not  known,  from  the  account  given  by
Alonzo  Sanchez,  what  course  to  take  in  a sea  so  vast,  it
would  be  almost  a miracle  to  have  gone  there  in  so  short  a
time.fi

* Guanahani.

t Columbus  sailed  from  Palos  on  August  3rd,  1492,  from  Gomera,
one  of  the  Canary  Isles,  on  September  8th,  and  sighted  the  island  of
Guanahani  on  October  12th : seventy  days  from  Palos,  and  thirty-four
from  Gomera.

X The  story  of  Alonzo  Sanchez  de  Huelva  having  discovered  America
before  Columbus  was  first  noticed  by  Oviedo  in  his  History  of  the  Indies,
published  in  1535,  as  a rumour  without  foundation,  but  he  does  not
give  the  name  of  the  pilot.  Gomara,  in  his  History  of  the  Indies , pub-
lished in  1552,  says: — “A  caravel , navigating  our  ocean  sea,  met  with  so
strong  an  east  wind,  and  so  continuous,  that  she  was  driven  to  an  un-
known land,  neither  placed  on  the  map  nor  on  the  sea  chart.  She  re-


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


turned  thence  in  many  more  days  than  she  went,  and  when  she  arrived  she
had  no  one  on  board  than  the  pilot  and  two  or  three  mariners,  who,  being
sick  from  hunger  and  hard  work,  died  shortly  afterwards  in  the  port.  Here
we  have  the  way  in  which  the  Indies  were  discovered,  but  to  the  disin-
herison of  him  who  first  saw  them,  for  he  ended  his  life  without  enjoy-
ing them,  and  without  even  leaving  the  memory  of  his  name,  nor  of
whence  he  came,  nor  of  the  year  of  his  discovery.  This  was  no  fault  of
his,  but  owing  to  the  malice  of  others,  or  the  envy  of  what  they  call
fortune.  We  must  do  without  the  name  of  that  pilot,  for  all  that  was
known  of  him  died  with  him.  Some  make  this  pilot  an  Andalusian,
who  was  trading  to  the  Canaries  and  Madeira,  when  he  was  forced  into
that  long  and  fearful  voyage.  Others  would  have  him  to  be  a Biscayan,
trading  with  England  and  France ; and  others  say  that  he  was  a Portu-
guese, on  his  way  to  or  from  India.  There  are  also  those  who  say  he
brought  the  caravel  to  Portugal,  others  who  say  he  arrived  at  Madeira,
and  others  at  the  Azores.  But  they  all  agree  that  this  pilot  died  in  the
house  of  Christoval  Colon,  in  whose  power  the  journals  of  the  caravel ,
and  the  narrative  of  all  that  long  voyage  remained,  with  the  bearings

and  latitude  of  the  lands  lately  seen  and  discovered Colon

married  in  Portugal,  or,  as  some  say,  in  the  island  of  Madeira,  whei'e  I
believe  that  he  was  living  at  the  time  when  the  above  mentioned  caravel
arrived  there.  He  entertained  the  master  of  her  in  his  house,  who  re-
lated to  him  the  events  of  the  voyage,  and  how  he  had  seen  new  lands
that  they  might  be  entered  on  a sea  chart  which  he  had  brought.  The
pilot  died,  leaving  the  narrative,  map,  and  latitude  of  the  new  land,  and

thus  Christoval  Colon  had  notice  of  the  Indies Christoval  Colon

was  not  learned,  but  he  was  very  intelligent,  and,  having  obtained
tidings  of  this  new  land  from  the  dead  pilot,  he  learnt  from  scholars

what  the  ancients  had  said  touching  other  lands  and  worlds The

pilot  and  mariners  who  discovered  the  Indies  being  dead,  Christoval
Colon  proposed  to  go  in  search  of  them.”  ( Historia  de  las  Indias  de
Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara,  Barcia,  cap.  xiii,  xiv,  xv,  p.  32-34.)

Benzoni  repeats  the  story  as  told  by  Gomara,  adding — “We  may
believe  that  Gomara  would  set  himself  to  confute  the  truth  with  many
inventions,  and  that  he  had  a wish  to  diminish  the  immortal  fame
of  Christopher  Columbus,  as  there  were  many  who  could  not  endure  that
a foreigner  and  an  Italian  should  have  acquired  so  much  honour  and  so
much  glory,  not  only  for  the  Spanish  kingdom,  but  also  for  the  other
nations  of  the  world.”  ( History  of  the  New  World  by  Girolamo  Benzoni
of  Milan,  showing  his  travels  in  America  from  a.d.  1541  to  1566,  trans-
lated by  Admiral  Smyth,  p.  15.  Printed  for  the  Hakluyt  Society.)
Acosta,  as  quoted  in  the  text,  also  mentions  the  story,  and  Mariana,  in
his  History  of  Spain , refers  to  it  in  the  following  words: — “The  occa-
sion and  beginning  of  this  new  navigation  and  discovery  was  after  this
manner.  A certain  ship  was  blown  off  the  coast  of  Africa,  where  she


20


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


was  occupied  in  the  trade  of  those  parts,  by  a violent  storm,  and  carried
to  certain  unknown  lands.  After  some  days  had  passed  away,  and  the
tempest  had  gone  down,  they  set  out  on  their  voyage  home,  but  nearly
all  the  passengers  and  mariners  died  of  hunger  and  hardships.  The
master,  with  three  or  four  companions,  finally  reached  the  island  of
Madeira.  Christoval  Colon,  a Genoese  by  nation,  happened  to  be  there.
He  was  married  in  Portugal,  and  had  much  experience  in  the  art  of
navigation.  He  was  a man  of  a great  heart  and  lofty  thoughts.  He
entertained  the  master  of  that  ship  in  his  inn,  who  died  soon  afterwards,
and  left  the  memorials  and  notices  of  all  that  voyage  in  the  power  of
Colon.  This  may  have  been  the  true  motive,  or  it  may  have  been  the
astrology  in  which  he  was  versed,  or,  as  others  say,  it  may  have  been
the  information  given  by  one  Marco  Polo,  a Florentine  physician,  which
made  him  come  to  the  conclusion  that  at  the  other  end  of  the  known
world,  towards  the  point  where  the  sun  sets,  there  were  very  great  and
extensive  countries.”  ( Historia  General  de  España , compuesta  por  el
Padre  Juan  de  Mariana,  tom.  vi,  lib.  xxvi,  cap.  3,  p.  308,  Madrid,  1794.)
This  part  of  Mariana’s  great  work  was  first  published  in  1609,  the  same
year  in  which  the  Ynca’s  account  saw  the  light,  at  Lisbon.

But  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  in  the  text,  gives  the  most  circumstantial
version  of  the  story,  with  the  date,  the  name  of  the  pilot,  and  several
other  particulars.  He  wrote  one  hundred  and  twenty  years  after  the
event,  and  the  conversations  of  his  father  and  the  other  conquerors
which  he  recollected,  must  have  taken  place  some  forty  years  earlier.

Washington  Irving  {Life  of  Columbus,  Appendix  No.  XI)  considers
that  the  story  is  altogether  unworthy  of  credit,  as  having  been  derived
entirely  from  the  unfounded  statement  of  Gomara,  which,  in  the  course
of  some  sixty  years,  got  arranged  into  the  regular  narrative,  with  name
and  dates,  as  given  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Yega.  In  the  opinion  of  Wash-
ington Irving  it  is  disproved  by  the  fact  that  “Columbus  communicated
his  idea  of  discovery  to  Paulo  Toscanelli  of  Florence  in  1474,  ten  years
previous  to  the  date  assigned  by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  for  this  occur-
rence.” Yet  the  fact  that  Columbus  had  developed  his  theory  in  a
correspondence  with  Toscanelli  in  1474,  by  no  means  disproves  the  state-
ment that  its  truth  was  confirmed  to  him  by  the  pilot  who  is  said  to
have  died  in  his  house,  in  1484.  The  story  told  by  Garcilasso,  though
partially  confirmed  by  Oviedo  and  Gomara,  rests  on  the  conversations  he
had  heard  in  his  youth,  between  men  who,  though  doubtless  well  ac-
quainted with  the  history  of  those  times,  were  not  contemporaries  of
Columbus.  They  must,  in  their  turn,  have  heard  the  story  at  second
hand.  Yet  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  it,  and  it  was  certainly  very
generally  adopted  by  subsequent  authors.  Herrera,  however,  never
alludes  to  it.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


CHAPTER  IV.

THE  DERIVATION  OF  THE  WORD  “PERU.”

As  we  are  about  to  treat  of  Peru,  it  will  be  well  if  we  say
here  from  what  the  name  is  derived,  the  Indians  having  no
such  word  in  their  language.  It  must  be  known  then  that
Vasco  Nunez  de  Balboa,  a native  of  Xeres  de  Badajoz,  dis-
covered the  South  Sea  in  the  year  1513,  and  he  was  the  first
Spaniard  who  ever  saw  it.  The  Catholic  Kings  granted
him  the  title  of  Adelantado  of  that  sea,  with  the  conquest
and  government  of  the  kingdoms  that  might  be  discovered
on  its  shores.  During  the  few  years  that  he  lived  after  re-
ceiving this  favour  (until  his  own  father-in-law,  the  Governor
Pedro  Arias  de  Avila,  in  place  of  many  favours  which  he
had  deserved,  and  which  his  deeds  merited,  cut  off  his
head)  this  knight  was  careful  to  discover  what  manner  of
land  it  was,  and  by  what  name  it  was  known,  that  runs
from  Panama  onwards  towards  the  South.  With  this  object
he  built  three  or  four  ships,  which,  while  he  made  the
necessary  preparations  for  his  discovery  and  conquest,  he
sent  at  different  times  of  the  year,  each  one  singly,  to  ex-
plore the  coast.  The  ships,  having  made  such  progress  as
they  were  able,  returned  with  an  account  of  many  lands
that  there  are  along  that  shore.  One  ship  went  beyond  the
others  and  passed  the  equinoctial  line  to  the  south ; and
near  it,  while  sailing  along  the  coast,  according  to  the
method  of  navigating  which  was  in  use  at  that  time,  an
Indian  was  seen  fishing,  at  the  mouth  of  one  of  the  numer-
ous rivers  which  fall  into  that  sea.  The  Spaniards  in  the
ship,  with  all  possible  caution,  landed  four  of  their  party
who  were  excellent  runners  and  swimmers,  at  a distance
from  the  place  where  the  Indian  stood,  so  that  he  might  not


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


28

get  away  either  by  land  or  water.  Having  taken  this  pre-
caution, the  rest  passed  before  the  Indian  in  the  ship,  that  he
might  fix  his  eyes  on  it,  and  become  careless  and  unmindful  of
the  ambush.  The  Indian,  on  seeing  a thing  so  strange  on  the
sea  as  a ship  with  all  sail  set,  wondered  greatly,  and  re-
mained in  a state  of  utter  astonishment,  bewildered  with
imagining  what  that  could  be  which  he  beheld  on  the  sea
before  him.  He  was  so  wrapped  up  in  wonder,  that  those
who  had  come  to  seize  him  had  secured  him  before  he  knew
they  were  coming,  and  so  they  took  him  on  board  with
much  rejoicing.  The  Spaniards  having  caressed  him,  that
he  might  recover  from  his  fear  at  seeing  men  with  beards
and  in  strange  dresses,  asked  him  by  signs  and  words,  what
land  that  was,  and  what  it  was  called.  The  Indian  under-
stood that  they  were  asking  him  something  by  the  signs  and
gestures  they  were  making  with  hands  and  face,  as  to  a
dumb  person,  but  he  did  not  understand  what  they  asked.
He  therefore  answered  quickly,  lest  they  should  do  him
some  mischief,  and  gave  his  own  name,  saying,  Beru;  adding
another,  Pelu.  He  intended  to  say,  “ if  you  ask  me  what  I
am  called,  I reply  Bern,  and  if  you  ask  where  I was,  I
answer  that  I was  in  the  river”.  For  the  word  Pelu,  in  the
language  of  that  province,  is  a noun  signifying  generally  a
river,  as  we  shall  presently  see  in  a grave  author.  To  a
similar  question,  the  Indian,  in  our  history  of  Florida,  re-
plied with  the  name  of  his  master,  saying  Breaos  and  Bredos
(lib.  vi,  chap.  15).  The  Christians  understood  that  the  In-
dian had  replied  to  the  question  correctly,  as  if  he  and  they
had  been  talking  in  Castillian,  and  from  that  time,  which
was  in  the  year  1515  or  1516,  they  called  that  rich  and
mighty  empire  by  the  name  of  Peru,  corrupting  both  words,
as  the  Spaniards  corrupt  almost  every  word  that  they  take
from  the  language  of  the  Indians  of  that  land.  Thus  if  they
take  the  name  of  the  Indian  Beru,  they  change  the  B for  a
P,  and  in  using  the  name  Pelu,  which  means  a river,  they


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


OC)

change  the  L for  an  R,  and  in  one  way  or  another  they
turned  it  into  Peru.  Others,  who  desire  to  be  considered
more  polished,  and  these  are  the  most  modern,  further  cor-
rupt the  letters,  and  write  Piru  in  their  histories.  The
more  ancient  historians,  such  as  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon,
the  accountant  Agustín  de  Zarate,  Francisco  Lopez  de
Gomara,  Diego  Fernandez  of  Palencia,  and  even  the  most
Reverend  Father  Friar  Gerónimo  Roman,  all  call  it  Peru,
and  not  Pirn.  As  the  place  where  this  happened  was  as-
certained to  be  within  the  boundary  of  the  dominions  held
by  the  Kings  Yncas,  having  been  conquered  and  annexed  to
their  empire,  they  called  the  whole  country  Peru,  from  this
place,  which  is  in  the  land  of  Quitu,  as  far  as  Charcas,  in-
cluding the  principal  districts  governed  by  the  Yncas,  and
extending  for  more  than  seven  hundred  leagues  in  length  ;
though  their  empire  reached  to  Chile,  which  is  five  hundred
leagues  further  on,  and  is  another  very  rich  and  fertile
kingdom.*

* The  Adelantado  Pascual  de  Andagoya  gives  a different  origin  to
the  name  Peru.  He  says  that,  in  1522,  having  been  appointed  In-
spector-General of  the  Indians  by  old  Pedradas,  the  Governor  of  Panama,
he  made  an  expedition  to  a province  called  Birú,  which  had  first  been
visited  by  Gaspar  de  Morales  and  Francisco  Pizarro,  who  called  it  the
territory  of  the  Cacique  Birú.  This  country  appears  to  have  been  on
the  borders  of  the  Pacific,  a little  south  of  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.
Andagoya  declares  that  he  here  received  accounts  concerning  all  the
coast,  and  everything  that  was  afterwards  discovered,  as  far  as  Cuzco.
He  says  that  the  province  was  subsequently  called  Pirú,  because  one  of
the  letters  of  Birú  was  corrupted,  but  that  in  reality  there  is  no
country  of  that  name.  Andagoya  gave  up  his  prior  claim  to  the  prose-
cution of  further  discoveries,  owing  to  an  illness  brought  on  by  having
fallen  into  the  sea  off  the  coast  of  this  country,  which  he  calls  Birú.
The  right  of  discovery  was  then  conceded  by  Pedrarias  to  Pizarro,
Almagro,  and  Luque  ; and  Pizarro  sailed  in  November  1524.  He  acted
contrary  to  Andagoya’s  advice  in  touching  at  this  country  of  Birú,  where
as  many  as  twenty-seven  of  his  crew  died  at  a place  called  Puerto  de  la
Hambre.  Pizarro  returned  to  Panama  in  1528.  See  my  translation  of
the  Narrative  of  Pascual  de  Andagoya , p.  42.  Printed  for  the  Hakluyt
Society,  1865.


30


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  V.

AUTHORITIES  IN  CONFIRMATION  OF  THE  NAME  “ PERU.

This  was  the  beginning  and  origin  of  the  name  Peru,  so
famous  in  the  world,  and  with  reason,  seeing  that  it  has  filled
the  world  with  gold  and  silver,  with  pearls  and  precious
stones.  But  as  it  was  adopted  by  accident,  the  native
Indians  of  Peru,  though  it  is  seventy-two  years  since  they
were  conquered,  have  not  taken  this  word  into  their  mouths,
it  being  a name  they  had  not  themselves  given.  They  now
know  what  it  means,  through  their  intercourse  with  the
Spaniards,  but  they  do  not  use  it,  because  they  had  no
generic  name  in  their  language  to  designate  the  kingdoms
and  provinces,  which  their  kings  ruled  over,  collectively ;
such  as  Spain,  Italy,  or  Prance,  which  contain  many  pro-
vinces. They  called  each  province  by  its  own  name,  as
will  be  seen  at  large  in  this  work,  but  they  had  no  word
which  signified  the  whole  kingdom  together.  They  called
it  Ttahuantin-suyu,*  which  means  the  four  quarters  of  the
world.  The  name  Berü,  as  we  have  seen,  was  the  proper
name  of  an  Indian,  and  is  a word  used  among  the  Indians
of  the  plains  and  on  the  sea-coast,  but  is  unknown  in
the  mountains,  and  in  the  general  language.  For,  as  in
Spain,  there  are  words  and  names  which  indicate  from  what
province  they  are  derived,  so  it  is  also  among  the  Indians
of  Peru.  That  the  word  Peru  was  imposed  by  the  Spaniards,
and  that  it  was  not  in  the  ordinary  language  of  the  country,
we  are  given  to  understand  by  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon  in

* Ttahua  is  the  number  four  in  Quichua,  ntin  is  a termination  for
forming  the  plural  when  two  or  more  things  are  spoken  of  collectively,
and  Suyu  is  a province.  Ttahuantin-suyu  means  literally  “ The  four
Provinces.”


ROYA!,  COMMENTARIES.


31


his  third  chapter,  where,  speaking  of  the  island  called  Gor-
gona,  he  says  : —

“ The  Marquis  Don  Francisco  Pizarro,  with  thirteen
Spanish  Christians,  was  many  days  on  this  island,  and
suffered  much  from  hunger  and  exposure,  until  at  last  God
was  well  served  by  the  discovery  of  the  provinces  called
Peru.”

In  the  thirteenth  chapter  he  says  : —

“ Wherefore  it  will  be  necessary  that  from  Quito,  the
point  where  that  country  which  we  call  Peru  truly  com-
mences,” etc.

In  the  eighteenth  chapter  he  says : —

“ From  the  accounts  given  us  by  the  Indians  of  Cuzco,  it
may  be  gathered  that  formerly  there  were  great  disorders
in  the  provinces  of  this  kingdom,  which  we  call  Peru,”  etc.

To  speak  of  Peru  so  many  times  and  always  with  this
phrase  we  call,  is,  to  give  us  to  understand  that  the  Spaniards
used  the  word,  and  that  the  Indians  had  no  such  name  in
their  general  language,  to  which  I also,  as  an  Ynca,  can
testify.  The  same,  and  much  more,  says  Father  Acosta  in
the  first  book  of  his  Natural  History  of  the  Indies  (chap,
xiii),  where,  speaking  on  this  subject,  he  tells  us  : —

“ It  has  been  a very  common  custom,  in  these  discoveries
of  the  New  World,  to  give  names  to  provinces  and  harbours
on  the  first  occasion  that  offers,  and  this  is  what  is  under-
stood to  have  happened  in  naming  the  kingdom  of  Peru.  It
is  the  belief  there  that  from  a river,  at  which  the  Spaniards
first  arrived,  and  which  was  called  by  the  natives  Piru,  they
entitled  the  whole  land  Piru.  And  it  is  a proof  of  the  truth
of  this  story,  that  the  Indian  natives  of  Peru  neither  use
nor  know  of  such  a name  for  their  country.”

The  authority  of  this  author  will  suffice  to  confound  the
novelties  that  have  since  been  invented  concerning  the
name  of  Peru.  And  as  the  river,  which  the  Spaniards  call
Peru,  is  in  the  same  region  and  very  near  the  equator,  it


32


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


may  be  that  the  capture  of  the  Indian  gave  rise  to  the  river,
as  well  as  the  country,  being  called  by  his  proper  name  of
Peru  : or  it  may  be  that  the  word  Pelu,  which  was  common
to  all  rivers,  was  turned  into  a special  name  by  the  Spaniards,
who  called  this  river  only  the  river  Peru.

Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara,  in  his  General  History  of
the  Indies , speaking  of  the  discovery  of  Yucatan  (chap.  52),
gives  two  derivations  of  names  very  similar  to  that  which
has  been  given  of  Peru,  and  for  this  reason  I will  here  ex-
tract what  he  says,  which  is  as  follows : —

“Francisco  Hernandez  de  Cordova  then  set  out,  and  in
time  reached  the  other  cape,  and,  owing  to  his  desire  to
make  discoveries,  he  went  on  shore  in  a land  unknown  to
us,  where  there  are  salt  pans  on  a point  called  “the  Cape  of
Women.”  It  was  so  named  because  there  were  found  there
some  stone  towers,  with  steps  and  chapels,  roofed  with  poles
and  thatch,  in  which  there  were  many  idols  resembling
women,  set  out  in  rows.  The  Spaniards  wondered  to  see
stone  buildings,  as  hitherto  none  had  been  observed,  and
that  the  people  should  dress  so  richly,  for  they  had  shifts
and  mantles  of  white  and  coloured  cotton,  plumes,  and
bracelets  of  gold  and  silver.  The  women  covered  their
bosoms  and  heads.  The  Spaniards  did  not  stop  there,
but  went  on  to  another  point,  which  was  called  Cotoche,
where  there  were  some  fishermen,  who  fled  inland  in
terror,  and  answered  Cotohe,  Cotohe  (which  means  a house),
thinking  that  they  were  asked  for  the  village.  From  that
time  the  Cape  retained  the  name  of  Cotoche.  A little
further  on  they  came  upon  some  men,  who  were  asked  the
name  of  a large  village  close  by.  They  replied,  Tectetan,
Tectetan,  which  meant  that  they  did  not  understand.  The
Spaniards  thought  it  was  the  name  of  the  village,  and,
corrupting  a syllable,  they  always  called  it  Yucatan,  a name
which  will  never  cease  to  be  used.”

So  far  Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara,  extracted  word  for


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


S3


word.  It  shows  that  in  many  other  parts  of  the  Indies  the
same  thing  has  fallen  out  as  in  Peru,  and  that  the  first  words
spoken  by  the  Indians  have  been  given  as  the  names  of  their
countries,  the  Spaniards  not  knowing  the  meaning  of  the
words,  and  fancying  that  the  Indians  replied  correctly  to
the  questions  that  were  put  to  them,  as  if  all  had  been  talk-
ing in  the  same  language.  The  same  error  has  been  com-
mitted in  many  other  things  relating  to  this  New  World,
but  especially  in  our  empire  of  Peru,  as  may  be  noted  in
numerous  passages  of  this  history.


CHAPTER  VI.

WHAT  A CERTAIN  AUTHOR  SAYS  TOUCHING  THIS  NAME
OF  PERU.

Besides  what  has  been  said  touching  the  name  of  Peru  by
Pedro  de  Cieza,  José  de  Acosta,  and  Gomara,  I shall  now
offer  the  authority  of  another  distinguished  author,  a priest
of  the  holy  Society  of  Jesus,  named  Father  Bias  Valera,  who
wrote  a history  of  that  empire  in  most  elegant  Latin,  and
who  was  able  to  have  written  it  in  many  languages,  for  he
had  the  gift  of  learning  them.  But  it  was  the  misfortune  of
my  native  country,  which  perhaps  did  not  deserve  to  be
written  of  in  such  a manner,  that  his  papers  were  lost  in  the
ruin  and  pillage  of  Cadiz  by  the  English  in  1596.  He  him-
self died  soon  afterwards.  I received  the  fragments  of
papers  which  were  rescued  from  the  pillage,  and  they  caused
me  regret  and  sorrow  at  the  loss  of  those  which  were
destroyed.  More  than  half  were  lost.  I was  presented
with  these  papers  by  the  Father  Maldonado  de  Saavedra,  a
native  of  Seville,  of  the  same  Company,  who  in  the  present
year  1600  reads  the  Scripture  in  the  city  of  Cordova.

The  Father  Valera,  touching  the  derivation  of  the  word

c


34


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


Peru,  says,  in  his  elegant  Latin,  what  follows,  which  I,  an
Indian,  have  translated  into  my  unpolished  romance.

“ The  kingdom  of  Peru  is  famous,  illustrious,  extensive,
and  contains  so  great  a quantity  of  gold,  silver,  and  other
rich  metals,  that  the  abundance  of  them  gave  rise  to  the  say-
ing ‘ he  possesses  Peru,’  instead  of  ‘the  man  is  rich.’  The
name  was  recently  given  to  this  empire  of  the  Yncas  by  the
Spaniards.  It  was  adopted  accidentally,  and  both  because
it  was  unknown  to  the  Indians,  and  because  it  sounds  so
barbarous  and  hateful  to  them  that  none  of  them  will  use  it,
it  is  only  used  by  the  Spaniards.  The  imposition  of  the
new  name  did  not  imply  wealth,  nor  any  other  notable
thing;  but  as  it  was  new,  so  also  it  signified  riches  in  a cer-
tain sense,  because  they  proceeded  from  the  successful  events
which  gave  rise  to  the  name.  This  word  Pelu  is  one  which
signifies  a river  among  the  barbarous  Indians  who  inhabit
the  sea-coast  between  Panama  and  Huayaquil.  It  is  also
the  proper  name  of  a certain  island,  which  is  called  Pelua
or  Pelu.  As  the  Spanish  conquerors,  navigating  from
Panama,  arrived  first  at  these  places,  they  were  pleased  with
this  name  of  Peru  or  Pelua,  thinking  it  must  mean  some-
thing grand  and  important,  so  they  adopted  it  to  give  to  any
other  discovery  they  might  make,  and  so  they  called  the
whole  empire  of  the  Yncas  by  the  name  of  Peru.  There
were  many  who  were  not  pleased  with  this  name  of  Peru,
and  they  called  the  country  New  Castille.  These  two
names  were  given  to  that  grand  empire,  and  they  are  com-
monly used  by  the  royal  scribes  and  ecclesiastical  notaries,
although  in  Europe  they  prefer  the  name  Peru  to  the  other.
Many  also  affirm  that  this  name  was  derived  from  Pirua,
which  is  a word  of  the  Quechuas*  of  Cuzco,  meaning  a

* This  is  the  first  occasion  on  which  the  general  language  of  the
Yncas  was  called  Quechua  or  Quichua,  the  language  of  the  Quechuas.
Garcilasso  himself  invariably  calls  it  the  general  language  of  Peru  ; but
in  the  first  grammar  of  the  language,  by  Friar  Domingo  de  Santo  Tomas,


ROYAL  COMMKNTAR1KS.


35


granary  where  the  crops  are  stored  up.  I cheerfully  coin-
cide in  this  opinion,  because  the  Indians  have  many
granaries  in  which  to  keep  their  grain,  and  it  was  easy  for
the  Spaniards  to  use  the  word,  and  to  say  Piru,  by  leaving
out  the  final  vowel,  and  placing  the  accent  on  the  last  syl-
lable. This  word  was  adopted  by  the  first  conquerors  as  a
name  for  the  empire  they  had  conquered,  and  I shall  use  it
also,  without  any  change,  saying  Peru  and  Pirü.

“ The  introduction  of  this  new  word  ought  not  to  be  re-
pudiated by  saying  that  it  was  improperly  adopted,  because
the  Spaniards  found  no  other  generic  name  for  the  whole
country.  Each  province  had  its  own  name,  as  Charcas,
Collas,  Cuzco,  Rimac,  Quitu,  and  many  others,  without  re-
ference to  the  neighbouring  region.  After  the  Incas  had
subjugated  the  whole  empire,  the  provinces  were  named
according  to  the  order  of  the  conquests,  and  finally  they
were  called  Ttahuantin-suyu,  that  is  to  say,  ‘ the  four
parts  of  the  empire ,’  or  Yncap  Runam,*  which  means  ‘ the
vassals  of  the  Ynca.’  The  Spaniards,  seeing  the  variety  and
confusion  of  these  names,  judiciously  adopted  the  names  of
Peru  or  New  Castille,”  etc.

This  is  from  Bias  Valera,  who  also,  like  Father  Acosta,
says  that  the  name  was  given  by  the  Spaniards,  and  that  the
Indians  have  no  such  word  in  their  language.

printed  at  Valladolid  in  1560,  it  is  called  Quichua.  Mossi,  the  author
of  a Quichua  dictionary,  gives  the  following  derivation  of  the  word.
Quehuani  is  to  twist;  the  participle  is  Quehuasca,  twisted.  Ychu  is
straw — together  Quehuasca-ychu,  twisted  straw;  corrupted  and  abbre-
viated into  Quichua.  The  hot  low  valleys  in  Peru  are,  called  Yunca,
the  more  temperate  intermediate  slopes  and  plateaux  Quichua,  and  the
lofty  heights  Puna.  Quichua,  therefore,  is  an  Indian  who  inhabits  the
temperate  slopes,  so  called  from  the  abundance  of  straw  in  that  region.
It  is  the  name  which  seems  to  have  been  adopted  by  the  first  Ynca  for
his  people.  See  Gramática  de  la  lengua  general  del  Peru,  llamada
Quichua,  con  diccionario : por  el  R.  P.  Fray  Honorio  Mossi  ( Misionero ).
Sucre,  1857.

* Yncap  the  genitive  case  of  Ynca.  Runa,  a man.

C 2


36


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


Having  thus  quoted  what  Father  Bias  Valera  has  written
on  this  subject,  I must  say  that  it  is  more  likely  that  the
adoption  of  the  name  Peru  originated  from  the  proper  name
Bern,  or  from  the  word  Pela,  which  in  the  language  of
that  province  means  a river,  than  from  the  word  Pirua,
which  signifies  a granary.*  For,  as  has  been  said,  the  name
was  given  by  the  followers  of  Vasco  Nunez  de  Balboa,  who
did  not  go  inland  so  as  to  become  acquainted  with  the  word
Pirua;  and  not  by  the  conquerors  of  Peru.  Fifteen  years
before  they  set  out  on  that  conquest,  the  Spaniards  who
lived  at  Panama,  called  all  the  coast  south  of  the  Equator  by
the  name  of  Peru.  This  is  certified  by  Francisco  Lopez  de
Gomara,  in  his  History  of  the  Indies  (chap.  110),  where  he
uses  these  words  : — “ Some  say  that  Balboa  received  an  ac-
count of  how  that  land  of  Peru  contained  gold  and  emeralds.
This  may  or  may  not  be,  but  it  is  certain  that  there  was  a
great  rumour  concerning  Peru  in  Panama,  when  Pizarro
and  Almagro  were  arming  to  go  there.”  Thus  far  from
Gomara,  whence  it  is  clear  that  the  name  of  Peru  was
adopted  long  before  the  coming  of  the  conquerors  who  sub-
dued that  empire. f


CHAPTER  VIE

OF  OTHER  DERIVATIONS  OF  NEW  WORDS.

As  the  adoption  of  the  name  of  Peru  does  not  stand  alone,
we  will  treat  of  other  similar  names  which  were  given  before
and  after  it : for  though  we  shall  thus  anticipate  a little,  it
will  not  be  amiss  to  do  so,  that  their  origin  may  be  known
when  we  come  to  them  in  their  places.  And  the  first  shall

* More  correctly  Pirhua.
t See  ante,  note  at  p.  2.9.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


37


be  Puerto  Viejo,*  because  it  is  near  the  place  where  the
name  of  Peru  originated.  It  must  be  known  then  that  the
sea  from  Panama  to  the  city  of  the  kings  is  navigated  with
much  difficulty,  owing  to  the  currents  and  the  southerly
winds,  which  are  always  met  with  on  that  coast.  By  reason
of  these  foul  winds  ships  were  obliged  to  sail  out  of  a port
on  one  tack  for  twenty  or  thirty  leagues,  and  to  return  to
the  coast  on  the  other,  and  in  this  manner  they  navigated
the  coast,  always  sailing  on  a bowline.  It  often  happens
that  when  a vessel  does  not  sail  well  on  a wind,  she  finds
herself  further  to  leeward  than  when  she  started  from  the
coast.  When  Francis  Drake,  the  Englishman,  entered  by
the  Straits  of  Magellan,  he  learnt  a better  way  of  navigating,
by  extending  the  length  of  the  tacks  for  three  or  four  hun-
dred leagues  out  to  sea.  The  pilots  had  never  attempted
this  before,  because,  without  knowing  on  what  grounds  ex-
cept their  own  imaginations,  they  were  persuaded  and  fear-
ful that  at  a distance  of  a hundred  leagues  from  the  land
there  were  great  calms  on  the  sea,  and  so  they  kept  closer
in  shore.  Owing  to  this  apprehension,  we  nearly  lost  our
ship,  when  I went  to  Spain,  for  a squall  carried  us  close  into
the  island  of  Gorgona,  where  we  expected  to  perish,  being
unable  to  get  out  of  that  dangerous  bay.  A ship,  then,  was
navigating  in  the  manner  I have  described,  soon  after  the
conquest  of  Peru,  and  having  gone  out  to  sea  on  one  tack
six  or  seven  times  from  that  port,  she  always  struck  the
coast  again  at  the  same  point.  One  of  the  crew,  vexed  that
they  could  not  work  to  windward,  said — “Here  is  our  old
port  again!”  and  from  that  time  it  was  called  Puerto  Viejo.

The  point  of  Santa  Elena,  which  is  near  Puerto  Viejo,
was  so  named  because  they  came  to  it  on  her  day.

Another  name  was  adopted  long  before.  In  the  year
1500,  a ship  was  sailing  under  the  command  either  of

* Puerto  Viejo  is  a seaport  in  Io  2'  S.  lat.  It  was  founded  by  Fran-
cisco Pacheco  on  March  12th,  1535,  by  order  of  Almagro.


38


FIRST  ROOK  OF  THE


Vicente  Yanez  Pinzón  or  of  Juan  de  Solis  (two  bold  cap-
tains in  the  discovery  of  new  lairds)  in  search  of  undiscovered
regions  (for  in  those  days  the  Spaniards  thought  of  little
else),  and  the  crew  were  anxious  to  find  the  main  land,  for
hitherto  nothing  had  been  discovered  but  the  islands,  now
known  as  the  Windward  Isles.  At  last  a sailor  got  sight  of
the  high  mountain  called  Capera,  which  rises  above  the  city
of  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  cried  out,  in  the  hope  of  a reward
from  the  crew,  (c  In  the  name  of  God,  my  companions,  I see
the  main  land.”  It  was  in  consequence  of  this  that  they
afterwards  called  the  city  that  was  founded  there  Nombre
de  Dios,  and  the  coast  Tierra  Firme.  And  they  do  not
call  any  other  part,  although  it  may  be  so.  Tierra  Firme,  ex-
cept the  coast  near  Nombre  de  Dios.  Ten  years  afterwards
they  named  that  province  Castilla  del  Oro,  by  reason  of
the  great  quantity  of  gold  that  was  found  there,  and  because
of  a castle  that  was  built  there  by  Diego  de  Nicuesa  in  1510.

The  island  which  has  the  name  of  Trinidad,  and  is  in  the
Sweet  Sea,  was  so  called  because  it  was  discovered  on  the
day  of  the  most  holy  Trinity.

The  city  of  Carthagena  has  its  name  from  its  convenient
port,  which,  being  very  like  that  of  Carthagena  in  Spain,  re-
ceived the  name  from  those  who  first  saw  it,  and  exclaimed
“ this  port  is  as  good  as  that  of  Carthagena.”

The  island  Serrana,  on  the  track  between  Carthagena  and
the  Havanna,  is  called  after  a Spaniard  of  that  name.  This
Pedro  Serrano  was  in  a ship  that  was  lost  near  the  island.
He  alone  escaped  by  swimming,  being  an  excellent  swimmer,
and  reached  this  island,  which  is  desert,  uninhabitable,  and
without  wood  or  water.  Here  he  lived  for  seven  years,  by
dint  of  his  industry  and  skill  in  obtaining  fuel  for  making  a
fire,  and  in  procuring  water.  (This  is  a historical  fact  worthy
of  great  admiration,  as  we  will  show  presently.)  From  his
name  they  call  the  island  Serrana,  and  another  that  is  close
by  Serranilla,  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


39


The  city  of  San  Domingo,  whence  the  whole  island  takes
its  name,  was  founded  in  the  way  related  by  Gomara  (chap.
35)  in  the  following  passage,  which  is  quoted  word  for
word  : — “ The  most  noble  town  is  Santo  Domingo,  which
Bartolomé  Colon  founded  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Ocama.
It  received  that  name  because  he  arrived  there  on  a Sunday,
the  feast  of  San  Domingo,  and  because  his  father  was  named
Domingo.  So  that  three  causes  united  to  induce  him  to
give  that  name,”  etc.

Thus  far  Gomara.  In  a similar  manner  the  names  of  all
the  other  famous  ports,  great  rivers,  provinces,  and  king-
doms that  have  been  discovered  in  the  New  World,  were
imposed.  They  received  the  names  of  Saints  on  whose  day
they  were  first  seen,  or  those  of  a captain,  soldier,  pilot,  or
mariner  who  discovered  them.  We  said  something  on  this
subject  in  the  History  of  Florida,  when  we  treated  of  the
description  of  that  land,  and  of»those  who  went  to  it  ; and
in  the  sixth  book,  after  the  sixteenth  chapter,  with  reference
to  the  same  subject,  these  derivations  of  names  are  given,
together  with  that  of  Peru,  as  I feared  I might  not  live  long
enough  to  treat  of  them  in  this  place.  But  God,  in  his
mercy,  has  lengthened  my  life,  so  it  seemed  as  well  to
remove  them  from  there,  and  to  put  them  in  their  place.
What  I now  fear  is  that  some  historian  may  have  robbed
me,  because  that  book,  owing  to  my  other  occupations,
passed  through  other  hands ; and,  besides  that,  many  have
asked  me  if  I knew  the  derivation  of  the  name  Peru,  and,
though  I wished  to  keep  it  to  myself,  it  was  not  possible  for
me  to  deny  it  to  some  of  my  lords.


40


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  VIII.

THE  DESCRIPTION  OF  PERU.

The  four  boundaries  of  the  Empire  of  the  Yncas,  when
the  Spaniards  entered  it,  were  as  follows — to  the  north  it
extended  as  far  as  the  river  Ancasmayu,  which  flows  be-
tween the  limits  of  Pastu  and  Quitu,  and  means  in  the
general  language  of  Peru,  “the  blue  river”.*  It  is  almost
exactly  on  the  equinoctial  line.  To  the  south  it  was  bounded
by  a river  called  Maulé,  which  flows  from  east  to  west,  past
the  kingdom  of  Chile,  and  before  the  country  of  the  Arau-
canians  is  reached.  This  river  is  more  than  forty  degrees
south  of  the  equator.  Between  these  two  rivers  there  is  a
distance  of  little  less  than  1*100  leagues,  by  land.f  The  part
they  call  Peru  is  750  leagues  in  length,  by  land,  from  the
river  Ancasmayu  to  the  Chichas,  which  is  the  last  province
of  Charcas.*  And  that  which  they  call  the  kingdom  of
Chile  is  near  550  leagues  in  length  from  north  to  south,
counting  from  the  end  of  the  province  of  the  Chichas  to  the
river  Maulé. §

To  the  east  the  Empire  is  bounded  by  that  never  trodden
by  man  nor  animal  nor  bird,  that  inaccessible  chain  of  snowy
mountains  which  extends  from  Santa  Martha  to  the  straits
of  Magellan,  which  the  Indians  call  Ritisuyu,||  meaning  the
“ line  of  snow”.  To  the  west  the  boundary  is  the  South
Sea,  which  extends  along  the  whole  length  from  end  to  end.
The  limit  of  the  Empire,  on  the  coast,  begins  at  Cape

* Ancas  or  Anccas,  blue ; and  Mayu,  a river.

+ This  distance  is  a little  over-estimated.  It  is  about  740  leagues  by
the  coast  route,  and  800  by  the  sierra.

7 About  480  leagues  in  a straight  line.

§ About  320  leagues.

||  Riti,  snow ; and  Suyu,  a district  or  province.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


41


Fasau  near  the  equator,  and  extends  to  the  same  river
Maulé,  which  also  falls  into  the  South  Sea.  The  whole  of
this  kingdom  is  narrow,  from  east  to  west.  In  the  broadest
part,  which  is  from  the  province  of  Muya-pampa,*  by  the
Chachapoyas,  to  the  city  of  Truxillo  near  the  coast  of  the
South  Sea,  it  has  a breadth  of  120  leagues  :f  and  in  the  nar-
rowest, which  is  from  the  port  of  Arica  to  the  province
called  Llaricosa,i  it  is  seventy  leagues  broad. § These  are
the  four  boundaries  of  the  dominions  of  the  Kings  Yncas,
whose  history  we  purpose  to  write,  with  the  Divine  bless-
ing.

It  will  be  well,  before  we  proceed  further,  to  relate  here
the  adventures  of  Pedro  Serrano,  which  we  have  already
alluded  to  ; in  order  that  this  chapter  may  not  be  too  short.

Pedro  Serrano  reached  that  desert  island  which  had  no
name  before,  by  swimming.  It  had,  as  he  relates,  a circum-
ference of  two  leagues,  and  the  sea  cards  show  almost  the
same  measurement.  For  they  depict  three  Very  small
islands  surrounded  by  many  rocks,  and  they  give  the  same
shape  to  Serrarilla,  which  forms  five  small  islands,  with
many  more  reefs  than  Serrana;  and  this  part  is  full  of  reefs,
for  which  reason  ships  avoid  it,  that  they  may  not  fall  into
danger. ’'||

* Now  corruptly  called  Moyobamba.

t The  distance  from  Moyobamba  to  Truxillo,  as  the  crow  flies,  is
about  130  geographical  miles  only,  but  this  is  not  the  broadest  part  of
Peru.  The  extreme  breadth,  from  Pisco  on  the  Pacific  to  the  foot  of  the
Cordilleras  east  of  Cuzco,  is  over  300  geographical  miles.

t Larecaja,  a province  to  the  eastward  of  the  lofty  chain  of  Andes,
which  contains  the  peaks  of  Illimani  and  Sorata.  It  is  in  the  modern
republic  of  Bolivia,  and  is  famous  for  its  yield  of  the  species  of  Chin-
chona richest  in  quinine,  the  C.  Calisaya.

§ This  distance  is  about  correct.

||  The  Serrana  bank,  which  according  to  the  Ynca  was  named  after
the  shipwrecked  mariner  Pedro  Serrano,  and  the  neighbouring  bank  of
Serranilla,  are  between  Jamaica  and  the  Mosquito  coast.  The  Serrana
is  a very  dangerous  bank  about  seventeen  miles  long  and,  in  the  centre,
about  eight  broad,  but  of  very  irregular  outline.  Its  extreme  east  end


42


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


It  was  the  fate  of  Pedro  Serrano  to  be  lost  on  these  reefs,
and  to  arrive  at  the  island  swimming,  where  he  found  him-
self in  a most  disconsolate  condition,  because  there  was  no
water,  nor  fuel,  nor  even  grass,  nor  any  other  thing  what-
ever, wherewith  to  maintain  life  until  some  ship  should
pass,  that  might  take  him  off,  before  he  died  of  hunger  or
thirst.  This  appeared  to  him  to  be  a more  cruel  death  than
if  he  had  been  drowned,  which  would  have  been  quicker.
Thus  the  first  night  passed,  the  castaway  mourning  over  his
wretched  fate,  and  that  he  should  be  placed  in  such  an
extremity.  When  dawn  appeared,  he  began  to  examine  the
island,  and  found  some  shell  fish,  crabs,  shrimps,  and  other
insects,  of  which  he  collected  as  many  as  he  could,  and  ate
them  raw,  because  he  had  no  fire  to  cook  them  with.  Thus
he  maintained  himself  until  he  saw  some  turtle  come  forth.
As  they  were  far  from  the  sea,  he  attacked  one,  and  turned
it  over,  and  he  did  the  same  to  as  many  as  he  could,  for
when  they  are  on  their  backs  they  become  helpless.  He
then  took  out  a knife,  which  he  generally  carried  in  his
waistband,  and  beheaded  one  of  them,  drinking  the  blood
instead  of  water.  He  did  the  same  with  the  rest,  and  put
the  flesh  in  the  sun  to  make  jerked  meat  of  it,  clearing  out
the  shells  that  he  might  catch  rain-water  in  them,  for  it  is
well  known  that  all  that  region  is  very  rainy.  In  this  way
he  kept  himself  alive  for  the  first  day,  killing  as  many
turtles  as  he  could.  Some  of  them  were  as  large  as  the  big-
gest shields,  and  some  were  even  larger,  like  wheels,  inso-
much that  they  were  of  all  sizes.  He  could  not  manage  to
turn  the  largest  on  their  backs,  because  they  were  too

presents  a solid  half-moon  reef,  upon  which  the  sea  breaks  with  such
terrific  violence  that  it  is  sighted  three  or  four  miles  off.  At  a distance
of  a quarter  of  a mile  there  is  no  bottom  at  one  hundred  and  twenty
fathoms.  On  the  west  side  of  this  reef  there  are  intricate  channels
which  might  be  the  means  of  saving  a vessel  in  extreme  danger.  Sur-
vey of  Capt.  E.  Burnett,  R.  A.,  1834;  Admiralty  Plan  of  Serrana  Cays ,
No.  1478;  West  India  Pilot,  i,  p.  294.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


43


strong,  and  though  he  tried  to  subdue  them  by  tiring  them,
yet  it  did  not  avail  him,  and  they  got  away  into  the  sea.
Then  experience  taught  him  what  turtles  to  attack,  and
which  must  submit  to  him.  He  collected  plenty  of  water  in
their  shells,  for  some  of  these  shells  would  hold  two  arrobas*
When  Pedro  Serrano  had  made  a large  store  of  food  and
drink,  it  appeared  to  him  that  if  he  could  make  fire,  to  cook
his  food,  and  to  make  smoke  if  he  should  see  any  ship  pass-
ing, he  would  want  nothing  more.  With  this  idea,  (and
certainly  the  men  who  have  made  voyages  over  the  sea  have
a great  advantage  over  all  others  in  contriving  things)  he
went  in  search  of  two  pebbles  to  serve  as  flints  from  which
he  might  strike  fire  with  his  knife.  But  he  could  not  find
any  on  the  island,  which  was  covered  with  sand,  so  he  swam
into  the  sea  and  dived,  seeking  with  great  diligence  along
the  bottom,  now  in  one  part  now  in  another,  for  what  he
wanted.  His  trouble  was  so  well  rewarded  that  he  found
some  flints,  took  as  many  as  he  could,  and  selected  the  best,
breaking  one  upon  another,  so  as  to  make  sharp  corners  to
strike  against  the  knife.  He  then  tried  his  plan,  and  seeing
that  sparks  came  out,  he  made  very  small  threads  of  a piece
of  his  shirt,  which  looked  like  corded  cotton.  This  served
for  tinder.  Then,  by  reason  of  his  industry  and  handiness,
after  much  perseverance,  he  made  a fire.  To  keep  it  up  he
collected,  during  many  hours,  the  seaweed  and  wood  from
wrecked  ships,  and  shells  and  bones  of  fish,  and  other  things
to  feed  the  flame.  That  the  rains  might  not  put  his  fire  out,
he  built  a shelter  of  the  largest  turtle  shells ; and  so  he  con-
tinued to  feed  the  flames  with  great  diligence.  Before  two
months  were  out  he  appeared  as  he  was  when  he  was  born  ;
for  the  heavy  rains,  the  sun,  and  the  damp  climate  had
rotted  the  few  clothes  he  had.  The  sun,  with  its  great  heat,
tried  him  very  much  ; for  he  neither  had  clothes  nor  shade
to  protect  him.  When  he  was  much  fatigued,  he  went  into

* 50  lbs.


44


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THF,


the  water,  so  as  to  cover  himself  with  it.  He  lived  three
years  enduring  these  hardships  and  trials,  and  during  this
time  he  saw  several  ships  pass ; but,  though  he  made  a
cloud  of  smoke,  which  is  a sign  of  shipwrecked  people
among  mariners,  they  did  not  see  him,  or  perhaps  the  crews
would  not  come  nearer  for  fear  of  the  reefs,  and  so  they
sailed  out  of  sight.  At  last  Pedro  Serrano  became  so  dis-
consolate that  he  would  have  been  glad  to  end  his  misery  by
death.  Owing  to  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  his  skin
grew  so  thick  that  it  looked  like  the  hide  of  an  animal,  and
not  of  any  animal,  but  rather  of  a wild  boar.  His  hair  and
beard  reached  to  his  girdle.

One  afternoon,  at  the  end  of  three  years,  when  he  was
not  thinking  of  it,  Pedro  Serrano  saw  a man  on  the  island,
who  had  been  cast  away  on  the  reefs  the  night  before,  and
had  been  saved  on  a piece  of  the  wreck.  When  the  dawn
appeared  he  saw  the  smoke  of  Pedro  Serrano’s  fire,  and
suspecting  what  it  was,  he  reached  it,  thanks  to  a board
and  his  own  good  swimming.  When  they  saw  each  other,
it  would  be  difficult  to  say  which  was  the  most  surprised.
Serrano  thought  that  it  was  the  devil,  coming  in  the  shape
of  man,  to  tempt  him  to  some  desperate  act.  The  guest  felt
sure  that  Serrano  was  the  devil  in  his  own  proper  form,
seeing  him  covered  with  hair,  beard,  and  thick  skin.  They
fled  from  each  other,  and  Serrano  went  off,  crying  “ Jesu  !
Jesu ! O Lord  deliver  me  from  the  Devil”.  When  the
other  heard  this  he  was  re-assured,  and  turning  round  he
said — “ Do  not  fly  from  me,  O my  brother,  for  I also  am  a
Christian”;  and,  to  prove  it,  for  Serrano  continued  his  flight,
he  repeated  the  Credo  in  a loud  voice.  When  Pedro  Ser-
rano heard  him,  he  turned  round  and  they  embraced  each
other  with  great  tenderness,  and  many  tears  and  groans,
seeing  that  they  were  both  in  the  same  fix,  without  any
hope  of  escape.  Each  one  briefly  recounted  to  the  other
the  story  of  his  life.  Pedro  Serrano,  suspecting  the  wants


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


45


of  his  friend,  gave  him  to  eat  and  drink,  after  which  he  was
somewhat  consoled,  and  they  began  anew  to  recount  their
adventures.  They  arranged  their  mode  of  life  in  the  best
way  they  knew  of,  dividing  the  hours  of  the  night  and  day
into  the  necessary  employments  of  seeking  shell  fish  to  eat,
and  sea-weed,  timber,  bones  of  fish,  and  whatever  else  the
sea  might  throw  up,  to  feed  the  fire.  Above  all  they  had
to  observe  constant  watchfulness  to  prevent  the  fire  from
going  out.  Thus  they  lived  for  some  days,  but  not  many
had  passed  away  before  they  quarrelled,  so  that  they  lived
apart,  the  only  cause  being  that  one  accused  the  other  of
want  of  care  in  his  share  of  their  labours  (thus  we  see  how
great  are  the  troubles  that  our  passions  bring  upon  us).
Then  they  came  to  their  senses,  and  sought  pardon  of  each
other  and  made  friends,,  returning  to  live  together  again,
which  they  did  for  four  years.  During  this  time  they  saw
several  ships  pass  by,  and  they  raised  a column  of  sn'ioke,
hut  it  did  not  avail,  and  so  they  remained  so  disconsolate
that  there  was  nothing  left  them  but  to  die.

At  the  end  of  this  long  time  a ship  came  so  close  that
those  on  board  saw  the  smoke,  and  lowered  a boat.  When
Pedro  Serrano  and  his  companion  saw  the  boat  coming,  they
feared  that  the  crew  might  think  they  were  devils,  being
quite  naked  ; so  they  began  to  say  the  Credo,  and  to  call
loudly  on  the  name  of  our  Lord.  This  was  lucky,  for
otherwise  the  mariners  would  certainly  have  fled  from
figures  which  were  not  those  of  human  beings.  They  were
taken  on  board  the  ship,  where  they  caused  wTonder  to
every  one  who  saw  them  and  heard  their  adventures.  The
companion  died  at  sea,  on  the  voyage  to  Spain.  Pedro
Serrano  arrived  there  safely,  and  went  on  to  Germany,
where  the  Emperor  then  was.  In  every  village  (if  he
chose  to  show  himself)  he  made  much  money.  Some  lords
and  principal  knights,  who  liked  to  see  his  figure,  paid  the
cost  of  his  journey,  and  his  Imperial  Majesty,  having  seen


46


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


and  heard  him,  was  pleased  to  grant  him  a rent  of  4000
pesos,  which  are  480  ducados  in  Peru.  On  his  way  out  to
enjoy  it,  he  died  at  Panama.  All  this  story,  as  I have
given  it,  was  related  by  a knight  named  Garcia  Sanchez  de
Figueroa,*  who  knew  Pedro  Serrano,  and  1 heard  it  from
him.  That  knight  had  heard  the  tale  from  Serrano  himself,
who,  after  he  had  seen  the  Emperor,  cut  his  hair  and  beard,
keeping  it  somewhat  shorter  than  that  it  should  reach  his
waist ; and  to  enable  him  to  sleep  at  night,  he  plaited  it ;
for  if  it  was  not  plaited,  it  spread  all  over  the  bed,  and  dis-
turbed his  slumbers.


CHAPTER  IX.

OF  THE  IDOLATRY  OF  THE  INDIANS  AND  OF  THE  GODS

THEY  WORSHIPPED  BEFORE  THE  TIME  OF  THE  YNCAS.

For  the  better  understanding  of  the  idolatry,  mode  of
life,  and  customs  of  the  Indians  of  Peru  it  will  be  necessary
for  us  to  divide  those  times  into  two  epochs.  We  shall
narrate  how  they  lived  before  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  and
afterwards  we  shall  give  an  account  of  the  government  of
those  kingdoms  by  the  Yncas,  that  the  one  may  not  be  con-
founded with  the  other,  and  that  neither  the  customs  nor
the  gods  of  the  period  before  the  Yncas  may  be  attributed

* Garcia  Sanchez  de  Figueroa  was  an  old  soldier  of  the  conquest,  and
a first  cousin  of  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  the  Ynca’s  father.  He  was
settled  in  Cuzco  during  the  boyhood  of  our  author,  and  fled  from  the
city  in  company  with  his  cousin,  on  the  night  of  Giron’s  rebellion,  on
November  13th,  1553.  After  the  Ynca’s  departure  for  Spain  in  1560,
Garcia  Sanchez  de  Figueroa  appears  to  have  corresponded  with  him,  and
a few  years  afterwards  he  announced  to  his  young  cousin  that  the
Spanish  hens,  which  had  never  laid  eggs  in  Cuzco  before,  but  had
always  been  brought  from  the  valley  of  Yucay,  were  having  chickens  in
great  abundance.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


47


to  the  Ynca  period.  It  must  be  understood,  then,  that  in
the  first  epoch  some  of  the  Indians  were  little  better  than
tame  beasts,  and  others  much  worse  than  wild  beasts.  To
begin  with  their  gods,  we  must  relate  that  they  were  in
unison  with  the  other  signs  of  their  folly  and  dulness,  both
as  regards  their  number  and  the  vileness  of  the  things  they
adored.  For  each  province,  each  nation,  each  house  had  its
gods,  different  one  from  another ; for  they  thought  that  a
stranger’s  god,  occupied  with  some  one  else,  could  not
attend  to  them,  but  only  their  own.  Thus  it  was  that  they
came  to  have  such  a variety  of  gods,  and  so  many -that
they  could  not  be  counted.  And  as  they  did  not  under-
stand, like  the  gentile  Romans,  how  to  make  ideal  gods,  as
Hope,  Victory,  Peace,  and  such  like,  because  they  did  not
raise  their  thoughts  to  invisible  things,  they  adored  what
they  saw.  The  one  desired  to  have  a god  different  from  the
other,  without  thinking  whether  the  objects  of  adoration
were  worthy  or  not,  and  without  self-respect  in  considering
whether  the  things  they  adored  were  not  inferior  to  them-
selves. They  only  thought  of  making  one  differ  from  another,
and  each  from  all.  Thus  they  worshipped  herbs,  plants,
flowers,  all  kinds  of  trees,  high  hills,  great  rocks,  and  the
chinks  in  them,  hollow  caves,  pebbles,  and  small  stones  of
different  colours  found  in  rivers  and  brooks,  such  as  jasper.
They  adored  the  emerald,*  particularly  in  a province  which
is  now  called  Puerto  Viejo;  but  they  did  not  worship  rubies
and  diamonds,  because  there  are  none  in  that  country.  In
place  of  them  they  worshipped  different  animals,  some  for
their  fierceness,  such  as  the  tiger,  lion,  and  bear;  and  as
they  looked  upon  them  as  gods,  they  did  not  fly  from  them,
if  they  crossed  their  path,  but  went  down  on  the  ground  to
worship  them,  and  these  Indians  allowed  themselves  to _be
killed  and  eaten,  without  attempting  flight,  or  making  any

* See  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  chap.  1,  p.  182.  Acosta,  lib.
iv,  cap.  14,  p.  233 ; and  Velasco,  Historia  del  Quito,  i,  p.  29.


48


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


defence.  They  also  adored  other  animals  for  their  cunning,
such  as  foxes  and  monkeys.  They  worshipped  the  dog  for
his  faithfulness  and  noble  character,  the  cat  for  its  agility,
the  bird  which  they  call  cuntur  for  its  size,  and  some  nations
adored  the  eagle  because  they  thought  they  were  descended
from  it,  as  well  as  the  cuntur.  Other  nations  worshipped
falcons  for  their  swiftness,  and  for  their  industry  in  pro-
curing food.  They  worshipped  the  owl  for  the  beauty  of
his  eyes  and  head,  and  the  bat  for  his  quickness  of  sight,
which  caused  much  wonder  that  he  could  see  at  night.
They  also  adored  many  other  birds  according  to  their
caprices.  They  venerated  the  great  serpents,  that  are  met
with  in  the  Antis,*  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet  in  length,  more
or  less,  and  thicker  than  a man’s  thigh,  for  their  monstrous
size  and  fierceness.  They  also  looked  upon  other  smaller
snakes  as  gods,  in  places  where  they  are  not  so  large  as  in
the  Antis,  as  well  as  lizards,  toads,  and  frogs.  In  fine,
there  was  not  an  animal,  how  vile  and  filthy  soever,  that
they  did  not  look  upon  as  a god  ; merely  differing  one
from  the  other  in  their  gods,  without  adoring  any  real  God,
nor  being  able  to  hope  for  anything  from  them.  They  were
indeed  most  foolish  in  all  these  things,  like  sheep  without
a shepherd.  But  we  should  not  wonder  that  a people  with-
out letters  or  any  instruction  should  fall  intc^these  follies ;
for  it  is  notorious  that  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  who  prided
themselves  so  much  on  their  science,  had,  when  their
empire  was  most  flourishing,  30,000  gods.

* Anti-suyu , the  eastern  division  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas,  was  so
called  irom  the  Antis,  who  dwelt  in  the  forests  at  the  foot  of  the  Cor-
dillera, to  the  eastward  of  Cuzco.


ROYA  I,  COMMENTARIES,


49


CHAPTER  X.

OF  MANY  OTHER  GODS  THAT  THEY  HAD.

There  were  many  other  nations  of  Indians,  in  that  first
epoch,  who  chose  their  gods  with  somewhat  more  judgment
than  those  we  have  mentioned  ; for  they  worshipped  certain
things  from  which  they  derived  benefit,  such  as  great  foun-
tains and  rivers,  which  supplied  water  for  irrigating  their
crops.

Some  worshipped  the  earth,  and  called  it  Mother,  because
it  yielded  their  fruits  ; others  adored  the  air  for  its  gift  of
breath  to  them,  saying  that  it  gave  them  life  ; others  the
fire  for  its  heat,  and  because  they  cooked  their  food  with  it ;
others  worshipped  a sheep,  because  of  the  great  flocks  they
reared  ;*  others  the  great  chain  of  snowy  mountains  for  its
height  and  grandeur,  and  for  the  many  rivers  which  flow
from  it,  and  furnish  irrigation  ; others  adored  maize  or  sara,
as  they  call  it,  because  it  was  their  bread;  others  worshipped
other  kinds  of  corn  and  pulse,  according  to  the  abundance
of  the  yield  in  each  province.

The  inhabitants  of  the  sea -coast,  besides  an  infinity  of
other  gods,  worshipped  the  sea,  which  they  called  Mama-
ccocha,  or  “ Mother  Sea”,  meaning  that  it  filled  the  office  of
a mother,  by  supplying  them  with  fish.  They  also  worshipped
the  whale  for  its  monstrous  greatness.  Besides  this  ordinary
system  of  worship,  which  prevailed  throughout  the  coast,
the  people  of  different  provinces  adored  the  fish  that  they
caught  in  greatest  abundance  ; for  they  said  that  the  first
fish  that  was  made  in  the  world  above  (for  so  they  named
Heaven)  gave  birth  to  all  other  fish  of  that  species,  and  took
care  to  send  them  plenty  of  its  children  to  sustain  their

* These  were  the  Collas  in  Southern  Peru.  See  Book  ii,  chap.  19.

T)


50


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


tribe.  For  this  reason  they  worshipped  sardines  in  one
region,  where  they  killed  more  of  them  than  of  any  other
fish ; in  others,  the  skate ; in  others,  the  dog  fish ; in  others,
the  golden  fish  for  its  beauty ; in  others,  the  craw  fish  ; in
others,  for  want  of  larger  gods,  the  crabs,  where  they  had
no  other  fish  or  where  they  knew  not  how  to  catch  and  kill
them.  In  short,  they  had  whatever  fish  was  most  service-
able to  them  as  their  gods.  So  that  they  not  only  had  the
four  elements  as  gods,  but  also  everything  that  is  formed  or
composed  of  them,  howsoever  vile  and  shapeless  it  might  be.
There  were  other  people,  such  as  the  Chirihuanas,  and  the
natives  of  the  Cape  de  Pasau  (these  two  provinces  being  at
the  northern  and  southern  extremities  of  Peru)  that  had  no
inclination  to  worship  anything  high  or  low,  neither  from
interested  motives  nor  from  fear,  but  who  lived  in  every
respect,  and  now  live  like  beasts  or  worse  ; for  the  doctrine
and  instruction  of  the  Kings  Yncas  never  reached  them.


CHAPTER  XI.

OF  THE  MANNER  OF  THEIR  SACRIFICES.

In  conformity  with  the  vileness  and  degraded  character
of  the  gods,  were  the  cruelty  and  barbarity  of  the  sacrifices
of  that  ancient  idolatry.  For,  besides  ordinary  things  such
as  animals  and  maize,  they  sacrificed  men  and  women  of  all
ages,  being  captives  taken  in  wars  which  they  made  against
each  other.  In  some  provinces  their  cruelty  was  so  great
that  it  exceeded  that  of  wild  beasts.  Not  content  with
sacrificing  their  captive  enemies,  they  offered  up  their  own
children  on  certain  occasions.  The  manner  of  this  sacrifice
of  men,  women,  and  children  was  that  they  opened  their
breasts  while  they  were  yet  alive,  and  took  out  the  heart
and  lungs.  They  then  anointed  the  idol  with  the  warm


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


51


blood,  thinking  that  the  idol  had  ordered  the  sacrifice  to  he
made.  Presently  they  watched  the  omens  in  the  same  heart
and  lungs,  to  see  if  the  sacrifice  had  been  accepted  or  not;  and,
whether  or  not,  they  burnt  the  offering  of  heart  and  lungs
before  the  idol,  until  it  was  consumed,  and  ate  the  sacrificed
Indian  with  great  relish  and  delight,  and  not  less  rejoicing,
even  though  it  might  be  their  own  child.

The  Father  Bias  Valera,  as  appears  in  many  parts  of  his
torn  papers,  had  the  same  design  as  ourselves  in  many  of
the  things  that  he  wrote ; such  as  to  divide  the  periods,
epochs,  and  provinces,  so  as  to  make  more  clear  the  customs
which  each  nation  had.  Thus  in  one  of  his  mutilated  papers
he  says  as  follows  : — “ Those  who  live  in  the  Antis  eat
human  flesh,  they  are  fiercer  than  tigers,  and  have  no  God,
nor  any  law,  nor  do  they  know  what  virtue  is.  They  have
no  idols,  nor  any  likeness  of  them,  but  worship  the  devil
when  he  presents  himself  in  the  form  of  any  beast  or  ser-
pent, and  speaks  to  them.  If  they  make  a captive  in  war,
or  by  any  other  chance,  knowing  that  he  is  one  of  low  con-
dition, they  cut  him  up  and  give  him  to  their  friends  and
servants,  for  them  to  eat  or  sell  in  the  meat  market.  But  if
he  is  a nobleman,  the  chiefs  assemble  together  with  their
wives  and  daughters,  and,  like  ministers  of  the  devil,  they
strip  him  and  tie  him  alive  to  a post.  Then  they  cut  him
into  slices  with  stone  knives,  not  dismembering  him,  but
cutting  the  flesh  off  the  parts  where  there  is  most  of  it,  such
as  the  calves,  thighs,  buttocks,  and  fleshy  parts  of  the  arms.
They  sprinkle  the  women  and  children  with  the  blood,  and
eat  the  flesh  very  hastily,  without  waiting  to  cook  or  even  to
chew  it.  They  take  the  flesh  bit  by  bit,  so  that  the  poor
patient  sees  himself,  while  yet  alive,  eaten  by  others,  and
buried  in  their  bellies.  The  women  (more  cruel  than  the
men)  anoint  the  teats  of  their  bosoms  with  the  unfortunate
victim’s  blood,  that  their  infants  may  suck  it  in,  and  drink
it  with  the  milk.  They  do  all  this,  in  place  of  sacrificing,

n 2


52


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


with  great  rejoicing,  until  the  man  dies.  Then  they  desist
from  eating  his  flesh  by  way  of  a feast  or  pleasure,  as  before,
but  as  a thing  dedicated  to  God,  and  from  that  time  they
look  on  the  flesh  with  the  greatest  veneration,  and  eat  it
as  a sacred  thing.  If  the  victim,  while  he  was  being  tortured,
gave  any  sign  of  feeling  in  his  face  or  in  his  body,  or  made
any  groan  or  sigh,  they  broke  his  bones  to  pieces,  after  having
eaten  his  flesh  and  tripes,  and  cast  them  into  the  fields  or
rivers,  with  every  mark  of  contempt.  But  if,  during  the
torture,  the  victim  was  firm,  composed,  and  fierce,  after  having
eaten  the  flesh,  with  all  the  inside,  they  dried  the  bones  and
nerves  in  the  sun,  and,  placing  them  in  a lofty  part  of  the
mountains,  worshipped  them  as  gods,  and  offered  them
sacrifices.  These  are  the  idols  of  those  wild  people;  for  che
government  of  the  Yncas  did  not  reach  them,  nor,  up  to  the
present  time,  has  that  of  the  Spaniards,  and  this  is  the  con-
dition in  which  they  remain  to  this  day.  This  race  of
terrible  and  cruel  men  came  from  the  Mexican  country,
and  peopled  that  of  Panama  and  Darien,  and  all  those  great
forests  which  extend  on  one  side  to  the  new  kingdom  of
Granada,  and  on  the  other  to  Santa  Martha.”*  All  this  is
quoted  from  Father  Bias  Valera,  who  recounts  the  devilries
of  these  people,  and  assists  us  to  give  an  idea  of  the  customs
of  that  first  age.

There  were  the  other  Indians  who  were  not  so  cruel  in
their  sacrifices  ; for,  though  they  mixed  human  blood  in
them,  it  was  not  obtained  by  killing  any  one,  but  by  bleed-
ing the  arms  and  legs,  according  to  the  importance  of  the
sacrifice.  For  the  most  solemn  sacrifices  they  bled  the  root
of  the  nose  where  it  is  joined  by  the  eyebrows.  This  bleed-

* The  Antis  were  a savage  tribe  in  the  forests  to  the  eastward  of
Cuzco;  but  Bias  Valera  probably  intends  to  include  in  the  country  of
the  Antis  all  the  vast  forest-covered  region  to  the  eastward  of  the
Andes.  The  practices  described  in  the  text  were  not  those  of  the
Peruvian  Indians,  but  of  the  fierce  Aztecs,  and  of  wild  tribes  in  New
Granada.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


53


ing  ivas  common  amongst  the  Indians  of  Peru,  even  in  the
time  of  the  Yncas,  as  well  for  sacrifices  (particularly  one,  as
we  shall  presently  explain)  as  for  their  illnesses,  when  they
had  very  bad  headaches.  The  Indians  had  other  sacrifices
in  common  (those  which  we  have  described  above  being  in
use  in  particular  provinces  and  not  in  others),  such  were  the
sacrifices  of  animals,  as  sheep,  lambs,  rabbits,  partridges,  and
other  birds,  grease,  the  herb  they  so  value  called  cuca ,
maize,  and  other  seeds,  pulses,  sweet-woods,  and  the  like,
according  to  the  produce  of  each  people,  and  their  ideas
touching  what  would  be  a pleasing  sacrifice  to  their  gods.
If  their  gods  were  birds  or  beasts  of  prey  they  offered  up
what  they  usually  saw  them  eat,  and  what  appeared  to  be
most  agreeable  to  their  tastes ; and  this  suffices  for  an  ac-
count of  the  sacrifices  of  that  ancient  heathenism.


CHAPTER  XII.

CONCERNING  THE  MODE  OF  LIFE  AND  GOVERNMENT  OF  THE
ANCIENT  PEOPLE,  AND  OF  THE  THINGS  THEY  ATE.

These  gentiles  were  as  barbarous  in  the  manner  of  build-
ing their  houses  and  villages,  as  in  their  gods  and  sacrifices.
The  most  civilised  had  their  villages  without  plazas*  or  order
in  their  streets  and  houses,  but  rather  with  the  appearance
of  a lair  of  wild  beasts.  Others,  by  reason  of  the  wars  that
they  waged  against  each  other,  lived  on  the  tops  of  high
rocks,  in  the  manner  of  fortresses,  where  they  were  less
molested  by  their  enemies.  Others  lived  in  huts  scattered
over  the  fields,  valleys,  and  ravines,  each  one  where  its  owners
could  best  secure  their  food.  Others  lived  in  caves  under  the
ground,  in  crevices  of  the  rocks,  or  in  hollow  trees,  each  one

* Every  village  in  Spanish  South  America  has  a plaza  or  open  square
in  the  centre,  whence  the  streets  diverge  at  right  angles.


54


FIRST  BOOK  OK  THE


finding  his  house  ready  built,  as  he  was  not  capable  of
building  one.  Some  such  people  are  still  to  be  met  with
near  the  Cape  of  Pasau,  and  in  the  country  of  the  Chiri-
huanas,  and  other  nations  which  were  not  conquered  by  the
Kings  Yncas,  and  are  still  in  the  ancient  condition  of  bar-
barism. These  are  the  people  who  are  most  difficult  to
convert  to  the  service  of  the  Spaniards,  and  to  the  Christian
religion  ; for  as  they  never  had  any  religion,  they  are  irra-
tional, and  scarcely  have  any  words  to  make  themselves  in-
telligible to  each  other.  So  they  liye  like  animals  of  different
species,  without  joining  or  communicating  with  each  other.

In  these  houses  and  villages  he  who  had  most  audacity
governed  the  others,  and  as  soon  as  he  became  their  lord
he  treated  his  vassals  with  tyranny  and  cruelty,  using  them  as
slaves,  taking  their  wives  and  daughters  at  will,  and  making
them  fight  one  with  another.  In  some  provinces  they
flayed  their  captives,  and  covered  their  drums  with  the
skins,  to  terrify  their  enemies  ; for  they  said  that  when  they
heard  the  skins  of  their  relations,  they  would  presently  fly.
They  led  a life  of  robberies,  murders,  and  burning  of
villages,  and  thus  many  chiefs  and  petty  kings  arose,  among
whom  there  were  some  good  men  who  treated  their  people
well  and  maintained  peace  and  justice.  The  Indians,  in
their  simplicity,  revered  these  good  chiefs  as  gods,  seeing
that  they  were  different  from  the  great  multitude  of  tyrants.
In  other  parts  the  people  lived  without  chiefs  to  rule  over
them,  nor  did  they  know  how  to  form  any  government
amongst  themselves  to  regulate  and  order  their  lives,  but
they  lived  like  sheep,  in  great  simplicity,  without  doing
either  good  or  evil,  and  this  was  due  more  to  ignorance  and
absence  of  malice,  than  to  excess  of  virtue.

The  Indians  in  many  provinces  were  so  sluggish  and
simple  in  the  manner  of  dressing  and  covering  their  bodies,
that  their  clothing  would  make  a man  laugh  to  see  it.  In
their  eating  they  were  so  fierce  and  barbarous  as  to  astound


KOYAL  COMMENTARIES.


55

any  man,  and  in  many  wide  regions  these  two  habits  went
together.  In  the  hot  climates,  on  account  of  their  natural
fertility,  they  sowed  little  or  nothing ; they  maintained
themselves  on  herbs,  roots,  and  wild  fruits,  and  other  food
which  the  earth  yielded  spontaneously,  or  with  small  aid
from  the  inhabitants ; and  as  the  people  desired  no  more
than  the  maintenance  of  their  natural  lives,  they  were
satisfied  with  little.  In  many  provinces  they  were  very  fond
of  human  flesh,  and  so  greedy  that,  before  the  Indian  they
were  killing  was  quite  dead,  they  drank  his  blood  out  of  the
wound  they  had  dealt  him,  and  did  the  same  when  he  was  cut
up,  sucking  their  hands  so  that  they  might  not  lose  a drop.

Pedro  de  Cieza  (chap.  27)*  says  the  same,  and  that  he  saw
it  with  his  own  eyes.  This  passion  so  increased  upon  them,
that  they  would  not  spare  their  own  offspring  by  a captive
woman  taken  in  war.  They  took  these  women,  when  they
were  virgins,  and  brought  up  the  children  they  had  by
them,  with  much  care,  until  they  were  twelve  or  thirteen
years  of  age,  when  they  ate  them,  as  well  as  their  mother,  so
soon  as  she  was  past  child-bearing.  They  even  went  further;
for  they  spared  the  lives  of  many  Indians  whom  they  took
prisoners  and  gave  them  wives  from  the  nation  of  their  con-
querors; and  the  children  they  begot  were  brought  up  until
they  were  old  enough  to  be  eaten.  Thus  they  had  a sort  of
college  of  youths  reared  for  eating,  and  they  would  not
spare  them,  either  on  the  ground  of  relationship,  or  because
they  had  reared  them,f  which  is  a source  of  love  even
amongst  animals  of  different  habits,  as  we  are  able  to  testify

* This  is  a wrong  reference,  but  there  is  plenty  about  the  cannibalism
of  the  Indians  of  New  Granada  in  Cieza  de  Leon.  See  my  translation,
chap,  xii,  p.  50  and  52,  chap,  xv,  p.  60,  chap,  xix,  p.  71,  chap,  xxi,  p.  79,
chap,  xxiii,  p.  84,  chap,  xxvi,  p.  96  and  97,  chap,  xxviii,  p.  101,  chap,
xxxii,  p.  115  and  p.  118.

t These  were  customs  of  Indians  in  the  valley  of  the  Cauca,  in  New
Granada,  as  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon,  and  not  those  of  Indians  in  any
part  of  Peru.


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


56

touching  some  that  we  have  seen,  and  others  of  which  we
have  heard.  But,  with  these  barbarians,  neither  the  one
motive  nor  the  other  was  sufficient ; for  they  hilled  the  sons
they  had  begotten  and  the  relations  they  had  reared,  for  the
purpose  of  eating  them,  doing  the  same  by  the  parents  as
soon  as  they  were  past  the  time  of  bearing  children,  without
regard  to  their  near  relationship.  There  was  one  nation  so
strangely  addicted  to  this  greediness  in  eating  human  flesh,
that  they  buried  their  dead  in  their  bellies.  As  soon  as  a
relation  died,  these  people  assembled  and  ate  him  roasted  or
boiled  according  as  he  was  thin  or  fat.*  If  he  was  thin  they
boiled  him,  if  fat  he  was  roasted.  Afterwards  they  collected
his  bones,  and  performed  his  obsequies  with  great  mourning,
interring  them  in  a hole  of  the  rocks  or  in  a hollow  tree.
They  had  no  God,  nor  did  they  know  what  it  was  to  wor-
ship anything,  and  they  are  still  in  the  same  condition.
This  habit  of  eating  human  flesh  prevailed  more  amongst
the  Indians  of  the  warm  than  of  the  cold  climates.

In  the  cold  and  sterile  regions  where  the  land  did  not
spontaneously  yield  fruits  and  herbs,  they  sowed  maize  and
other  crops,  being  urged  by  necessity.  But  they  did  so
without  observing  either  time  or  season.  They  followed
the  chase  and  caught  fish  in  the  same  rude  fashion  as  they
showed  in  all  other  matters.


CHAPTER  XIII.

HOW  THEY  DRESSED  IN  THOSE  ANCIENT  TIMES.

Their  dress,  owing  to  its  indecency,  is  more  a subject  for
keeping  silence  upon  and  for  concealing  than  for  talking  of

* This  was  the  tribe  of  Cu, camas,  on  the  Maranon  and  Huallaga
rivers.  See  M.  Rodriguez , Velasco , Poeppig,  ii,  p.  449,  Herndon,  p.  195,
Rates,  ii,  p.  159,  Raimondy,  p.  113.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


57


and  describing.  But  as  the  truth  of  history  obliges  me  to
tell  everything  correctly,  I must  beseech  modest  ears  to  close
themselves,  that  they  may  not  hear  me  in  this  part ; and
should  they  punish  me  with  this  disfavour,  I shall  hold
them  to  be  well  employed.  In  this  first  epoch  the  Indians
dressed  like  animals,  for  they  wore  no  more  clothing  than
the  skin  which  nature  had  given  them.  Many  of  them,
either  for  love  of  adorning  themselves  or  out  of  peculiarity,
had  a thick  string  girded  round  their  bodies,  which  served
them  as  clothing,  but  we  must  say  no  more  on  this  head,  as
it  is  not  proper.  In  the  year  1560,  on  my  way  to  Spain,  I
encountered  five  Indians  in  a street  of  Carthagena,  without
any  clothes,  and  they  did  not  walk  abreast,  but  one  behind
the  other,  like  cranes,  it  having  been  so  many  years  since
they  had  had  intercourse  with  Spaniards.

The  women  went  about  in  the  same  dress,  that  is,  naked.
Those  who  were  married  had  a thread  girded  round  the
body,  to  which  was  fastened  a sort  of  apron  consisting  of  a
rag  of  cotton  a yard  square.  In  places  where  they  could
not  or  would  not  weave,  they  used  bark  of  trees  or  leaves,
which  served  as  a covering  for  the  sake  of  decency.  Virgins
also  wore  a girdle  of  thread,  and  in  place  of  an  apron  they
wore  a different  sort  of  thing  as  a sign  that  they  were  virgins.
But  as  it  is  proper  to  preserve  that  respect  which  is  due  to
the  reader,  it  will  be  well  to  keep  silence  as  to  what  it  was.
Suffice  it  to  say,  that  such  was  the  dress  in  the  hot  regions,
that,  as  regards  decency,  the  people  were  like  unreasoning
beasts ; and,  by  this  folly  alone,  as  regards  the  adorning
of  their  persons,  it  may  be  understood  how  brutal  they  must
have  been  in  all  other  things — these  Indians  of  heathendom,
who  lived  before  the  time  of  the  empire  of  the  Yncas.

In  the  cold  countries  the  people  went  about  more  honestly
clad,  not  for  the  sake  of  decency,  but  owing  to  the  necessity
caused  by  the  cold.  They  covered  themselves  with  the
skins  of  animals,  and  with  a sort  of  cloak  that  they  made


5S


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


from  the  aloe,  and  from  a long  and  soft  straw  which  grows
in  the  fields.  With  these  contrivances  they  covered  their
bodies  as  well  as  they  could.  In  other  nations  there  was
more  propriety,  and  they  wore  mantles,  badly  made,  badly
twisted,  and  worse  woven,  of  wool  or  of  wild  aloe,  called  by
them  chahuar .*  They  wore  these  cloaks  fastened  round  the
neck  and  waist,  so  that  they  went  sufficiently  covered.
Th  ese  clothes  were  used  in  that  first  epoch,  and  the  custom
prevailing  in  the  warm  countries  of  going  naked  was  one
which  the  Spaniards  found  in  many  provinces  not  yet  con-
quered by  the  Kings  Yncas.  It  still  prevails  in  many  lands
subjugated  by  the  Spaniards,  where  the  Indians  are  so
stupid  as  to  be  unwilling  to  dress,  excepting  those  who  have
close  intercourse  with  the  Spaniards  in  their  houses,  and
they  dress  more  from  persuasion  than  from  choice  and
proper  modesty.  This  applies  to  women  as  well  as  men;  for
the  former,  when  scolded  for  being  bad  spinsters  and  very
indecent,  and  asked  by  the  Spaniards  why  they  do  not  dress,
reply  that  they  do  not  want  to  spin,  or  if  asked  why  they  do
not  spin,  they  say  they  do  not  want  to  dress.


CHAPTER  XIV.

DIFFERENT  MODES  OF  MARRIAGE,  AND  DIVERS  LANGUAGES.
HOW  THEY  USED  POISONS  AND  PRACTISED  SORCERY.

In  their  other  customs,  such  as  those  relating  to  marriage,
the  Indians  of  that  heathen  time  were  no  better  than  in  their
habits  of  eating  and  clothing  themselves.  For,  in  many
nations,  they  cohabited  like  beasts,  without  any  special  wife,
but  just  as  chance  directed.  Others  followed  their  own  de-
sires, without  excepting  sisters,  daughters,  or  mothers.  Others


* Chahuar  is  the  fibre  of  the  agave  or  American  aloe.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


59


excepted  their  mothers,  but  none  else.  In  other  provinces
it  was  lawful,  and  even  praiseworthy,  for  the  girls  to  be  as
immodest  and  abandoned  as  they  pleased,  and  the  most  dis-
solute were  more  certain  of  marriage  than  those  who  were
faithful.  At  all  events  the  abandoned  sorts  of  girls  were
held  to  be  more  lusty,  while  of  the  modest  it  was  said  that
they  had  had  no  desire  for  any  one  because  they  were
torpid.  In  other  provinces  they  had  an  opposite  custom,
for  the  mothers  guarded  their  daughters  with  great  care  ;
and  when  they  were  sought  in  marriage,  they  were  brought
out  in  public,  and,  in  presence  of  the  relations  who  had  made
the  contract,  the  mothers  deflowered  them  with  their  own
hands,  to  show  to  all  present  the  proof  of  the  care  that  had
been  taken  of  them.

In  other  provinces  the  nearest  relations  of  the  bride  and
her  most  intimate  friends  had  connection  with  her,  and  on
this  condition  the  marriage  was  agreed  to,  and  she  was  thus
received  by  the  husband.  Pedro  de  Cieza  (chap.  xxiv).says
the  same.*  There  were  sodomites  in  some  provinces,  though
not  openly  nor  universally,  but  some  particular  men  and
in  secret.  In  some  parts  they  had  them  in  their  temples,
because  the  devil  persuaded  them  that  their  gods  took  great
delight  in  such  people : and  thus  the  devil  acted  as  the
traitor  to  remove  the  veil  of  shame  that  the  gentiles  felt  for
this  crime,  and  to  accustom  them  to  commit  it  in  public  and
in  common. f There  were  also  men  and  women  who  gave
poison,  both  to  kill  by  slow  degrees  or  suddenly,  and  to
destroy  reason  and  cause  idiotcy.  They  could  also  make  the
face  ugly,  bring  out  black  and  white  spots  on  the  body,  and
maim  the  limbs.

Each  province,  each  tribe,  and  in  many  places  each  vil-

* The  account  of  Cieza  de  Leon  does  not  refer  to  Indians  of  Peru,  but
to  those  of  New  Granada.

t This  is  also  from  Cieza  de  Leon,  and  does  not  refer  to  the  natives
of  Peru.


60


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


lage,  had  its  own  language,  different  from  that  of  its  neigh-
bours. Those  who  understood  their  language  were  looked
upon  as  relations,  and  were  therefore  friends  and  allies.
Those  who  did  not  understand  them,  owing  to  the  difference
in  the  languages,  they  held  as  enemies,  and  made  cruel  war
upon,  insomuch  that  they  ate  each  other,  as  if  they  were
brutes  of  different  species.  They  also  had  sorcerers  and
witches  among  them,  but  this  profession  was  more  commonly
practised  by  women  than  men.  Many  only  exercised  their
art,  to  be  able  to  talk  to  the  devil,  so  as  to  gain  a reputation
with  the  people,  giving  replies  to  things  that  were  asked,
and  making  themselves  great  priests  and  priestesses.

Other  women  used  the  art  of  bewitching  people,  oftener
women  than  men,  from  envy  or  some  other  evil  motive,  and
they  produced  the  same  results  by  witchcraft  as  by  poison.
And  this  suffices  for  my  account  of  the  Indians  of  that  first
epoch,  and  of  their  ancient  heathenism,  leaving  that  which
I have  not  described  as  fully  as  it  really  required  to  the
imagination  of  each  person  to  add;  for  howsoever  he  may
enlarge  on  what  has  been  said,  he  will  not  be  able  to  imagine
how  great  was  the  barbarism  of  those  gentiles.  In  fine,  they
were  a people  who  had  no  other  guide  nor  master  than  the
devil,  and  of  such  a nature  were  their  lives,  customs,  gods,
and  most  savage  sacrifices,  without  any  exaggeration.  Others
were  very  simple  in  everything,  like  tame  animals.  Others
partook  either  of  one  extreme  or  the  other,  as  we  shall  see
further  on  in  the  course  of  our  history,  where  I shall  relate
what  barbarous  rites  they  practised  in  each  province.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


61


CHAPTER  XV.

THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  YNCAS  KINGS  OF  PERU.

It  pleased  our  Lord  God  that,  while  these  people  were
living  and  dying  in  the  way  we  have  described,  the  glimmer-
ings of  dawn  should  appear  amongst  themselves,  which,  in
the  midst  of  that  pitch  darkness,  might  give  some  indications
of  the  natural  law,  of  civilisation,  and  of  the  respect  which
men  ought  to  have  for  each  other  Afterwards,  some  fur-
ther progress  was  made,  and  these  wild  creatures  were  con-
verted into  men,  and  made  capable  of  reason  and  of  com-
prehending any  good  doctrine.  Thus,  when  the  same  God,
who  is  the  Sun  of  Justice,  saw  fit  to  extend  the  light  of  his
divine  rays  to  these  idolaters,  they  were  found  not  to  be
such  savages,  but  more  ready  to  receive  the  Catholic  faith,
and  the  teaching  and  doctrine  of  our  holy  church,  than
those  who  had  not  had  such  early  advantages;  as  will  be
seen  in  the  course  of  this  history.  For  it  has  been  clearly
shown  by  experience  how  much  more  prompt  and  ready  the
Indians  who  had  been  conquered,  governed,  and  instructed
by  the  Kings  Yncas  were  to  receive  the  gospel  than  the
other  neighbouring  people,  to  whom  the  teaching  of  the
Yncas  had  not  yet  extended.  Many  of  the  latter  are  even
now  as  barbarous  and  brutal  as  they  ever  were,  after  the
Spaniards  have  been  seventy-one  years  in  Peru.  And  now
that  we  are  at  the  entrance  of  this  great  labyrinth,  it  will  be
well  for  us  to  pass  onwards,  and  relate  what  there  is  in  it.

After  having  sketched  out  many  plans,  and  taken  many
roads  for  entering  upon  a narrative  of  the  origin  of  the
Yncas,  the  former  native  kings  of  Peru,  it  seemed  to  me
that  the  best  and  clearest  way  wrould  be  to  relate  what  I have
often  heard,  in  my  childhood,  from  my  mother,  and  from  her


62


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


brothers,  uncles,  and  other  relations,  touching  this  origin
and  beginning.  For  all  that  is  said  on  the  subject  from
other  sources  may  be  reduced  to  the  same  as  we  shall  re-
late, and  it  is  better  that  it  should  be  made  known  in  the
actual  words  in  which  the  Yncas  have  told  it,  than  in  those
of  strange  authors.  My  mother  resided  in  Cuzco,  her  native
town,  and  almost  every  week  some  of  the  few  male  and
female  relations,  who  escaped  the  cruelty  and  tyranny  of
Atahualpa  fas  we  shall  relate  in  the  account  of  his  life),
came  to  visit  her.  On  the  occasion  of  these  visits  their
usual  conversation  was  on  the  subject  of  the  origin  of
the  Yncas,  of  their  majesty,  of  the  grandeur  of  their  empire,
of  their  greatness,  of  their  mode  of  government  in  peace
and  war,  and  of  the  laws  which  they  ordained  for  the  good
of  their  subjects.  In  short,  they  omitted  nothing  relating
to  the  flourishing  period  of  their  history  in  the  course  of
these  conversations.

From  their  past  greatness  and  prosperity,  they  went  on  to
the  present  state  of  affairs  ; they  mourned  for  their  dead
kings,  their  lost  rule,  their  fallen  state.  Such  and  the  like
discourses  were  held  by  the  Yncas  and  Pallas  when  they
visited  my  mother,  and,  at  the  memory  of  their  lost  happi-
ness, they  always  concluded  their  conversations  with  tears
and  mourning,  saying  “We  are  turned  from  rulers  into
vassals.”  During  these  conversations  I,  as  a boy,  came  in
and  out  of  the  place  where  they  were  assembled  many  times,
and  was  entertained  at  hearing  them,  just  as  lads  always
like  to  hear  stories  told.  So  days,  months,  and  years  passed
away,  until  I was  sixteen  or  seventeen  years  old.  At  that
time  it  happened  that,  one  day  when  my  relations  were  en-
gaged in  these  discourses,  talking  of  their  royal  ancestors,  I
said  to  the  most  aged  of  them,  who  usually  related  the  stories
of  his  family — “ Ynca  my  uncle,  you  have  no  writings  which
preserve  the  memory  of  past  events ; but  what  accounts
have  you  of  the  origin  of  our  kings?  For  the  Spaniards,


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


63

and  other  people  who  live  on  their  borders,  have  divine  and.
human  histories,  and  they  know  through  them  when  their
kings  began  to  reign,  when  one  empire  gave  place  to  another,
and  even  how  many  thousand  years  it  is  since  God  created
heaven  and  earth.  But  you,  who  have  no  books,  what
memory  have  you  preserved  respecting  your  ancestors?
Who  was  the  first  of  our  Yncas?  What  was  his  name?
What  was  his  origin?  In  what  manner  did  he  begin  to
reign?  With  what  people  and  arms  did  he  conquer  this
great  empire  ? What  beginning  had  our  history  ?”

The  Ynca,  as  soon  as  he  had  heard  my  questions,  was  de-
lighted to  have  the  opportunity  of  replying  to  them  ; and  I,
though  I had  heard  his  stories  many  times  before,  never
listened  with  so  mueh  attention  as  on  that  occasion.  He
turned  to  me  and  said,  “Nephew,  I will  tell  you  what  you
ask  with  great  pleasure,  and  you  should  preserve  what  I
have  to  say  in  your  heart”  (which  is  their  phrase,  instead  of
saying  in  the  memory).  “Know  then  that,  in  ancient  times,
all  this  region  which  you  see  wras  covered  with  forests  and
thickets,  and  the  people  lived  like  wild  beasts  without  re-
ligion, nor  government,  nor  town,  nor  houses,  without  culti-
vating the  land,  nor  clothing  their  bodies,  for  they  knew
not  how  to  weave  cotton  nor  wool  to  make  clothes.  They
lived  two  or  three  together  in  caves  or  clefts  of  the  rocks,  or
in  caverns  under  ground.  They  ate  the  herbs  of  the  field
and  roots  or  fruit  like  wild  animals,  and  also  human  flesh.
They  covered  their  bodies  with  leaves  and  the  bark  of  trees,  or
with  the  skins  of  animals.  In  fine  they  lived  like  deer  or  other
game,  and  even  in  their  intercourse  with  women  they  were
like  brutes ; for  they  knew  nothing  of  living  with  separate
wives.”

It  will  be  well,  in  order  to  avoid  tiresome  repetition,  to
say  here  that  the  phrase  “ Our  Father  the  Sun”,  was  a mode
of  expressing  veneration  and  respect  in  the  language  of  the
Yncas.  They  always  named  the  Sun,  because  they  were


64


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


proud  of  being  descended  from  him,  and  it  was  not  lawful
for  any  man  who  was  not  of  Ynca  blood  to  have  the  word  in
his  mouth  ; for  it  was  looked  upon  as  blasphemy,  and  the
blasphemer  was  stoned.

“ Our  Father  the  Sun”,  said  my  uncle  the  Ynca,  “seeing
the  human  race  in  the  condition  I have  described,  had  com-
passion upon  them,  and  sent  down  from  heaven  to  the  earth
a son  and  daughter  to  instruct  them  in  the  knowledge  of  our
Father  the  Sun,  that  they  might  adore  Flim,  and  adopt  Him
as  their  God;  also  to  give  them  precepts  and  laws  by  which
to  live  as  reasonable  and  civilised  men,  and  to  teach  them  to
live  in  houses  and  towns,  to  cultivate  maize  and  other  crops,
to  breed  flocks,  and  to  use  the  fruits  of  the  earth  like  rational
beings,  instead  of  living  like  beasts.  With  these  commands
and  intentions,  our  Father  the  Sun  placed  his  two  children
in  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  which  is  eighty  leagues  from  here  ;
and  He  said  to  them  that  they  might  go  where  they  pleased,
and  that  at  every  place  where  they  stopped  to  eat  or  sleep,
they  were  to  thrust  a sceptre  of  gold  into  the  ground,  which
was  half  a yard  long,  and  two  fingers  in  thickness.  He  gave
them  this  staff  as  a sign  and  token  that  in  the  place  where,
by  one  blow  on  the  earth,  it  should  sink  down  and  disappear,
there  it  was  the  desire  of  our  Father  the  Sun  that  they
should  remain  and  establish  their  court.  Finally,  He  said
to  them  : — ‘ When  you  have  reduced  these  people  to  our
service,  you  shall  maintain  them  in  habits  of  reason  and
justice,  by  the  practice  of  piety,  clemency,  and  meekness,
assuming  in  all  things  the  office  of  a pious  father  towards
his  beloved  and  tender  children.  Thus  you  will  form  a
likeness  and  reflection  of  me.  I do  good  to  the  whole
world,  giving  light  that  men  may  see  and  do  their  business,
making  them  warm  when  they  are  cold,  cherishing  their
pastures  and  crops,  ripening  their  fruits  and  increasing
their  flocks,  watering  their  lands  with  dew,  and  bringing
fine  weather  in  the  proper  season.  I take  care  to  go  round


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


65

the  earth  each  day,  that  I may  see  the  necessities  that  exist  in
the  world,  and  supply  them,  as  the  sustainer  and  benefactor
of  the  heathens.  I desire  that  you  shall  imitate  this  example
as  my  children,  sent  to  the  earth  solely  for  the  instruction
and  benefit  of  these  men  who  live  like  beasts.  And  from
this  time  I constitute  and  name  you  as  kings  and  lords  over
all  the  tribes,  that  you  may  instruct  them  in  your  rational
works  and  government.’  Having  declared  His  will  to  His
children,  our  Father  the  Sun  dismissed  them.  These  children
set  out  from  Titicaca,  and  travelled  northwards,  trying  at
every  place  where  they  stopped  on  the  road  whether  their
sceptre  of  gold  would  sink  into  the  earth,  but  it  never  did.
At  last  they  came  to  an  inn  or  small  resting-place,  which  is
seven  or  eight  leagues  south  of  this  city,  and  is  called
Paccari-Tampu ”*  (that  is  to  say,  the  resting-place  of  the
claion).  The  Ynca  gave  it  this  name  because  he  set  out
from  it  in  the  early  morning.  It  is  one  of  the  towns  which
this  prince  afterwards  ordered  to  be  founded ; and  the  in-
habitants are  very  proud  of  the  name  to  this  day,  because  it
was  given  by  the  Ynca.  From  this  place  he  and  his  wife,
our  queen,  advanced  to  the  valley  of  Cuzco,  which  at  that
time  was  entirely  covered  with  wild  forests.”


CHAPTER  XVI.

THE  FOUNDATION  OF  CUZCO,  THE  IMPERIAL  CITY.

“ The  first  settlement  that  was  made  in  this  valley,”  con-
tinued my  uncle  the  Ynca,  “ was  on  the  hill  called  Huana-
cauti,  to  the  south  of  this  city.  It  was  here  that  the  sceptre
of  gold  buried  itself  in  the  ground  with  great  ease,  and  it
was  never  seen  more.  Then  our  Ynca  said  to  his  wife  and

* Paccari,  morning;  and  tarnpu  (corrupted  by  the  Spaniards  into
tambo),  an  inn.


E


66


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


sister ‘ Our  Father  the  Sun  orders  that  we  settle  in  this
valley  to  fulfil  his  wishes.  It  is  therefore  right,  0 queen
and  sister,  that  each  of  us  should  gather  these  people  to-
gether, to  instruct  them  and  to  do  the  good  which  has  been
ordered  by  our  Father  the  Sun.’  Our  first  rulers  set  out
from  the  hill  of  Huanacauti,  in  different  directions,  to  call
the  people  together,  and  as  this  is  the  first  place  we  know
of  which  they  pressed  with  their  feet,  we  have  built  a
temple  there,  as  is  notorious,  wherein  to  worship  our  Father
the  Sun,  in  memory  of  this  act  of  benevolence  which  He
performed  for  the  world.  The  prince  went  northwards,  and
the  princess  to  the  south,  speaking  to  all  the  people  they
met  in  the  wilderness,  and  telling  them  how  their  Father
the  Sun  had  sent  them  from  Heaven,  to  be  the  rulers  and
benefactors  of  the  inhabitants  of  all  that  land,  delivering
them  from  their  wild  lives,  and  teaching  them  how  to  live
like  men  ; and  how,  in  pursuance  of  the  commands  of  their
Father  the  Sun,  they  had  come  to  bring  the  people  out  of
the  forests  and  deserts,  to  live  in  villages,  and  to  eat  the
food  of  men,  and  not  of  wild  beasts.  Our  kings  said  these
and  similar  things  to  the  savages  they  met  with  in  the  forests
and  mountains.  The  people,  seeing  these  two  personages
attired  and  adorned  with  the  ornaments  that  our  Father  the
Sun  had  given  them  (a  very'different  dress  from  their  own),
with  their  ears  bored  and  opened,  in  the  way  that  we  their
descendants  wear  ours  ; and  that,  from  their  words  and  ap-
pearance, they  seemed  to  be  children  of  the  Sun  ; and  that
they  came  among  them  to  give  them  villages  to  live  in  and
food  to  eat;  astonished  on  the  one  hand  at  what  they  saw,
and  pleased  on  the  other  at  the  promises  that  were  held  out;
fully  believed  everything,  worshipped  the  strangers  as  chil-
dren of  the  Sun,  and  obeyed  them  as  their  kings.  The  same
savages,  having  collected  together  and  related  the  wonders
they  had  seen  and  heard,  assembled  in  great  numbers,  both
men  and  women,  and  set  out  to  follow  our  kings,  whither-
soever they  might  lead  them.


IiOYAL  COMMENTARIES.


67


“ When  our  princes  saw  the  large  multitude  of  people
that  had  arrived,  they  ordered  that  some  should  occupy  them-
selves in  procuring  supplies  for  the  rest,  that  hunger  might
not  force  them  to  scatter  themselves  over  the  mountains
again,  while  the  rest  worked  at  building  houses  according  to
a plan  made  by  the  Ynca.  In  this  manner  he  began  to
settle  this  our  imperial  city,  dividing  it  into  two  parts,  called
Hanan  Cuzco , which,  as  you  know,  means  Upper  Cuzco,
and  Hurin  Cuzco,  which  is  Lower  Cuzco.  The  people  who
followed  the  king  wished  to  settle  in  Hanan  Cuzco,  and  for
that  reason  it  received  the  name ; and  those  who  were
gathered  together  by  the  queen  settled  in  Hurin  Cuzco,  and
it  was  therefore  called  the  lower  town.  This  division  of  the
city  was  not  made  in  order  that  those  living  in  one  half
should  have  any  pre-eminence  or  special  privileges,  for  the
Ynca  desired  that  all  should  be  equal  like  brothers — the
sons  of  one  father  and  one  mother.  He  only  wished  to  make
this  division  into  an  upper  and  a lower  town,  that  there
might  be  a perpetual  memory  of  the  fact  that  the  inhabitants
of  one  were  assembled  by  the  king,  and  of  the  other  by  the
queen.  He  ordered  that  there  should  be  only  one  difference
between  them  as  a mark  of  superiority,  which  was,  that  the
people  of  Upper  Cuzco  should  be  looked  upon  and  respected
as  elder  brothers,  and  those  of  Lower  Cuzco  as  younger
brothers ; that  they  should  be,  in  short,  as  a right  and  left
arm , on  any  occasion  of  precedence,  the  one  as  having  been
brought  there  by  a man,  and  the  other  by  a woman.  In
imitation  of  this  division,  a similar  arrangement  was  made  in
all  the  towns,  large  or  small,  of  our  empire,  which  were
separated  into  wards  according  to  the  lineages  of  the  families,
which  were  called  Hanan- Ayllu  and  Hurin  Ayllu,  that  is,
the  upper  and  lower  lineage;  or  Hanan-Suyu  and  Hurin-
Suyu , or  the  upper  and  lower  provinces.*

* Hanan  or  ITanac , high,  upper.  Hurin,  lower.  Ayllu,  a family,
lineage,  or  tribe.  Suyu,  a province.


68


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


4i  At  the  same  time  that  the  city  was  being  peopled,  our
Ynca  taught  the  Indians  those  occupations  which  appertain
to  a man,  such  as  breaking  up  and  cultivating  the  ground,
and  sowing  corn  and  other  seeds,  which  he  pointed  out  as
fit  for  food  and  useful.  He  also  taught  them  to  make
ploughs  and  other  necessary  instruments,  he  showed  them
the  way  to  lead  channels  from  the  brooks  which  flow  through
this  valley  of  Cuzco ; and  even  instructed  them  how  to  pre-
pare the  sandals  which  we  now  wear.  On  the  other  hand,
the  Queen  employed  the  Indian  women  in  such  work  as  is
suitable  to  them,  such  as  to  sew  and  weave  cotton  and  wool,
to  make  clothes  for  themselves,  their  husbands,  and  children,
and  to  perform  other  household  duties.  In  fine,  our  princes
taught  their  first  vassals  everything  that  is  needful  in  life,
the  Ynca  making  himself  king  and  master  of  the  men,  and
the  Ccoya  being  queen  and  mistress  of  the  women.


CHAPTER  XVII.

OF  THE  COUNTRY  WHICH  WAS  BROUGHT  UNDER  THE
RULE  OF  THE  YNCA  MANCO  CCAPAC.

“ Those  very  Indians,  who  had  thus  been  brought  under
the  rule  of  the  Ynca,  recognising  the  benefits  they  had
received  with  great  satisfaction,  entered  into  the  moun-
tains and  wildernesses  in  search  of  their  countrymen,
and  spread  the  news  of  those  children  of  the  Sun.  They
explained  that  the  Ynca  had  come  down  to  the  earth
for  the  good  of  all  men,  and  they  recounted  the  many
benefits  he  had  conferred.  They  then  displayed  their  clothes,
and  showed  their  new  kinds  of  food,  and  that  they  now  lived  in
houses  and  villages,  that  their  words  might  be  believed.
When  the  wild  people  heard  all  this,  they  assembled  in  great
numbers  to  behold  the  wonderful  things  that  our  first  parents,


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


69


king  and  lords,  had  performed.  Having  satisfied  themselves
by  their  eyes,  they  remained,  to  serve  and  obey  the  Ynca.  In
this  way  one  party  brought  another,  until,  in  a few  years,
so  great  a multitude  was  assembled  that,  after  the  first  six  or
seven  years,  the  Ynca  had  a body  of  armed  and  disciplined
men  to  defend  him  against  any  invader,  and  even  to  subject
by  force  all  who  were  not  willing  to  submit  of  their  own
accord.  He  taught  them  to  make  offensive  arms,  such  as
bows  and  arrows,  lances,  clubs,  and  others,  which  are  still
used.

“ But  in  order  to  state  briefly  the  deeds  of  our  first  Ynca,
I must  tell  you  that,  towards  the  east,  he  subdued  the  country
as  far  as  the  river  Paucar  tampu.*  To  the  westward  he
conquered  the  country  for  a distance  of  eight  leagues,  up  to
the  river  Apurimac,f  and  to  the  south  his  dominion  extended
for  nine  leagues,  to  Quequesana.  Within  this  region  our
Ynca  ordered  more  than  a hundred  villages  to  be  built,  the
largest  with  a hundred  houses,  and  others  with  less,  accord-
ing to  the  situation.  These  were  the  first  princes  that  this
our  city  had,  they  having  founded  and  peopled  it,  as  you
have  now  heard.  These  were  the  first  rulers  who  held  this
our  great,  rich,  and  famous  empire,  which  thy  father  and
his  companions  have  taken  from  us.  These  were  our  first
Yncas  and  king£,  who  appeared  in  the  first  ages  of  the
world,  from  whom  descended  the  other  kings  who  have
ruled  over  us,  and  from  these  again  we  are  all  descended.
I am  unable  to  tell  you  exactly  how  many  years  it  is  since
our  Father  the  Sun  sent  these  his  first  children,  for  it  is  so
long  since  that  we  have  been  unable  to  preserve  the  remem-
brance of  it,  but  it  is  more  than  four  hundred  years.  Our

* Paucar,  beautifully  coloured,  a flowery  meadow ; any  graceful  or
beautiful  thing.  In  Ecuador  Paucar  is  the  troupial,  and  Paucar-huasi,
a troupial’s  nest.  Tampu,  an  inn  or  resting-place.

t Apu,  chief,  and  Rimac,  an  oracle,  the  participle  of  Rimani , I
speak.


70


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


Ynca  was  called  Manco  Ccapac,*  and  our  Ccoya  was  Mama
Occllo  Huaco.f  They  were,  as  I have  told  you,  brother  and
sister,  children  of  the  Sun  and  of  the  Moon,  our  parents.  I
believe  that  I have  now  given  you  a full  account  of  what
you  asked,  and  that  I have  replied  to  your  inquiries  ; and
that  I may  not  make  you  weep,  I have  not  related  the  story
with  tears  of  blood  torn  from  the  eyes,  as  they  are  torn  from
my  heart  by  the  grief  which  fills  it,  at  seeing  that  our  line  of
Yncas  is  ended,  and  our  empire  lost.”

This  long  account  of  the  origin  of  their  kings  was  given
me  by  that  Ynca,  uncle  of  my  mother,  from  whom  I had  in-
quired respecting  it.  I have  had  it  faithfully  translated  from
the  language  of  my  mother,  which  is  that  of  the  Yncas,  into
Castilian,  though  I have  been  unable  to  imitate  the  majestic
sentences  in  which  the  Ynca  spoke,  nor  to  give  it  with  all
the  point  of  the  original,  for  it  would  have  caused  it  to  be
much  longer  than  I have  presented  it  here.  I have  some-
what shortened  it,  leaving  out  a few  things,  but  it  is  sufficient
that  I have  given  its  true  meaning,  which  is  all  that  is  re-
quired for  our  history.  This  Ynca  told  me  a few  other
stories  during  the  visits  which  he  paid  to  the  house  of  my
mother,  and  I shall  relate  them  further  on,  in  their  proper
places.  I regret  that  I did  not  ask  many  more  questions,
that  I might  now  have  a knowledge  of  them,  obtained  from
so  excellent  a chronicler,  to  be  written  here.

* Manco,  a word  with  no  special  meaning  in  Quichua.  Ccapac,  rich,
powerful.

t Mama,  mother.  Occllo,  from  Ocllani,  to  hatch,  to  embrace  when
naked,  to  warm  in  the  bosom.  Huaco  is  a sparrow-hawk,  Huacco,  a
wisdom  tooth.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


71


CHAPTER  XVIII.

OF  FABULOUS  ACCOUNTS  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  YNCAS.

The  Indians  living  to  the  south  and  west  of  Cuzco,  in  the
provinces  called  Colla-suyu  and  Cunti-suyu,  give  another
account  of  the  origin  of  the  Yncas.  They  say  that  this  event
happened  after  the  deluge  (concerning  which  they  can  give
no  particulars,  not  even  knowing  whether  it  was  the  general
deluge  of  the  time  of  Noah  or  some  other  special  flood,  so
we  shall  not  relate  what  they  say  concerning  it,  and  con-
cerning other  things  ; for  the  way  they  have  of  telling  these
stories  makes  them  appear  more  like  dreams  or  badly  in-
vented fables  than  historical  narratives).  Their  account  is
that,  after  the  flood  subsided,  a man  appeared  in  Tiahuacanu,*
to  the  southward  of  Cuzco,  who  was  so  powerful  that  he
divided  the  world  into  four  parts,  and  gave  them  to  four
men  who  were  called  kings.  The  first  was  called  Manco
Ccapac,  the  second  Colla,  the  third  Tocay,  and  the  fourth
Pinahua.  They  say  that  he  gave  the  northern  part  to
Manco  Ccapac,  the  southern  to  Colla  (from  whose  name
they  afterwards  called  that  great  province  Colla),  the  eastern
to  Tocay,  and  the  western  to  Pinahua.  He  ordered  each  to
repair  to  his  district,  to  conquer  it,  and  to  govern  the  people
he  might  find  there.  But  they  do  not  say  whether  the  de-
luge had  drowned  the  people,  or  whether  they  had  been
brought  to  life  again,  in  order  to  be  conquered  and  instructed;
and  so  it  is  with  respect  to  all  that  they  relate  touching  those
times.  They  say  that  from  this  division  of  the  world  after-
wards arose  that  which  the  Yncas  made  of  their  kingdom,

* A misprint  for  Tiahuanacu.  The  same  misprint  occurs  in  both
editions  (Lisbon  1609,  and  Madrid  1723).  The  word  occurs  again  near
the  end  of  this  chapter,  and  it  is  there  spelt  right  in  both  editions.


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


called  Ttahuantin-suyu.  They  declare  that  Manco  Ccapac
went  towards  the  north,  and  arrived  in  the  valley  of  Cuzco,
where  he  founded  a city,  subdued  the  surrounding  inhabit-
ants, and  instructed  them.  With  the  exception  of  this  ver-
sion of  his  origin,  they  tell  almost  the  same  story  of  Manco
Ccapac  as  we  have  given  above,  and  say  that  the  kings
Yucas  were  descended  from  him.  But  they  do  not  know
what  became  of  the  other  three  kings ; and  this  is  the  way
with  all  their  accounts  of  ancient  times,  which  is  not  to  be
wondered  at,  seeing  that  they  had  no  letters  wherewith  to
preserve  the  memory  of  their  ancestors.  Those  of  the
heathen  times  in  the  Old  World,  possessing  letters,  and
being  so  curious  in  using  them,  invented  fables  worthy  to  be
laughed  at,  and  in  greater  number  than  did  these  Indians.
One  such  is  the  story  of  Pyrrha  and  Deucalion,  and  there
are  others  which  we  might  enumerate.  The  stories  of  the
one  age  of  heathenism  may  be  compared  with  that  of  the
other,  and  in  many  points  they  will  be  found  to  agree.  The
Indians,  for  instance,  have  a story  resembling  the  history  of
Noah,  as  some  Spaniards  have  desired  to  show;  but  we  shall
treat  of  this  presently.  I shall  say,  in  the  sequel,  what  I
myself  think  respecting  the  origin  of  the  Yncas.

The  Indians  to  the  north  and  east  of  the  city  of  Cuzco
give  another  account  of  the  origin  of  the  Yncas,  resembling
the  above.  They  say  that,  in  the  beginning  of  the  world,
four  men  and  four  women,  all  brothers  and  sisters,  came  out
of  certain  openings  in  the  rocks  near  the  city,  in  a place
called  Paucar-tampu.  They  came  forth  from  the  central
openings,  which  are  three  in  number,  and  they  called  them
the  royal  window.  Owing  to  this  fable,  they  lined  those
openings  with  great  plates  of  gold,  covered  with  many  pre-
cious stones,  while  the  openings  on  the  sides  were  only
adorned  with  gold,  and  had  no  precious  stones.  They  called
the  first  brother  Manco  Capac,  and  his  wife  Mama  Occllo.
They  say  that  he  founded  the  city  called  Cuzco  (which,  in


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


73


the  special  language  of  the  Yncas,  means  a navel),  that  he
conquered  the  nations  round  that  city,  teaching  them  to  live
like  men,  and  that  from  him  all  the  Yncas  were  descended .*
The  second  brother  was  called  Ayar  Cachi,  the  third  Ayar

* Our  author  here  gives  us  three  legends  respecting  the  origin  of  the
Yncas;  the  first  being  the  one  preserved  in  the  royal  family,  and
actually  told  to  Garcilasso  by  an  Ynca  of  the  blood  royal;  the  second
being  the  version  generally  received  among  the  Indians  in  the  southern
and  western  parts  of  the  empire ; and  the  third  being  that  prevalent  to
the  eastward  of  Cuzco.

Herrera  also  gives  three  versions.:  the  first  being  that  prevailing  to
the  south ; the  second  having  a family  resemblance  to  the  legend  told
by  the  old  Ynca  to  Garcilasso,  only  much  briefer;  and  the  third  being
the  same  as  that  told  by  Garcilasso  as  existing  to  the  eastward  of
Cuzco.  Herrera , dec.  iii,  lib.  ix,  cap.  i.  He  evidently  copies  from  the
Ynca.

The  licentiate  Fernando  Montesinos  visited  Peru  twice,  a century
after  the  conquest,  and  travelled  for  fifteen  years  through  the  country,
collecting  materials  for  his  work.  His  Memorials  treat  of  the  ancient
history  of  Peru,  which  he  believed  to  be  the  Ophir  of  Solomon,  and  to  have
been  peopled  by  emigrations  from  Armenia.  He  gives  a catalogue
of  101  kings  of  Peru,  commencing  five  hundred  years  after  the  Deluge,
and  containing  their  ages,  the  exact  length  of  each  reign,  and  the  most
memorable  events.  He  says  that,  five  hundred  years  after  the  Deluge,
the  first  inhabitants  marched  towards  Cuzco,  led  by  four  brothers,
named  Ayar  Manco  Topa,  Ayar  Cachi  Topa,  .Ayar  Anca  Topa,  and
Ayar  Uchú  Topa,  who  were  accompanied  by  four  wives,  whose  names  he
also  gives.  The  youngest  brother  got  rid  of  two  of  the  others  by  closing
them  up  in  a cave,  and  the  third  fled.  Ayar  Uchú  Topa,  according  to
Montesinos,  reigned  for  sixty  years,  and  left  the  throne  to  his  son  Manco
Ccapac.

This  account  given  by  Montesinos  is  evidently  the  same  legend  as
Garcilasso  heard  from  the  Indians  to  the  eastward  of  Cuzco,  though
mutilated  by  time,  and  doubtless  garbled  by  Montesinos  himself,  who  is
a most  untrustworthy  authority.  His  catalogue  is  unworthy  of  atten-
tion.

Zarate  says  that  the  people  in  Peru  were  originally  ruled  by  numerous
Curacas,  without  any  superior,  until  a very  warlike  race,  called  Ingas,
came  forth  .from  the  part  of  the  Collas,  near  the  banks  of  lake  Titicaca.
They  had  their  heads  shaved,  and  their  ears  bored,  with  large  pieces  of
gold  in  the  ears,  which  continually  enlarged  them.  The  chief  of  these
people  was  called  Sapalla  Inga,  which  means  sole  lord,  though  some
would  have  it  that  they  called  him  luga  Viracocha,  the  meaning  of


74


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


Uchu,  and  the  fourth  Ayar  Sauca.  The  word  Ayar  has  no
meaning  in  the  general  language  of  Peru,  though  it  pro-
bably has  in  the  special  idiom  of  the  Yncas.  The  other
words  are  in  the  general  language.  Cachi  means  the  salt
that  we  eat,  and  Uchu  is  the  condiment  they  use  for  season-
ing their  dishes,  which  the  Spaniards  call  pepper  ;*  the
Indians  of  Peru  had  no  other  kind.  The  other  word  Sauca
signifies  pleasure,  satisfaction,  or  delight.  On  pressing
the  Indians  with  questions  respecting  these  three  brothers
and  sisters,  their  first  kings,  they  repeat  a thousand  foolish
tales  j and  finding  no  other  way  out  of  it,  they  invent  an
allegory.  By  the  salt,  which  is  one  of  the  names,  they  say
that  the  instruction  which  the  Ynca  gave  in  the  rational
life,  is  to  be  understood.  The  pepper  represents  the  delight
they  received  from  this  teaching ; and  the  word  for  pleasure
is  to  show  the  joy  and  satisfaction  in  which  they  afterwards
lived.  But  even  this  is  told  in  so  disjointed  and  confused  a
style,  that  it  is  gathered  from  them  more  by  conjecturing
what  they  want  to  say  than  by  following  their  discourse  and
the  order  of  their  words.  They  are  clear  upon  one  point,
which  is,  that  Manco  Ccapac  was  the  first  king,  and  that  all
the  others  were  descended  from  him.  Thus  all  three
legends  point  to  Manco  Ccapac  as  the  beginning  and  origin
of  the  Yncas ; and  of  the  other  three  brothers  no  further
mention  is  made.f  They  either  disappear  in  an  allegory,  or

which  is  “ foam  of  the  sea.”  These  Ingas  began  to  occupy  the  city  of
Cuzco,  and  from  thence  they  subjugated  the  surrounding  country.
Historia  del  Peru  por  Agustín  de  Zarate , Contador  de  mercedes  de  la
Majestad  Cesárea,  lib.  i,  cap.  x,  p.  13.  Barcia  Coll.

Cieza  de  Leon  promises  an  account  of  the  origin  of  the  Yncas  in
another  part  of  his  work,  which  has  never  seen  the  light.  (See  my
translation,  p.  136.)

* Ucliu  is  the  Quichua  for  the  Chile  pepper  which  the  Spaniards  call
aji  ( Capsicum  frutescens).

t Cieza  de  Leon,  a very  high  authority,  and  one  who  preceded
Garcilasso,  also  says  that  Manco  Ccapac  was  the  first  Ynca,  according  to
the  Indians.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


75


else  Manco  Ccapac  alone  appears.  And  it  is  certain  that  no
king  nor  any  man  of  royal  lineage  had  those  names  in  after
times,  nor  is  there  any  nation  that  claims  descent  from
them.  Some  curious  Spaniards,  hearing  these  legends,  have
tried  to  make  out  that  these  Indians  had  a knowledge  of  the
history  of  Noah  and  his  three  sons,  wife,  and  daughters-in-
law,  who  were  in  all  four  men  and  four  women  saved  by
God  from  the  flood.  They  would  have  it  believed  that  these
are  the  persons  in  the  Indian  legend, — that  for  the  opening
in  the  rock  at  Paucar-tampu  is  intended  the  window  of  the
ark  of  Noah,  by  these  Indians.  Others  say  that  by  the
powerful  man  who  appeared  in  Tiahuanacu  and  divided  the
earth  amongst  four  men,  is  meant  God,  who  ordered  Noah
and  his  three  sons  to  people  the  world.  Other  passages,
either  in  one  fable  or  the  other,  have  been  supposed  to
resemble  the  sacred  history.  I do  not  myself  entertain  such
baseless  views.  I merely  relate  the  historical  legends  that  I
heard  from  my  relations,  in  my  childhood,  and  each  one
may  be  treated  as  the  reader  pleases ; and  the  allegory  can
fit  in  as  it  best  may.  The  other  nations  of  Peru  invent  nu-
merous fables,  like  those  we  have  related  of  the  Yncas,
touching  their  origin,  and  that  of  their  first  parents.  They
differ  one  from  the  other,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  course  of
this  history.  An  Indian  is  not  looked  upon  as  honorable
unless  he  is  descended  from  a fountain,  river,  or  lake  (or  even
the  sea) ; or  from  a wild  animal,  such  as  a bear,  lion,  tiger,
eagle,  or  the  bird  they  call  cuntur ,*  or  some  other  bird  of
prey ; or  from  a mountain,  cave,  or  forest,  each  one  as  he
fancies,  for  the  better  praise  and  glory  of  his  name.  What
I have  said  will  suffice  for  an  account  of  the  legends  of  these
Indians.


* Condor.


76


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XIX.

PROTEST  OF  THE  AUTHOR  TOUCHING  THE  HISTORY.

Now  that  we  have  laid  the  foundation  stone  of  our  history
(although  it  be  fabulous),  being  the  origin  of  the  Yncas,
Kings  of  Peru,  it  will  be  well  to  pass  on  and  give  an  ac-
count of  the  conquest  and  subjugation  of  the  Indians,  ex-
tending the  narrative  somewhat,  which  was  given  me  by  my
uncle  the  Ynca,  together  with  a narrative  touching  many
other  Yncas  and  Indians,  natives  of  the  settlements  which
the  first  Ynca,  Manco  Ccapac,  ordered  to  be  formed,  and
included  in  his  empire.  I was  brought  up  amongst  these
Indians  and  held  intercourse  with  them  until  I was  twenty
yeai’s  of  age.  During  that  time  I acquired  a knowledge  of
all  the  matters  on  which  we  are  about  to  treat ; for  in  my
childhood  they  told  me  their  histories,  just  as  they  tell
stories  to  children.  Afterwards,  when  I had  reached  a more
advanced  age,  they  gave  me  a long  account  of  their  laws
and  government,  comparing  them  with  the  new  government
of  the  Spaniards.  They  enumerated  the  crimes  with  their
punishments  in  the  days  of  the  Yncas,  and  related  how  their
kings  governed  in  peace  and  in  war,  in  what  manner  they
treated  their  vassals,  and  how  they  were  served  by  them.
Besides  they  told  me,  as  to  their  own  son,  of  all  their  idola-
tries, rites,  ceremonies,  and  sacrifices,  of  their  festivals,  their
superstitions  and  abuses,  and  of  all  their  customs,  good  or
evil ; as  well  those  relating  to  their  sacrifices,  as  others.  In
short,  I may  declare  that  they  related  to  me  all  things  con-
nected with  their  commonwealth  ; and  if  I had  then  written
it  all  down,  this  history  would  be  more  copious.  Besides
what  the  Indians  told  me,  I had  the  opportunity  of  seeing
with  my  own  eyes,  a great  many  of  their  idolatrous  customs,


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


77


their  festivals  and  superstitions,  which  were
even  until  I was  twelve  or  thirteen  years
born  eight  years  after  the  Spaniards  conquer
and,  as  I have  before  said,  I was  brought  uj


twentieth  year,  so  that  I myself  saw  many  things  that  w§9


practised  by  the  Indians  in  the  time  of  their  idolatry,  and  ^
which  I shall  relate.

But  in  addition  to  what  my  relations  told  me,  and  to  what  I
myself  saw,  I have  heard  many  other  accounts  of  the  con-
quests and  acts  of  those  kings  ; for  as  soon  as  I resolved  to
write  this  history  I wrote  to  my  old  schoolfellows,  asking
them  each  to  help  me  by  sending  me  an  account  of  the  par-
ticular conquest  which  the  Yncas  achieved  in  the  provinces
of  their  mothers  ; for  each  province  has  its  history,  and  its
knots  with  their  recorded  annals  and  traditions,  and  thus
each  province  retains  a more  accurate  account  of  what  took
place  within  its  borders,  than  of  what  happened  beyond
them.  My  schoolfellows,  taking  what  I had  sought  from
them  in  earnest,  reported  my  intention  to  their  mothers  and
relations,  who,  on  hearing  that  an  Indian,  a child  of  their
own  land,  intended  to  write  a history  of  it,  brought  out  the
accounts  which  they  possessed,  from  the  archives,  and  sent
them  to  me.  It  was  thus  that  I obtained  the  records  of  the
deeds  and  conquests  of  each  Ynca,  which  is  the  same  as  the
Spanish  historians  heard,  except  that  this  is  longer,  as  we
shall  point  out  in  many  parts  of  it.  As  the  deeds  of  the
first  Ynca  form  the  commencement  and  foundation  of  the
history  we  are  about  to  write,  it  will  be  well  that  we  should
give  them  here,  at  least  the  most  important,  that  we  may  not
have  to  repeat  them  further  on,  in  the  lives  and  acts  of  each
of  the  Yncas  his  descendants.  For  all  these,  whether  they
were  kings  or  not,  loved  to  imitate  the  deeds  and  customs  of
the  first  Prince  Manco  Ccapac.  We  shall  now  carefully  re-
late the  more  authentic  acts,  leaving  out  many  others  as  dull
and  absurd  ; and  though  some  of  the  former  may  appear


78


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


fabulous,  it  seems  well  to  insert  them,  so  as  not  to  omit  the
foundations  on  which  the  Indians  build  the  whole  story  of
their  empire.  For  from  these  fabulous  beginnings  proceeded
the  greatness  which  is  now  actually  possessed  by  Spain,  and
it  will  be  well,  therefore,  to  give  the  best  possible  account
of  the  beginnings  and  endings  of  that  monarchy.  I protest
that  I shall  relate  freely  the  accounts  which  I imbibed  with
my  mother’s  milk,  and  those  which  I afterwards  received
from  my  relations ; and  I promise  that  I will  not  swerve
from  the  truth,  either  to  gloss  over  the  evil  or  to  exaggerate
the  good  that  was  done.  I know  well  that  heathenism  is  an
ocean  of  errors.  I will  not  write  down  new  things,  but  will
relate  the  same  events  as  the  Spanish  historians  have  written
concerning  that  land,  and  its  kings,  using  their  very  words
whenever  it  is  convenient,  not  inventing  fictions  in  praise  of
my  relations,  but  saying  the  same  things  as  have  been  re-
corded by  the  Spaniards.  My  history  will  thus  serve  as  a
commentary  to  amplify  and  explain  many  things  which  they
hastily  assumed  or  left  half  told,  not  having  obtained  the
full  account  of  them.  Many  other  things  will  be  added,
wdiich  are  wanting  in  the  histories,  and  others  will  be  passed
over  as  superfluous  or  false,  the  Spaniards  not  being  able  to
make  their  inquiries  with  reference  to  time,  ages,  or
divisions  of  the  provinces  and  nations ; or  not  properly  un-
derstanding their  informants,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  the
language.  A Spaniard  who  thinks  he  knows  the  language
best  is  generally  ignorant  of  nine  parts  of  it  out  of  ten,  from
the  number  of  meanings  to  each  word,  and  the  differences  of
pronunciation.  A single  word  often  has  very  different
meanings,  as  will  be  explained  further  on  in  the  case  of  cer-
tain words,  the  meanings  of  which  it  will  be  necessary  to
explaip.

Besides  this,  in  all  that  I shall  say  touching  this  empire,
which  was  destroyed  as  soon  as  it  was  known,  I shall  narrate
all  that  in  ancient  times  related  to  their  idolatry,  rites,  sacri-


ROYAI,  COMMENTARIES.


79


fices,  and  ceremonies,  their  government,  laws,  and  customs
in  peace  and  war,  without  comparing  these  things  with
other  similar  customs  met  with  both  in  divine  as  well  as
profane  history,  nor  with  the  government  of  our  own  times,
for  all  comparisons  are  odious.  He  who  may  read,  can
compare  at  his  pleasure,  and  he  will  find  many  things  re-
sembling those  of  ancient  times,  as  well  in  the  sacred  as  in
profane  writings,  and  among  the  fables  of  ancient  heathenry.
He  will  meet  with  many  laws  and  customs  which  resemble
those  of  our  times,  others  he  will  find  which  are  quite  dif-
ferent. I have  done  what  I was  able,  without  having  been
able  to  do  all  that  I desired.  I beseech  the  discreet  reader
to  accept  my  desire,  which  is  to  give  pleasure  and  satisfac-
tion; though  neither  the  energy  nor  the  ability  of  an  Indian,
born  amongst  the  Indians,  and  brought  up  amidst  horses
and  arms,  may  be  able  to  achieve  this  aim.


CHAPTER  XX.

THE  VILLAGES  WHICH  THE  FIRST  YNCA  ORDERED  TO
RE  FOUNDED.

Returning  to  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac,  we  have  to  say
that  after  founding  Cuzco  in  the  two  divisions  which  we
have  described  before,  he  ordered  many  other  towns  to  be
built.  To  the  eastward,  among  the  people  who  dwell  on
that  side,  so  far  as  the  river  Paucar-tampu,  he  founded
thirteen  villages  on  either  side  of  the  royal  road  of  Anti-
suyu.*  We  do  not  name  these,  to  avoid  prolixity;  but  all,
or  nearly  all,  are  inhabited  by  the  nation  called  Foques.  To
the  westward  of  the  city,  over  a space  eight  leagues  long
and  nine  or  ten  broad,  he  ordered  thirty  villages  to  be  built,

* The  eastern  division  of  the  empire.  The  Antis  are  a wild  tribe  of
Indians  in  the  forest  to  the  eastward  of  the  Andes.


80


FIRST  ROOK  OF  THE


which  are  scattered  on  either  side  of  the  royal  road  of  Cunti-
suyu.*  These  villages  were  inhabited  by  three  tribes  with
different  names,  which  were.  Masca,  Chillqui,  Papri.  To
the  north  of  the  city  he  formed  twenty  villages,  and  peopled
them  with  four  different  tribes,  namely,  Mayu,  Cancu,  Chin-
chapucyu,  and  Pimac-tampu.  The  rest  of  these  villages
are  in  the  beautiful  valley  of  Sacsahuana,  where  the  battle
and  capture  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  took  place.  The  most  dis-
tant of  these  villages  is  seven  leagues  from  the  city,  and  the
others  are  scattered  about  on  either  side  of  the  royal  road  of
Chincha-suyu.f

To  the  south  of  the  city  he  peopled  thirty-eight  or  forty
villages,  eighteen  of  the  Ayamarca  nation,  which  are  scat-
tered on  either  side  of  the  royal  road  of  Colla-suyu,J  for  a
distance  of  three  leagues,  beginning  from  the  borders  of  the
salt  pans,  which  are  a short  league  from  the  city.  It  was
there  that  the  lamentable  battle  between  Don  Diego  de  Al-
magro the  elder  and  Hernando  Pizarro  was  fought.  The
other  villages  are  inhabited  by  tribes  of  five  or  six  different
names — Quespicancha,  Muyna,  Urcos,  Quehuar,  Huaruc,
Gavina.  This  Caviña  nation  vainly  believed  that  their  fore-
fathers came  out  of  a lake,  to  which,  they  said,  the  souls  of
those  who  died,  returned,  and  thence  came  forth,  and  entered
the  bodies  of  those  who  were  born.  They  had  an  idol  of  a
frightful  form,  to  which  they  offered  very  barbarous  sacri-
fices. The  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  abolished  these  sacrifices  and
the  idols  ; and  ordered  them  to  worship  the  Sun,  like  his
other  vassals.

These  villages,  which  numbered  more  than  a hundred,
were  at  first  small,  the  largest  not  having  more  than  a
hundred  houses,  and  the  smallest  about  twenty-five  or  thirty.

* The  western  division  of  the  empire.

t The  northern  division  of  the  empire.

t The  southern  division  of  the  empire,  now  called  the  Collao,  in-
cluding lake  Titicaca.  It  is  inhabited  by  the  Aymara  nation.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


81


Afterwards,  owing  to  the  favours  and  privileges  granted  to
them  by  Manco  Ccapac,  as  w7e  shall  relate  presently,  they
increased  very  much,  and  many  of  them  reached  a popula-
tion of  a thousand  inhabitants,  the  smaller  ones  having  from
300  to  400.  Long  afterwards  the  great  tyrant  Atahualpa
destroyed  many  of  these  towns.  In  our  own  times,  not  more
than  twenty  years  ago,  these  towns,  which  were  founded  by
the  Yuca  Manco  Ccapac,  and  almost  all  the  others  in  Peru,
were  moved  from  the  original  sites  to  other  very  different  situ-
ations ; because  a Viceroy,*  as  we  shall  relate  in  its  place,
ordered  all  to  be  converted  into  a smaller  number  of  larger
towns,  uniting  five  or  six  into  one,  and  seven  or  eight  into
another.  Whence  resulted  much  inconvenience,  which,
being  hateful,  I will  refrain  from  describing.


CHAPTER  XXI.

THE  THINGS  WHICH  THE  YNCA  TAUGHT  TO  HIS  VASSALS.

The  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac,  in  establishing  his  people  in
villages,  while  he  taught  them  to  cultivate  the  land,  to  build
houses,  construct  channels  for  irrigation,  and  to  do  all  other
things  necessary  for  human  life  ; also  instructed  them  in  the
ways  of  polite  and  brotherly  companionship,  in  conformity
with  reason  and  the  law  of  nature,  persuading  them,  with
much  earnestness,  to  preserve  perpetual  peace  and  concord
between  themselves,  and  not  to  entertain  anger  or  passionate
feelings  towards  each  other,  but  to  do  to  one  another  as  they
would  others  should  do  to  them,  not  laying  down  one  law
for  themselves  and  another  for  their  neighbours.  He  parti-
cularly enjoined  them  to  respect  the  wives  and  daughters  of
others  ; because  they  were  formerly  more  vicious  in  respect
to  women,  than  in  any  other  thing  whatever.  He  imposed

* Don  Francisco  de  Toledo,  a.d.  1569-81.

F


FIRST  ROOK  OF  THE


82

the  penalty  of  death  on  adulterers,  homicides,  and  thieves.
He  ordered  no  man  to  have  more  than  one  wife,  and  that
marriages  should  take  place  between  relations,  so  as  to  pre-
vent confusion  in  families,  also  that  marriages  should  take
place  at  the  age  of  twenty  years  and  upwards,  that  the
married  couples  might  be  able  to  rule  their  households,  and
work  their  estates.  He  directed  the  tame  flocks,  which
wandered  over  the  country  without  a master,  to  be  collected,
so  that  all  people  might  be  clothed  with  their  wool,  by
reason  of  the  industry  and  skill  which  had  been  taught  to
the  women  by  the  Queen  Mama  Occllo  Huaco.  They  were
also  taught  to  make  the  shoes  which  are  now  used,  called
mata*  A Curaca,  which  is  the  same  as  a Cacique  in  the
language  of  Cuba  and  San  Domingo,  and  means  lord  of
vassals,  was  appointed  over  every  nation  that  was  subju-
gated. The  Curacas  were  chosen  from  among  those  who
had  done  most  in  conquering  the  Indians,  for  their  merit,  as
being  most  affable,  gentle,  and  pious,  and  most  zealous  for
the  public  good.  They  were  constituted  lords  over  the
others,  that  they  might  instruct  them  as  a father  does  his
children,  and  the  Indians  were  ordered  to  obey  them,  as
sons  obey  their  parents.

He  ordered  that  the  harvests  gathered  by  each  village,
should  be  preserved  in  common,  so  that  each  might  be  sup-
plied with  what  it  required,  until  arrangements  could  be
made  for  giving  an  allotment  of  land  to  each  Indian.  To-
gether with  these  precepts  and  laws,  he  taught  the  Indians
the  worship  of  his  idolatrous  religion.  The  Yncas  selected
a spot  for  building  a temple  where  they  might  sacrifice  to
the  Sun,  persuading  the  people  that  it  was  the  principal
. God  whom  they  should  worship,  and  to  whom  they  should

* A sandal  made  of  llama  hide,  and  secured  with  thongs  of  the  sarhte
material.  The  Indians  did  not  know  the  art  of  tanning  these  hides
■with  bark  ; but  they  dressed  them  in  large  holes,  and,  burying  them  in
rich  earth,  left  them  for  some  time.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


give  thanks  for  the  natural  benefits  which  he  conferred  on
them  by  his  light  and  heat.  For  they  saw  that  these  proper-
ties of  the  Sun  caused  their  crops  to  grow  and  their  flocks  to
multiply,  and  produced  the  other  mercies  which  they  received
every  day : and  they  were  instructed  that  their  worship  and
service  were  more  especially  due  to  the  Sun  and  Moon,  for
having  sent  their  children  to  take  them  from  the  wild  life  they
had  hitherto  led,  and  to  bring  them  to  a more  civilised  condi-
tion. The  Ynca  ordered  them  to  make  a house  of  women  for
the  Sun,  so  soon  as  they  should  have  a sufficient  number  of
females  of  the  blood  royal  to  replenish  the  house.  All  these
things  he  ordered  them  to  comply  with  and  attend  to  as  a
people  who  were  grateful  for  the  benefits  they  had  received;
and,  on  the  part  of  his  father  the  Sun,  he  promised  them
many  other  blessings  if  they  were  obedient,  telling  them
that  they  might  be  very  sure  that  he  would  not  say  these
things,  if  they  had  not  been  revealed  to  him  by  the  Sun,
who  had  ordered  him  to  repeat  them  to  the  Indians,  and
who  guided  him  as  a father,  in  all  he  said  and  did.  The
Indians,  with  the  simplicity  they  have  always  displayed
down  to  our  own  times,  believed  all  that  the  Ynca  said,  and
chiefly  what  he  said  touching  his  being  a child  of  the  Sun.
For  there  were  tribes  among  themselves  who  professed  to
have  similar  fabulous  descents,  as  we  shall  presently  relate,
though  they  did  not  comprehend  how  to  select  ancestors  as
well  as  the  Ynca,  but  adored  animals  and  other  low  and
earthy  objects.  The  Indians  of  those  and  later  times  com-
pared their  descent  with  that  of  Yncas,  and,  seeing  that  the
benefits  conferred  on  them  by  the  latter  testified  in  their
favour,  believed  most  firmly  that  the  first  Ynca  was  a child
of  the  Sun,  and  promised  to  comply  with  all  his  demands,
worshipping  him  as  such,  and  confessing  that  no  mortal  man
could  have  done  to  them  the  things'  that  he  had  done.
They,  therefore,  believed  that  he  was  a divine  man  come
down  from  heaven.


N4


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XXII.

THE  HONOURABLE  BADGES  WHICH  THE  YNCA  GAVE  TO  HIS

FOLLOWERS.

In  the  above  affairs,  and  in  other  similar  occupations,  the
Yuca  Manco  Ccapac  was  occupied  during  many  years,  con-
ferring benefits  on  his  people ; and,  having  experienced
their  fidelity  and  love,  and  the  respect  and  adoration  with
which  they  treated  him,  he  desired  to  favour  them  still
farther  by  ennobling  them  with  titles,  and  badges  such  as
he  wore  on  his  own  head,  and  this  was  after  he  had  per-
suaded them  that  he  was  a child  of  the  Sun.  The  Ynca
Manco  Ccapac,  and  afterwards  his  descendants,  in  imitation
of  him,  were  shorn,  and  only  wore  a tress  of  hair  one  finger
in  width.  They  were  shaven  with  stone  razors,  scraping
the  hair  off,  and  only  leaving  the  above-mentioned  tress.
They  used  knives  of  stone,  because  they  had  not  invented
scissors,  shaving  themselves  with  great  trouble,  as  any  one
may  imagine.  When  they  afterwards  experienced  the  faci-
lity and  ease  afforded  by  the  use  of  scissprs,  one  of  the  Yncas
said  to  an  old  schoolfellow  of  mine : — “ If  the  Spaniards,
your  fathers,  had  done  nothing  more  than  bring  us  scissors,
looking-glasses,  and  combs,  we  would  have  given  all  the
gold  and  silver  there  is  in  our  land,  for  them.”  Besides
having  their  heads  shaved,  they  bored  their  ears,  just  as
women  are  usually  bored  for  ear-rings ; except  that  they  in-
creased the  size  of  the  hole  artificially  (as  I shall  more  fully
relate  in  the  proper  place)  to  a wonderful  greatness,  such  as
would  be  incredible  to  those  who  have  not  seen  it,  for  it
would  seem  impossible  that  so  small  a quantity  of  flesh  as
there  is  under  the  ear,  could  be  so  stretched  as  to  be  able  to
surround  a hole  of  the  size  and  shape  of  the  mouth  of  a pitcher.


HOYA],  COMMENTARI liS.


85


The  ornaments  they  put  in  the  holes  were  like  stoppers,
and  if  the  lobes  were  broken  the  flesh  would  hang  down  a
quarter  of  a vara  in  length,  and  half  a finger  in  thickness.
The  Spaniards  called  the  Indians  Orejones  (large-eared
men)  because  they  had  this  custom.

The  Yucas  wore,  as  a head-dress,  a fringe  which  they
called  llautu.  It  was  of  many  colours,  about  a finger  in
width,  and  a little  less  in  thickness.  They  twisted  this  fringe
three  or  four  times  round  the  head,  and  let  it  hang  after  the
manner  of  a garland.

These  three  fashions,  the  llautu,  the  shaving,  and  the
boring  of  the  ears  were  the  principal  ones  that  were  intro-
duced by  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac.  There  were  others
which  we  shall  describe  presently,  and  which  were  peculiar
to  the  sovereign,  no  one  else  being  permitted  to  use  them.
The  first  privilege  that  the  Ynca  granted  to  his  vassals  was
to  order  them  to  imitate  him  in  wearing  a fringe  ; only  it
was  not  to  be  of  many  colours  like  the  one  worn  by  the
Ynca,  but  of  one  colour  only,  and  that  colour  was  black.

After  some  time  another  fashion  was  granted  to  the  people,
and  they  were  ordered  to  go  shaven,  but  in  a fashion  differ-
ing one  from  another,  and  all  from  the  Ynca,  that  there
might  be  no  confusion  in  the  distinctions  between  nations
and  provinces,  and  that  they  might  not  have  too  near  a re-
semblance to  the  Ynca.  Thus  one  tribe  was  ordered  to
wear  the  tail  plait  like  a cap  for  the  ears ; that  is,  with  the
forehead  and  temples  bare,  and  the  plaits  reaching  down  so
as  to  cover  the  ears  on  either  side.  Others  were  ordered  to
cut  the  tail  plait  so  as  only  to  reach  half  way  down  the
ears,  and  others  still  shorter.  But  none  were  allowed  to
wear  the  hair  so  short  as  that  of  the  Ynca.  It  is  also  to  be
observed  that  all  these  Indians,  and  especially  the  Yncas,  took
care  not  to  let  the  hair  grow,  but  always  kept  it  at  a certain
length,  that  it  might  not  appear  after  one  fashion  on  one
day,  and  after  another  on  another.  Thus  regulated  as  to


86


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


the  fashion  and  differences  of  the  head-dress,  each  nation
kept  to  its  own,  which  was  decreed  and  ordained  by  the
hand  of  the  Ynca.*


CHAPTER  XXIII.

OF  OTHER  FASHIONS,  AND  OF  THE  NAME  OF  ANCA.

After  several  months  and  years  had  elapsed,  the  Ynca
granted  his  people  another  privilege,  more  important  than
those  already  mentioned,  which  was  that  of  boring  their
ears.  This  privilege,  however,  was  limited  with  reference
to  the  size  of  the  hole,  which  was  not  to  be  so  much  as  half
that  of  the  Ynca,  and  each  tribe  and  province  wore  a dif-
ferent stopper  in  the  ear  hole.  To  some  he  granted  the
privilege  of  wearing  a wisp  of  straw  in  their  ears,  the  size
of  a little  finger,  and  these  were  of  the  nations  called  Mayu
and  Cancu.  Others  were  to  have  a tuft  of  white  wool,
which  was  to  come  out  on  each  side  as  far  as  the  length  of
the  first  joint  of  a man’s  thumb,  and  these  were  of  the  na-
tion called  Póques.  The  nations  called  Muyna  and  Huarac
Chillqui  were  ordered  to  wear  ear  ornaments  made  of  com-
mon reeds,  called  by  the  Indians  tutura.  The  nation  of
Rimac-tampu  and  its  neighbours  wore  their  ear  ornament
made  of  the  pole  which  is  called  maguey  in  the  Windward
Islands,  and  chuchan f in  the  general  language  of  Peru.
When  the  bark  is  removed,  the  pith  is  very  soft  and  light.
The  three  tribes  called  Urcos,  Yucay,  and  Tampu,  all  living
in  the  valley  of  the  river  Yucay,  + were  ordered,  as  a parti-
cular favour  and  honour,  to  wear  a larger  hole  in  their  ears
than  any  of  the  other  nations.  But,  that  it  might  not  reach

* See  more  on  the  same  subject  further  on,  lib.  vii,  cap.  9.

+ The  Agave  Americana.

% Or  Vilca-inayu.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


ÍS7

to  half  the  size  of  the  Ynca’s  hole,  he  gave  them  a measure
of  the  size  of  his  hole,  as  he  had  done  to  all  the  other  tribes.
He  also  ordered  their  stoppers  to  be  made  of  the  reed
tutura,  that  they  might  more  resemble  those  of  the  Ynca.
They  called  the  ornaments  ear  stoppers,  and  not  ear  drops,
because  they  did  not  hang  from  the  ears,  but  were  closed  in
by  the  sides  of  the  hole,  like  a stopper  in  the  mouth  of
a jar.

Besides  the  signs  which  were  intended  to  prevent  confu-
sion between  one  tribe  and  another,  the  Ynca  ordered  other
differences  in  the  fashions  of  his  vassals,  which  they  said
were  intended  to  show  the  degree  of  favour  and  trust  in
which  they  were  held,  according  as  they  resembled  the
badges  of  the  Ynca.  But  he  did  not  like  one  vassal  more
than  another  from  any  caprice,  but  in  conformity  with  rea-
son and  justice.  Those  who  most  readily  followed  his  pre-
cepts, and  who  had  worked  most  in  the  subjugation  of  the
other  Indians,  were  allowed  to  imitate  the  YYica  most  closely
in  their  badges,  and  received  more  favours  than  the  others.
H e gave  them  to  understand  that  all  he  did  with  regard  to
them  was  by  an  order  and  revelation  of  his  father  the  Sun.
And  the  Indians,  believing  this,  were  well  satisfied  with
every  thing  that  was  ordered  by  the  Ynca,  and  with  any
manner  in  which  he  might  treat  them ; for,  besides  believ-
ing that  his  orders  were  revelations  of  the  Sun,  they  saw,  by
experience,  the  benefits  that  were  derived  from  obedience
to  them.

Finally,  when  the  Ynca  grew  old,  he  ordered  his  prin-
cipal vassals  to  assemble  in  the  city  of  Cuzco,  and  said  to
them,  in  a solemn  discourse,  that  he  should  soon  return  to
heaven  to  rest  with  his  father  the  Sun,  who  had  called  him
(the  same  words  were  always  used  by  the  kings,  his  de-
scendants, when  they  felt  the  approach  of  death),  and  that
he  must  leave  them.  As  he  had  to  part  with  them,  he  con-
tinued, he  desired  to  crown  his  favours  to  them  by  allowing


88


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


them  to  use  his  royal  name  ; and  he  ordered  that  they  and
their  descendants  should  live  honoured  and  esteemed  by  the
whole  world.  Thus,  that  they  might  know  the  paternal
love  with  which  he  regarded  them,  he  decreed  that  they,
and  their  descendants  for  ever,  should  be  called  Yncas,
without  any  difference  or  distinction  between  them,  in  the
same  way  as  they  had  enjoyed  his  other  past  favours  and
honours.  He  said  that  they  should  enjoy  the  distinction  of
this  name,  as  being  his  first  vassals,  whom  he  loved  as  sons,
and  therefore  desired  to  grant  them  his  insignia,  and  royal
name,  and  to  call  them  sons.  He  trusted  that,  as  sons,  they
would  serve  the  present  king,  and  those  who  succeeded
him,  in  the  conquest  and  subjugation  of  other  Indians,  for
the  increase  of  the  empire.  He  told  them  to  preserve  all  he
had  said  in  their  hearts  and  memories,  like  loyal  vassals  ;
but  he  did  not  will  that  their  wives  and  daughters  should  be
called  Pallas,  like  those  of  the  blood  royal,  because  women,
not  being  capable  of  bearing  arms  to  serve  in  war  like  men,
ought  not  to  bear  the  royal  names.

From  these  Yncas,  to  whom  the  privilege  of  using  the
name  was  granted,  are  descended  those  who  at  present  exist
in  Peru  who  are  called  Yncas,  and  whose  women  are  called
Pallas  and  Ccoyas.

But  there  are  very  few  Yncas  of  the  blood  royal  now  sur-
viving, and,  owing  to  their  poverty,  only  one  here  and  there
is  known,  for  most  of  them  were  destroyed  by  the  tyranny
and  cruelty  of  Atahualpa.  Of  the  few  who  escaped  from  his
cruelty,  the  chief  and  most  important  members  of  the  family
were  killed  in  other  calamities,  as  we  shall  relate  further  on,
in  the  proper  place.  Of  the  badges  which  the  Ynca  Manco
Ccapac  wore  as  a head-dress,  he  only  reserved  one  especiallv
for  himself,  and  for  the  kings  his  descendants.  This  was  a
red  fringe,  in  the  fashion  of  a border,  which  he  wore  across
his  forehead  from  one  temple  to  the  other.  The  prince,  who
was  heir  apparent,  wore  a yellow  fringe,  which  was  smaller


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


89


than  that  of  his  father.  Of  the  ceremonies  which  were  ob-
served in  conferring  these  badges,  when  the  prince  was
sworn,  and  of  the  other  insignia  which  the  Kings  Yncas
afterwards  adopted,  we  shall  speak  in  the  proper  place,
when  we  treat  of  the  arms  of  the  Yncas.

The  Indians  esteemed  very  highly  the  favour  which  was
shown  them  by  conferring  these  badges  used  also  by  the
royal  person ; and  although  they  had  the  differences  we
have  described,  they  accepted  them  with  great  rejoicing,
because  the  Ynca  made  them  believe  that  they  were  granted
by  order  of  the  Sun,  according  to  the  merits  of  each  tribe  ;
and  for  this  reason  they  valued  them  exceedingly.  When
they  learnt  the  greatness  of  the  final  favour,  which  was  the
privilege  to  use  the  name  of  Ynca,  and  that  this  was  not
only  granted  to  them  but  also  to  their  descendants,  they
were  so  astonished  at  the  liberality  and  munificence  of  their
prince  that  they  knew  not  how  to  show  their  gratitude.
They  said  amongst  themselves  that  the  Ynca,  not  content
with  having  brought  them  from  the  condition  of  wild  beasts
to  that  of  rational  beings  ; nor  with  having  conferred  on
them  so  many  blessings  in  teaching  them  the  things  neces-
sary for  human  life,  the  laws  of  natural  morality,  and  the
knowledge  of  their  God  the  Sun  ; had  deigned  to  grant
them  his  own  royal  badges.  Finally,  in  place  of  imposing
tribute,  he  had  conferred  on  them  the  majesty  of  his  name,
which  was  so  much  respected  as  to  be  looked  upon  by  them
as  sacred  and  divine,  insomuch  that  no  man  might  use  it
except  with  the  utmost  veneration  as  the  name  of  the  king.
Yet  now  he  had  made  it  so  common  as  that  they  might  all
make  use  of  it  freely  ; being  his  adopted  sons,  and  vassals  of
the  child  of  the  Sun.


90


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XXIV.

NAMES  BY  WHICH  THE  INDIANS  KNEW  THEIR  KING.

The  Indians,  well  considering  the  greatness  of  the  love
and  mercy  with  which  the  Ynca  had  treated  them,  praised
and  blessed  him  exceedingly,  seeking  titles  and  names  for
their  prince  which  should  express  the  grandeur  of  his  soul,
and  indicate  his  heroic  virtues ; and,  among  those  which
they  invented,  I will  mention  two.  The  first  was  Ccapac,
which  signifies  rich,  not  in  estates  nor  in  the  gifts  of  fortune
as  the  Indians  generally  use  the  word,  but  rich  in  the  gifts
of  the  mind,  in  meekness,  piety,  clemency,  liberality,  justice,
magnanimity,  and  the  desire  to  do  good  to  the  poor.  As
this  Ynca  had  done  so  much  good  to  his  vassals,  they  said
that  he  might  worthily  be  called  Ccapac.  The  word  also
means  rich  and  powerful  in  war.  The  other  name  was
Huaccba-ctiyac,  which  means  a lover  and  benefactor  of  the
poor.  Thus  the  first  name  signified  the  greatness  of  his
mind,  and  the  second  had  reference  to  the  benefits  he  had
conferred  on  his  people.  From  that  time  the  prince  was
called  Manco  Ccapac,  having  previously  been  known  as
Manco  Ynca.  Manco  is  a proper  name,  but  we  know  not
what  signification  it  had  in  the  general  language  of  Peru,
though  in  the  special  language  in  which  the  Yncas  talked  to
each  other  (but  which,  as  I am  informed  in  letters  from
Peru,  is  now  entirely  lost)  it  must  have  had  a meaning,  for
generally  the  names  of  the  kings  had  some  signification,  as
we  shall  explain  when  we  give  the  other  names.  The  name
Ynca,  when  applied  to  the  prince,  signified  lord,  king,  or
emperor ; and  when  used  by  others  it  meant  lord,  but  to
explain  its  actual  meaning,  it  may  be  said  to  indicate  a
person  of  the  blood  royal.  The  Curacas,  great  lords  as  they


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


91


were,  did  not  receive  the  name  of  Ynca.  Palla  means  a
woman  of  the  blood  royal.  To  distinguish  the  sovereign
from  the  rest  of  the  Yncas,  they  called  him  Sapa*  Ynca,
which  means  sole  lord,  just  as  the  subjects  of  the  Turk  call
him  Gran  Señor.  Further  on,  we  shall  give  all  the  royal
names,  male  and  female,  for  the  information  of  the  curious,
who  may  desire  to  know  them.  The  Indians  also  called
their  first  king  and  his  descendants  Yutip  churi ,f  which  is
as  much  as  to  say  “ Child  of  the  Sun  but  this  name  was
given  more  out  of  simplicity,  as  they  ignorantly  believed  in
it,  than  from  a desire  to  deceive.


CHAPTER  XXV.

OF  THE  WILL  AND  DEATH  OF  THE  YNCA  MANCO  CCAPAC.

Manco  Ccapac  reigned  many  years,  but  it  is  not  certainly
known  how  many.  Some  say  that  he  reigned  more  than
thirty  years,  others  more  than  forty  ; always  occupied  in
the  works  we  have  described.  When  he  felt  the  approach
of  death,  he  called  together  his  sons,  who  were  numerous,
as  well  by  his  wife  the  Queen  Mama  Occllo  Huaco,  as  by  the
concubines  he  had  taken,  saying  that  it  was  well  that  there
should  be  many  children  of  the  Sun.  He  also  called  to-
gether his  principal  vassals,  and,  instead  of  a will,  he  deli-
vered to  them  a long  discourse,  commending  to  the  prince
his  heir,  and  the  rest  of  his  sons,  the  duty  of  love  and  kind-
ness towards  his  vassals  ; and  to  his  vassals  he  ordered  the
observation  of  fidelity  and  loyalty  to  their  king,  and  of  obe-
dience to  the  laws  that  he  had  made,  declaring  that  they

* Sapa  (Mossi  spells  it  Zapa)  means  “ only  one.”  It  is  added  to  nouns
as  a particle,  to  denote  quantity  or  size,  as  Uma-sapa  (big  head),
Yuyay-sapa  (very  thoughtful),
t Yntip  is  the  genitive  of  Ynti,  the  sun.  Churi,  a son.


9:2


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


were  ordained  by  inspiration  from  his  father  the  Sun.  He
then  dismissed  his  vassals,  while  he  delivered  another  dis-
course to  his  sons  in  private,  which  was  the  last  he  ever
made.  He  ordered  them  always  to  keep  in  mind  that  they
were  children  of  the  Sun,  and  to  adore  and  respect  him  as
their  God  and  father.  He  told  them  that,  in  imitation  of
him,  they  should  see  that  his  laws  and  commands  were
obeyed,  and  that  they  should  be  the  first  to  observe  them,
so  as  to  set  an  example  to  their  vassals.  He  told  them  to  be
gentle  and  pious,  and  to  subjugate  the  Indians  by  kindness
rather  than  by  force,  for  that  those  who  were  conquered  by
force  would  never  be  good  vassals.  He  also  desired  them
to  rule  with  justice,  and  to  suffer  no  wrongs  to  exist.  Fi-
nally, he  besought  them,  in  their  virtues,  to  show  them-
selves to  be  children  of  the  Sun,  certifying  by  their  acts
what  they  said  in  words,  that  the  Indians  might  believe
them,  for,  if  they  said  one  thing  and  did  another,  it  would
cause  scandal.  He  directed  that  all  he  had  said  to  them
might  be  delivered  to  their  sons  and  descendants  from
generation  to  generation,  that  they  might  observe  and  com-
ply with  what  his  father  the  Sun  had  ordered,  affirming  that
all  were  his  words,  and  that  he  thus  left  them  as  a last  will
and  testament.  He  said  that  the  Sun  had  called  him,  and
that  he  was  going  to  rest  with  his  father,  leaving  them  in
peace,  and  that  he  would  watch  over  and  succour  them  in
all  their  necessities,  from  heaven.  Saying  these  and  many
other  similar  things,  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  died.  He
left,  as  the  prince  his  heir,*  his  eldest  son  by  the  Ccoya
Mama  Occllo  Huaco,  his  wife  and  sister,  named  Sinchi
Roca.f  Besides  the  Prince,  these  sovereigns  left  other  sons
and  daughters,  who  married  each  other  to  preserve  the
purity  of  their  blood,  which  was  fabulously  said  to  be  de-

* The  heir-apparent  was  called  Yncap  sapay  churin  (sole  or  chief
son  of  the  Ynca).

t Sinchi,  strong.  Roca  has  no  special  meaning  in  Quichua.


ROYA!/  COMMENTARIES.


93


rived  from  the  Sun.  In  truth,  they  held  in  the  highest
veneration  a pure  descent  from  those  sovereigns  whom  they
looked  upon  as  divine,  and  all  others  human ; even  the
great  lords  over  vassals,  who  were  called  Curacas.

The  Ynca  Sinchi  Roca  married  Mama  Occllo,  or  Mama
Cora  (as  others  have  it)  his  eldest  sister,  in  imitation  of  his
father,  and  of  his  grandfather  the  Sun  who  married  the
Moon  ; for,  in  the  times  of  idolatry,  they  believed  that  the
Moon  was  the  sister  and  wife  of  the  Sun.  They  married  in
this  way  to  preserve  the  purity  of  their  blood,  and  that  the
heir  might  inherit  the  kingdom  as  much  from  his  mother  as
from  his  father,  and  also  for  other  reasons  which  we  shall
explain  more  fully,  further  on.  The  other  legitimate  and
illegitimate  sons  also  married  their  sisters,  to  preserve  and
increase  the  descendants  of  the  Yncas.  They  said  that  the
Sun  had  ordered  this  marriage  between  brothers  and  sisters,
and  that  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  had  delivered  the  order,
that  the  blood  might  be  preserved  pure ; but  afterwards  no
one  might  marry  his  sister  except  only  the  heir  of  the  Ynca.
They  observed  this  rule,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  course  of  the
history.

The  vassals  mourned  for  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  with
great  sorrow,  and  the  obsequies  and  mourning  lasted  for
many  months.  They  embalmed  his  body  so  as  to  keep  it
with  them,  and  not  to  lose  sight  of  it.  They  worshipped  it
as  God,  the  child  of  the  Sun,  and  offered  up  to  it  many
sacrifices  of  sheep,  lambs,  wild  rabbits,  birds,  maize,  and
pulses ; confessing  it  to  be  lord  of  all  things  here  below.

I am  inclined  to  conjecture,  from  what  I saw  of  the  con-
dition and  nature  of  these  people,  that  the  origin  of  this
prince  Manco  Ynca,  who  was  named  by  his  vassals  Manco
Ccapac,  by  reason  of  his  great  qualities,  was  as  follows.  He
may  have  been  some  Indian  of  good  understanding,  pru-
dence, and  judgment,  who  appreciated  the  great  simplicity
of  those  nations,  and  saw  the  necessity  they  had  for  instruc-


94


FIRST  BOOK  OF  TFT F,


tion  and  teaching  in  natural  life.  He  may  have  invented  a
fable  with  sagacity  and  astuteness,  that  he  might  be  re-
spected ; saying  that  he  and  his  wife  were  children  of  the
Sun,  who  had  come  from  Heaven,  and  that  their  Father  had
sent  them  to  teach  and  do  good  to  the  people.  In  order  to
ensure  belief,  he  probably  adopted  a peculiar  dress  and
fashion,  particularly  the  gfeat  ears  affected  by  the  Yncas,
which  would  certainly  be  incredible  to  any  one  who  had  not
seen  them,  as  I have.  A person  now  seeing  them  (if  they
are  still  used)  would  be  astonished  at  their  being  so  enlarged.
The  belief  in  the  fable  of  the  Ynca’s  origin  would  be  con-
firmed by  the  benefits  and  privileges  he  conferred  on  the
Indians,  until  they  at  last  firmly  believed  that  he  was  the
Child  of  the  Sun,  come  from  Heaven.*  Then  they  may
have  begun  to  worship  him,  as  the  ancient  gentiles,  who  were
less  barbarous,  worshipped  other  men  who  had  done  them
similar  services.  For  it  is  so,  that  these  Indians  are  never  so
much  struck  by  anything  as  at  beholding  that  their  masters
act  in  conformity  with  their  teaching  ; and  shape  their  lives
according  to  their  doctrine.  They  then  require  no  argu-
ment to  convince  them  that  they  should  obey.  I have  said
this  because  neither  the  Yncas  of  the  blood  royal  nor  the
common  people  know  of  any  other  origin  for  their  kings
than  what  is  given  in  their  fabulous  histories,  which  agree
with  each  other,  and  all  concur  in  making  Manco  Ccapac
the  first  Ynca.

* All  this  is  sensible  enough,  and  gives  no  justification  to  the  asser-
tions of  numerous  modern  writers  that  our  author  was  partial  and
credulous  in  all  matters  relating  to  his  maternal  ancestors.


ROYAL  CO  M M K N T A R 1 E S .


95


CHAPTER  XXVI.

OF  THE  ROYAL  NAMES  AND  THEIR  MEANINGS.

It  will  be  well  if  we  now  give  a brief  account  of  the  sig-
nification of  tbe  royal  titles,  as  well  of  the  men  as  of  the
women,  and  to  whom  they  were  applied,  and  how  used.  It
will  be  seen  how  the  Yncas  applied  their  names  and  sur-
names, which  is  a matter  worthy  of  remark.

Beginning  with  tbe  name  Ynca,  it  must  be  understood
that  when  applied  to  the  royal  person  it  meant  king  or
emperor;  but  when  given  to  those  of  his  lineage  it  signified
a person  of  the  blood  royal,  and  the  name  was  applied
to  all  who  were  descendants  in  the  male,  but  not  in
the  female  line.  They  called  their  kings  Sapa  Ynca,
which  means  sole  king  or  sole  emperor  or  sole  lord ; for
Sapa  means  sole.  They  do  not  give  this  title  to  any
other  member  of  the  royal  family,  not  even  to  the  heir,
until  he  has  inherited ; for  the  king  being  alone,  they
cannot  give  his  title  to  another,  which  would  be  to  make
many  kings.  They  also  called  him  Huaccha-cuyac , which
means  a lover  and  benefactor  of  the  poor;  and  this  title  was
also  given  exclusively  to  the  kings,  for  the  special  care
which  all  of  them,  from  the  first  to  the  last,  took  of  the  wel-
fare of  their  people.  I have  already  given  the  meaning  of
the  word  Ccapac,  which  is  rich  and  magnanimous,  and  of
royal  dignity.  They  gave  this  title  to  the  king  only  and  to
no  other,  because  he  was  their  chief  benefactor.  They  also
called  him  Yutip-churi,  which  means  Son  of  the  Sun,  and
this  title  was  also  applied  to  all  the  males  of  the  blood  royal,
because,  according  to  the  fable,  they  were  descended  from
the  Sun,  but  it  was  not  given  to  the  females.  The  sons  of
the  kings  and  all  their  relations  in  the  male  line  were  called


FIRST  BOOK  OF  THE


96


Auqui,  which  is  equivalent  to  Infante , the  word  used  in
Spain  for  the  king’s  younger  sons.  They  preserved  this
title  until  they  were  married,  and  after  marriage  they  were
called  Ynca.*  These  were  the  names  and  titles  that  were
applied  to  the  king  and  to  the  men  of  the  blood  royal,  be-
sides others  which  we  shall  mention  farther  on,  and  which,
being  proper  names,  were  continued  as  the  surnames  of  their
descendants.

As  to  the  names  and  titles  of  the  women  of  the  blood
royal,  the  queen,  being  the  legitimate  wife  of  the  king,  was
called  Ccoya,  which  means  queen  or  empress.  They  also
gave  her  another  title,  which  was  Mamanchic,f  meaning
“our  mother”,  because,  in  imitation  of  her  husband,  she
assumed  the  office  of  a mother  to  all  her  relations  and  vas-
sals. Her  daughters  were  called  Ccoya  from  the  relation-
ship to  their  mother,  and  not  as  being  their  own  proper
name,  for  this  title  of  Ccoya  belonged  only  to  the  queen.
The  concubines  of  the  king,  being  his  relations,  and  all
other  women  of  the  blood  royal,  were  called  Palla.  The
other  concubines  of  the  king,  not  being  of  bis  blood,  were
known  as  Mana-cuna, % which  is  as  much  as  to  say — matrons
or  women  who  have  to  perform  the  office  of  mothers.  The
Infantas,  daughters  of  the  king,  and  all  his  female  relations
of  the  blood  royal,  were  called  mista , which  means  virgin
of  the  blood  royal.  But  there  was  this  difference.  The
legitimate  daughters  of  the  blood  royal  were  simply  called
mista,  which  was  sufficient  to  intimate  that  they  were  legiti-
mate. The  illegitimate  daughters  had  the  name  of  the  pro-
vince to  which  thoir  mothers  belonged  added  to  their  titles,
as  Colla-ñusta,  Huanca  ñusta,  Ynca-ñusta,  Quitu-ñusta,
and  so  on  with  the  other  provinces.  They  retained  the

* A married  prince  of  the  blood  royal  was  also  called  Atauchi.

t Mama , a mother ; and  chic  or  nchic,  a form  of  the  inclusive  plural
(first  person)  of  the  possessive  pronoun.

% Mama , mother ; and  cuna,  the  ordinary  plural  particle.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


97


title  of  ñusta  until  they  were  married,  when  they  were
called  Palla.

These  names  and  titles  were  given  to  the  descendants  of
the  blood  royal  in  the  male  line,  and,  if  this  was  wanting,
although  the  mother  might  be  a relation  of  the  king  (for
the  kings  often  gave  their  illegitimate  relations  as  wives  to
the  great  lords)  the  sons  and  daughters  did  not  take  the
titles  of  the  blood  royal,  and  were  not  called  either  Ynca  or
Falla,  but  merely  by  the  names  of  their  fathers.  For  the
Yncas  did  not  value  a descent  by  the  female  line,  lest  it
should  degrade  their  royal  blood  from  its  purity.  Even  the
male  descent  lost  much  of  its  royal  character  from  mixing
with  the  blood  of  strange  wives  not  being  of  the  same  lineage,
and  how  much  more  would  the  female  descent  become  cor-
rupt. Comparing  the  names  one  with  another,  we  see  that
the  title  Ccoya,  which  is  queen,  corresponds  with  Sajm
Ynca,  which  is  sole  lord.  The  word  Mamanchic,  meaning
“ our  mother”,  answers  to  Huaccha-cuyac,  which  is  lover
and  benefactor  of  the  poor.  The  title  ñusta  or  Infanta  cor-
responds with  Auqui,  and  the  title  Palla,  or  married  woman
of  the  blood  royal,  with  the  title  Ynca*  These  were  the
royal  titles  which  I heard  the  Yncas  use  among  each  other
and  to  the  Pallas  ; for  my  chief  intercourse,  in  my  child-
hood, was  with  them.  The  Curacas,  how  great  lords  soever,
could  not  use  these  titles,  nor  their  wives  and  children ; for
they  appertained  exclusively  to  the  blood  royal,  in  the  male
line  Howbeit  Don  Alonzo  de  Ercilla  y Zuñiga,  in  the  ex-
planation he  gives  of  Indian  words,  in  the  elegant  verses
which  he  wrote,  declares  that  the  word  Palla  means  a lady
with  many  vassals  and  great  estates. f He  says  this  because,

* Or  Alaachi,  married  man  of  the  blood  royal.

t At  the  beginning  of  the  Araucana,  the  epic  poem  written  by  Don
Alonzo  de  Ercilla,  there  is  a glossary  headed  “ Declaration  of  some
doubts  which  may  offer  themselves  in  this  work.”  In  this  glossary,
under  the  head  Palla , there  is  the  following  explanation — “ Palla  is  the


Cr


98


FIRST  BOOK  OF  ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


when  he  passed  that  way,  the  names  of  Ynca  and  Palla  had
already  been  adopted  improperly  by  many  persons ; for
illustrious  and  heroic  titles  are  sought  after  by  every  body,
however  base  and  low  born  they  may  be  ; and  thus,  there
being  no  one  to  prevent  it,  the  highest  titles  are  usurped.
This  is  what  has  happened  in  mj  country.

same  as  we  call  lady ; but  amongst  them  this  name  is  only  used  for
ladies  of  noble  lineage,  and  possessing  many  vassals  and  great  estates.”
La  Araucana , parte  i.  Su  Autor  Don  Alonso  de  Er cilla  y Zuniga ,
Madrid , por  Don  Antonio  de  Sancha,  año  de  1776,  p.  1.


END  OF  THE  FIRST  BOOK.


SECOND  BOOK

OF  THE


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES  OF  THE  YNCAS,

IN  WHICH  AN  ACCOUNT  IS  GIVEN  OF  THE  IDOLATRY  OF  THE  YNCAS,
AND  HOW  THEY  SOUGHT  OUR  TRUE  GOD;  HOW  THEY  HELD  THE
DOCTRINE  OF  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL,  AND  THE
UNIVERSAL  RESURRECTION.  IT  DESCRIBES  THEIR  SACRI-
FICES AND  CEREMONIES,  AND  HOW,  FOR  THE  GOVERN-
MENT OF  THEIR  PEOPLE,  THEY  WERE  REGISTERED
IN  DECURIAS;  OF  THE  OFFICE  OF  DECURION.

THE  LIFE  AND  CONQUESTS  OF  SINCHI  ROCA,  THE  SECOND  KING,

AND  OF  LLOQUE  YUPANQUI,  THE  THIRD  KING;  AND  OF  THE
SCIENCES  ATTAINED  TO  BY  THE  YNCAS.

THE  BOOK  CONTAINS  TWENTY-EIGHT  CHAPTERS.


G


O


THE  SECOND  BOOK.


CHAPTER  I.

OF  THE  IDOLATRY  OF  THE  SECOND  AGE,  AND  OF  ITS  ORIGIN.

That  which  we  call  the  second  age,  and  the  idolatry  that
was  practised  in  it,  had  its  origin  with  Manco  Ccapac,  the
Ynca  who  first  established  the  empire  of  the  Yncas,  kings
of  Peru,  who  reigned  for  a period  of  four  hundred  years,
though  the  Father  Bias  Valera  says  that  it  was  for  more  than
five  hundred  and  near  six  hundred  years.  We  have  already
spoken  of  Manco  Ccapac,  relating  who  he  was  and  whence
he  came,  how  he  founded  his  empire  and  subjugated  the
Indians  who  were  his  first  vassals,  teaching  them  to  sow,  and
rear  flocks,  to  build  houses,  and  to  perform  the  other  acts
necessary  to  sustain  the  natural  life.  We  recounted  how
his  sister  and  wife,  the  Queen  Mama  Ocllo  Huaco,  taught
the  women  to  sew,  weave,  and  bring  up  their  children,  to
serve  their  husbands  with  love  and  cheerfulness,  and  to  per-
form all  the  other  household  duties  of  a good  wife.  We
also  stated  that  they  taught  the  natural  laws  to  their  people,
and  gave  them  laws  and  precepts  for  a moral  life,  for  the
common  good  of  all,  that  they  might  not  offend  each  other,
either  in  their  honour  or  their  estates.  They  also  taught  the
Indians  their  idolatry  and  ordered  them  to  worship  the  Sun
as  principal  God,  persuading  them  that  it  was  right  to  do  so,
by  reason  of  its  beauty  and  splendour.  They  declared  that  the
Pachacamac*  (which  means  the  sustainer  of  the  world)  had
not  in  vain  advanced  the  Sun  so  far  above  all  the  stars  of


* Pacha.,  the  earth;  and  Camac,  participle  of  Camani,  I create.


102


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


heaven,  granting  them  as  his  servants,  that  they  might  adore
him,  and  hold  him  as  their  God.  They  represented  the
benefits  which  he  conferred  every  day,  and  that  which  he
had  finally  conferred  upon  them  by  sending  his  children  to
bring  them  from  the  condition  of  brutes  to  that  of  men,  as
they  already  knew  from  experience,  and  would  see  hereafter
more  fully,  as  time  went  on.  On  the  other  hand  they  un-
deceived the  Indians  respecting  their  own  base  and  vile
gods,  asking  them  what  trust  they  could  have  in  things  so
contemptible,  to  help  them  in  time  of  need  ? and  what  bene-
fits they  had  received  from  those  animals,  as  they  had  done
every  day  from  their  father  the  Sun.  They  pointed  out
that  a glance  would  undeceive  them,  and  show  that  the
herbs,  plants,  and  trees  which  they  worshipped  were  created
by  the  Sun  for  the  use  of  men  and  the  sustenance  of  beasts.
They  showed  the  difference  between  the  splendour  and
beauty  of  the  Sun  and  the  ugliness  and  filth  of  the  frog,  the
lizard,  and  the  other  vermin  they  looked  upon  as  gods.
Moreover,  they  ordered  the  Indians  to  hunt  these  vermin,
saying  that  they  should  rather  cause  horror  and  dislike  than
give  rise  to  feelings  of  esteem  and  adoration.  With  these
arguments,  and  others  as  simple,  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac
persuaded  his  first  vassals  to  adore  the  Sun  and  receive  him
as  their  God.

The  Indians,  convinced  by  the  reasoning  of  the  Ynca,
and  many  more  by  the  benefits  he  had  conferred  on  them,
and  undeceived  by  their  own  eyes,  accepted  the  Sun  as  their
sole  God,  without  the  company  of  father  or  brother.  They
held  their  kings  to  be  his  children,  because  they  very  simply
believed  that  the  man  and  woman  -who  had  done  so  much
for  them  must  be  his  children  come  down  from  heaven.
Thus  they  adored  them  as  divine,  and  afterwards  they  did
the  same  to  all  their  descendants  with  much  more  venera-
tion, both  outwardly  and  inwardly,  than  the  ancient  Gen-
tiles, Greeks,  and  Romans,  worshipped  Jupiter,  Venus,  or


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


103


Mars.  I may  affirm  that  they  adore  them  to  this  day,  as
they  did  formerly,  and  make  great  show  of  veneration  when
they  name  any  of  their  Kings  Yncas.  When  they  are  up-
braided for  this,  and  asked  why  they  do  it  when  they  know
that  their  kings  were  men  like  themselves  and  not  gods,
they  say  that  they  are  now  undeceived  respecting  their
idolatry,  but  that  they  venerate  their  old  kings  for  the  many
and  great  blessings  they  received  from  them ; that  they
treated  their  vassals  as  Yncas  and  children  of  the  Sun  would
do,  and  that  if  other  men  like  them  should  appear  now,
they  would  also  adore  them  as  divine.

This  was  the  principal  idolatry  of  the  Yncas,  and  that
which  they  taught  their  vassals  ; and  though  they  made
many  sacrifices,  which  we  shall  describe  farther  on,  and  had
many  superstitions,  such  as  believing  in  dreams,  watching
for  omens,  and  other  follies,  yet  their  sole  God  was  the  Sun,
whom  they  worshipped  for  his  many  benign  qualities,  being
a people  more  thoughtful  and  reasonable  than  their  ancestors
of  the  first  age.  They  erected  temples  to  the  Sun  of  in-
credible richness.  Although  they  held  the  moon  to  be  the
sister  and  wife  of  the  Sun,  and  the  mother  of  the  Yncas,  they
did  not  worship  her  as  a Goddess,  nor  offer  sacrifices  to  her,
nor  build  temples  in  her  honour.  They  held  her  in  great
veneration  as  the  universal  mother,  but  went  no  further  in
their  idolatry.  They  held  lightning  and  thunder  to  be  ser-
vants of  the  Sun,  as  we  shall  see  presently,  in  describing  the
chamber  that  was  set  apart  for  them  in  the  house  of  the  Sun
at  Cuzco;  but  they  did  not  look  upon  them  as  Gods,  though
some  Spanish  historians  have  said  as  much.*  On  the  con-

* Mr.  Prescott  gives  his  high  authority  in  support  of  the  Spanish
historians  Ondegardo,  Herrera,  and  Gomara,  and  against  Garcilasso  de
la  Vega,  in  this  matter.  Yet  surely,  in  a question  relating  to  the
religion  of  his  ancestors,  the  testimony  of  the  Ynca,  who  was  intimately
acquainted  with  the  language  and  traditions  of  his  people,  is  worth
more  than  that  of  all  the  Spanish  historians  put  together,  Cieza  de  Leon
alone  excepted.


1 04


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


trary,  they  detested  and  do  still  abominate  the  house  or
any  other  place  where  it  is  certain  that  a thunder-bolt  has
fallen.  They  closed  the  door  of  such  a house  with  mud  and
stones,  that  no  one  might  enter  it,  and  when  a bolt  fell  on
the  ground,  they  marked  the  spot  with  a heap,  that  no  one
might  tread  there.  They  considered  these  places  to  be
accursed  and  unlucky,  and  said  that  the  sun  marked  them
as  such  by  his  servant  the  thunder-bolt.  I saw  this  myself
in  Cuzco,  with  reference  to  the  palace  of  the  Ynca  Huayna
Ccapac,  part  of  which  fell  to  the  share  of  Antonio  Altami-
rano,* when  the  city  was  divided  amongst  the  conquerors.
A bolt  had  fallen  on  a room  in  it,  in  the  time  of  Huayna
Ccapac,  and  the  Indians  had  closed  up  the  doors  with  stones
and  mud,  looking  upon  the  circumstance  as  an  evil  omen
for  their  king.  They  said  that  he  would  lose  part  of  his
empire,  or  that  some  similar  misfortune  would  .befall  him.

Gomara  says  that  the  Indians  of  Peru  had  many  idols,  and  he
enumerates  sharks,  lions,  birds,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  earth,  etc.  He
makes  no  distinction  between  the  Yncas  and  the  numerous  other  nations
of  South  America,  and  his  testimony  on  this  point  is  therefore  valueless.
Herrera,  never  having  been  in  the  Indies,  writes  at  second-hand.  Gomara ,
cap.  cxxi,  p.  112;  Herrera,  dec.  v,  lib.  iv,  cap.  4.

* Antonio  Altamirano  was  one  of  the  first  conquerors,  and  in  the
division  of  the  city  of  Cuzco  his  share  turned  out  a prize.  He  was
allotted  a portion  of  the  palace  of  the  Ynca  Huayna  Ccapac,  called  the
Amaru-cancha,  from  the  serpents  carved  in  relief  on  the  stones  forming
the  outer  wall  (Amaru,  a serpent,  and  Cancha,  a place) ; and  soon  after-
wards he  discovered,  buried  in  the  patio  or  inner  court,  a large  golden
jar  for  brewing  chicha  in,  weighing  eight  or  nine  arrobas  (220  to  225
lbs.),  and  other  gold  and  silver  vases,  the  whole  worth  80,000  ducats.
He  joined  the  faction  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  and  was  appointed  his  chief
standard  bearer;  but  Gonzalo’s  cruel  old  lieutenant,  Carbajal,  beheaded
the  unfortunate  Altamirano  at  Lima,  because  he  thought  he  discovered
in  him  some  signs  of  lukewarmness  in  the  cause.  He  had  a son  Pedro,
by  an  Indian  lady,  who  was  one  of  the  Ynca’s  schoolfellows.  One  day
this  youth  was  riding  a race  down  one  of  the  streets  of  Cuzco,  and  saw
a very  pretty  girl  looking  out  of  a window.  This  made  him  turn  round
on  his  horse  to  look  back  so  often,  that  at  last  he  fell  off ; but  the  horse
immediately  stopped,  and  waited  for  him  to  mount  again.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


105


because  his  father  the  Sun  had  pointed  out  his  house  as  an
unlucky  place.  I got  into  the  closed  room  after  the  Spaniards
rebuilt  it,  and  after  three  years  another  bolt  fell  on  the  same
room  and  destroyed  it.  The  Indians,  amongst  other  things,
said  that  the  Sun,  having  marked  the  place  out  as  accursed,
the  Spaniards  should  not  have  rebuilt  it,  but  should  have
left  it  as  it  was.  If,  as  the  above-mentioned  historian
asserts,  they  looked  upon  thunder-bolts  as  gods,  it  is  clear
that  they  would  have  adored  this  place  as  sacred  and  have
built  their  most  famous  temples  on  it,  saying  that  their
Gods,  the  thunder,  lightning,  and  bolts,  desired  to  inhabit
such  places  as  they  thus  pointed  out  and  consecrated  them-
selves. All  three,  thunder,  lightning,  and  bolts,  are  called
yllapa,  and,  owing  to  the  resemblance,  they  gave  the  same
name  to  an  arquebuss.  The  other  names  which  are  given
to  the  thunder,  and  to  the  Sun  in  Trinity,  are  newly  invented
by  the  Spaniards.*  In  this  particular,  and  in  others  of  the
same  kind,  the  Spaniards  have  no  proper  authority  for  what
they  say,  for  there  are  no  such  words  in  the  general  language
of  the  Indians  of  Peru,  and  even  these  new  words  are  not
well  composed,  and  do  not  bear  the  signification  they  are
intended  to  convey.

* Acosta  is  one  of  those  historians  whose  absurcPcredulity  is  thus  ex-
posed by  the  Ynca.  He  says  “ The  Devil  had  also  introduced  the
Trinity  into  this  idolatry,  for  the  three  statues  of  the  Sun  were  called
Apn-ynti,  Churi-ynti,  and  Yntip  huauque,  which  means  the  Father
Sun,  the  son  Sun,  and  the  brother  Sun ; and  in  like  manner  they  named
the  three  statues  of  Chuqui-ylla,  who  is  the  god  presiding  over  the  re-
gion of  the  air,  where  it  thunders,  rains,  and  snows”  (lib.  v,  cap.  27,  p.
377).

Calancha  tells  us  that  these  three  idols  of  the  sun  were  on  a rock,
overhanging  lake  Titicaca,  facing  the  road  between  Juli  and  Pomata.
Crónica  Moralizada  (Lima,  1653).


106


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  II.

THE  YNCAS  SOUGHT  THE  TRUE  GOD  OUR  LORD.

Besides  adoring  the  Sun  as  a visible  god,  to  whom  they
offered  sacrifices,  and  in  whose  honour  they  celebrated
grand  festivals  (as  we  shall  relate  in  another  part),  the  kings
Yncas  and  their  amantas,  who  were  philosophers,  sought  by
the  light  of  nature  for  the  true  supreme  God  our  Lord,  who
created  heaven  and  earth,  as  we  shall  see  further  on  by  the
arguments  and  phrases  which  some  of  them  used  touching
the  divine  majesty.  They  called  Him  Pachacamac,  a word
composed  of  paclia,  which  means  the  universal  world,  and
camac,  the  present  participle  of  the  verb  cama,  to  animate,
whence  is  derived  the  word  cama,  the  soul.*  Pachacamac
therefore  means  He  who  gives  animation  to  the  universe,
and  in  its  full  signification  it  may  be  translated — “ He  who
does  to  the  universe  what  the  soul  does  to  the  body.”
Pedro  de  Cieza  (cap.  72)  says — “ The  name  of  this  devil  is
intended  to  signify  creator  of  the  world,  for  camac  means
creator,  and  'pacha,  the  world. ”f  Being  a Spaniard,  he  did
not  understand  the  language  so  well  as  1 who  am  an  Indian
Yuca.  They  held  this  name  in  such  veneration  that  they
never  used  it  without  signs  of  great  veneration,  bowing  the
head  and  the  whole  body,  raising  the  eyes  to  heaven,  stoop-
ing to  the  ground,  raising  the  hands  and  opening  them,  and
kissing  the  air.  These  were  the  signs  used  by  the  Yncas
and  their  vassals  to  express  great  reverence  and  veneration,
and  they  observed  them  when  they  spoke  of  Pachacamac,
worshipped  the  Sun,  and  reverenced  the  king,  but  on  no
other  occasion.  Those  of  the  blood  royal  were  approached

* Camani,  I create ; Camac , creating  or  creator,
t See  page  252  of  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


107


with  some  of  these  observances,  and  the  other  superiors,
such  as  the  caciques,  with  very  different  and  much  less
formal  ceremony.  They  held  Pachacamac  in  much  greater
inward  veneration  than  the  Sun,  for  they  did  not  even  take
the  name  of  the  former  in  their  mouths,  while  they  spoke  of
the  latter  on  every  occasion.  When  the  Indians  were
asked  who  Pachacamac  was,  they  replied  that  he  it  was  who
gave  life  to  the  universe,  and  supported  it ; but  that  they
knew  him  not,  for  they  had  never  seen  him,  and  that  for  this
reason  they  did  not  build  temples  to  him,  nor  offer  him
sacrifices.  But  that  they  worshipped  him  in  their  hearts
(that  is  mentally),  and  considered  him  to  he  an  unknown
God.*  Agustín  de  Zarate  (lib.  ii,  cap.  5),  writing  of  what
the  Father  Friar  Vicente  de  Val  verde  said  to  the  King
Atahualpa,  that  Christ  our  Lord  was  the  creator  of  the
world,  says  that  the  Ynca  replied  that  he  knew  nothing  of
that,  and  that  nobody  created  anything  except  the  Sun,  whom
he  and  his  people  held  to  be  God,  and  that  he  held  the  earth
to  be  his  mother,  and  believed  in  his  /macas,  and  that
Pachacamac  had  made  all  things.  From  this  it  is  clear  that
these  Indians  considered  him  to  be  the  maker  of  all  things.

It  is  true,  what  I am  about  to  say,  that  the  Indians  sought
out  the  truth  with  this  name  and  gave  it  to  our  true  God,  as
the  devil  testifies,  though,  as  the  father  of  lies,  he  mixed  up
a lie  with  the  truth.  For  when  he  saw  our  holy  evangel
preached,  and  that  the  Indians  were  baptised,  he  said  to
certain  familiars  of  his,  in  the  valley  now  called  Pacha-
camac (from  the  great  temple  which  wTas  erected  there  to
this  unknown  God),  that  the  God  whom  the  Spaniards  were

* Mr.  Prescott  suggests  that  the  fact  of  the  temple  to  Pachacamac,
on  the  coast  of  Peru,  having  existed  before  that  part  of  the  country
came  under  the  sway  of  the  Yncas,  may  indicate  that  the  worship  of
this  Great  Spirit  did  not  originate  with  the  Peruvian  princes.  The  fact
that  Pachacamac  is  purely  a Quichua  word  alone  suffices  to  prove  that
this  idea  is  groundless.


108


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


preaching  about  and  Pachacamac  were  all  one.  Pedro  de
Cieza  de  Leon  tells  us  this  in  his  Account  of  Peru  (chapter
72),*  and  the  Reverend  Father  Friar  Gerónimo  Roman,  in
his  History  of  the  Western  Indies  (book  i,  chapter  5),  says
the  same,  both  speaking  of  this  same  Pachacamac,  although,
from  not  knowing  the  correct  meaning  of  the  word,  they
applied  it  to  the  devil.  But  the  devil,  in  saying  that  the
God  of  the  Christians  and  Pachacamac  were  one  and  the
same,  spoke  the  truth ; for  it  was  the  intention  of  the
Indians  to  give  that  name  to  the  Most  High,  who  gives  life
and  existence  to  the  universe,  as  the  word  itself  signifies.
But  in  saying  that  he  was  the  Pachacamac  the  devil  lied,  for
it  was  never  the  intention  of  the  Indians  to  give  him  that
name.  They  had  no  other  name  for  the  devil  than  Supay,
and  when  they  used  that  name  they  first  spat  on  the  ground,
in  sign  of  malediction  and  abomination.  But  they  used  the
word  Pachacamac  with  all  the  demonstrations  of  adoration
which  we  have  already  mentioned.  Nevertheless  the  enemy
had  so  much  power  amongst  these  Indians  that  he  made
himself  a God,  mixing  himself  up  in  everything  that  the
Indians  venerated  and  held  as  sacred.  He  spoke  in  their
oracles  and  temples,  in  the  corners  of  their  houses,  and  in
other  places,  telling  them  that  he  was  the  Pachacamac,  and
that  he  was  all  the  other  things  which  the  Indians  looked
upon  as  gods ; and,  on  account  of  this  deceit,  they  wor-
shipped those  things  out  of  which  the  devil  spoke  to  them,
thinking  that  it  was  the  god  who  spoke.  But  if  they  had
known  it  was  the  devil,  they  would  assuredly  have  burnt
those  things,  as  they  now  do,  through  the  mercy  of  God  who
desired  to  receive  them  into  his  fold.f

The  Indians  do  not  understand  how  to  give  an  account  of
these  things,  using  their  words  with  the  .proper  meaning

* See  my  translation,  p.  253.

t Al J this  nonsense  about  the  devil  is  evidently  a concession  to
Spanish  folly  and  bigotry.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


109


and  signification;  seeing  that  the  Christian  Spaniards  seemed
to  abominate  all  their  words  which  referred  to  religion :
neither  did  the  Spaniards  clearly  explain  themselves  when
they  asked  questions.  Thus  all  the  words  were  looked  upon
as  diabolical,  because  the  rules  of  the  general  language  of
the  Yncas,  for  the  derivation,  composition,  and  proper  in-
terpretation of  words  were  not  understood.  The  Spaniards
give  another  name  for  God  in  their  histories,  which  is
Ticivir acocha  ; but  neither  I nor  they  know  what  it  means.
The  word  Pachacamac,  which  the  Spanish  historians  so
abominate,  not  understanding  the  meaning  of  the  word,  is
really  that  of  God ; although  their  abhorrence  of  it  is  not
wholly  without  reason,  because  the  devil  spoke  in  that  gor-
geous temple,  making  himself  appear  as  God  under  that
name,  which  he  adopted  for  his  own.

But  if  any  one  should  now  ask  me,  who  am  a Catholic
Christian  Indian  by  the  infinite  mercy,  what  name  was  given
to  God  in  my  language,  I should  say — Pachacamac.  For
in  that  general  language  of  Peru  there  is  no  other  word  in
which  to  name  God  save  this ; and  all  those  that  are  given
by  historians  are  generally  incorrect,  for  they  are  either
corrupt  or  invented  by  the  Spaniards.  Some  of  the  words
newly  composed  by  the  missionaries  incorrectly  express  the
signification  that  has  been  given  to  them,  such  as  Pachaya-
chachi*  which  is  intended  to  convey  the  meaning  of  “ maker
of  heaven.”  Its  true  meaning  is  “ teacher  of  the  world.”
But  to  give  the  word  “ maker”  they  should  have  said
Pacharurac,  for  Rurac\  is  “to  make;”  yet  the  phrase  is  not
correct.  For  in  very  truth  it  lowers  the  high  and  majestic
place  of  God  to  which  the  name  of  Pachacamac  raises  it,

* Yachani,  I know ; Yachacuni,  I learn ; Yachachini,  I teach ;
Yacha-huasi,  a school.  The  particle  chi  means  the  act  of  making
another  do  a thing.  Thus  Yachani,  “I  know;”  Yachachini,  “I  make
another  know,”  that  is,  “ I teach.”

t Rurani  (I  make).  Hence  the  participle  Rurac  (making) ; and  in
its  substantive  form  “ a maker.”


110


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


and  this  latter  is  the  true  name  of  God.  In  order  that  what
has  been  said  may  be  fully  understood,  it  must  be  known
that  the  verb  yacha  signifies  “ to  learn,”  and  by  adding
the  syllable  chi  it  means  “ to  teach.”  But  the  verb  rura
means  “ to  make,”  and  with  the  addition  of  chi  it  is  “ to
cause  a thing  to  be  made.”  And  the  same  particle  causes
the  same  change  in  the  meaning  of  every  other  verb.  As
these  Indians  paid  no  attention  to  abstract  speculations,  but
only  to  material  things,  so  their  verbs  are  not  adapted  to  the
teaching  of  spiritual  things,  nor  to  the  expression  of  grand
or  divine  works,  but  only  to  convey  meanings  used  in  human
intercourse.  But  the  word  Pachacamac  is  far  removed  in
meaning  from  this  materialism,  for,  as  has  already  been  said,
it  signifies  “ He  who  does  with  the  universe  what  the  soul
does  with  the  body;  which  is  the  supplying  of  it  with  exist-
ence, life,  growth,  sustenance.”  From  this  the  incorrect-
ness of  the  names  for  God  lately  invented  will  be  evident  (if
their  literal  signification  is  considered),  owing  to  the  base-
ness of  their  meaning.  But  it  may  be  hoped  that  in  time
they  will  be  more  respected ; and  the  composers  of  them
should  be  careful  not  to  change  the  meaning  of  the  verb  or
noun  in  the  compound  word,  in  order  that  the  Indians  may
not  turn  it  into  ridicule.  This  is  especially  important  in  the
composition  of  words  for  teaching  the  Christian  doctrine,
which  should  be  done  with  much  care.


CHAPTER  III.

THE  YNCAS  KEPT  A ^ IN  A SACRED  PLACE.

The  Kings  Yncas  kept  in  Cuzco  a cross  of  fine  marble,
of  the  white  and  red  colour  called  crystalline  jasper,  and
ihey  know  not  from  what  time  they  have  had  it.  I left  it,
in  the  year  1560,  in  the  sacristy  of  the  cathedral  church  of


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


Ill


that  city,  where  it  was  hung  to  a nail  by  a cord  passing
through  a hole  made  at  the  top  of  the  upper  end.  I re-
member that  the  cord  was  a selvedge  of  black  velvet,  but  in
the  time  of  the  Indians  it  must  have  had  a chain  of  silver  or
gold,  which  may  have  been  exchanged  for  this  selvedge  by
the  man  who  first  found  it.  The  cross  was  square,  that  is,
as  long  as  broad,  being  three-quarters  of  a vara  long,  rather
less  than  more,  and  three  fingers  deep;  and  almost  the  same
in  breadth.  It  was  all  of  the  same  piece,  very  well  carved,
with  corners  carefully  squared,  and  the  stone  brightly
polished.  The  Yncas  kept  it  in  one  of  their  royal  houses,
in  a huaca  or  sacred  place.  They  did  not  worship  it,  be-
yond holding  it  in  veneration  on  account  of  the  beauty  of
its  form,  or  for  some  other  reason  which  they  could  scarcely
give  expression  to.  Thus  it  was  kept  until  the  Marquis
Don  Francisco  Pizarro  entered  the  valley  of  Tumpez ; and,
owing  to  what  there  happened  to  Pedro  de  Candia,  they
began  to  worship  it  and  hold  it  in  greater  veneration,  as  we
shall  mention  hereafter.*

The  Spaniards,  when  they  captured  this  imperial  city,  and
made  a temple  to  our  Most  High  God,  put  this  cross  in  the
place  I have  mentioned  without  more  ornament  than  has
been  related,  though  it  might  fitly  have  been  hung  over  the
high  altar,  richly  adorned  with  gold  and  precious  stones,  of
which  they  found  so  much.  They  taught  the  Indians  our
holy  religion  with  their  own  things,  comparing  them  with  ours,
such  as  this  cross  and  other  resemblances  in  their  laws  and
ordinances,  which  are  very  closely  allied  to  our  natural  law.
Thus  the  commandments  of  our  holy  law  and  the  works  of
mercy  are  very  like  the  ordinances  of  this  gentile  people,  as
we  shall  see  presently.  With  reference  to  the  cross,  we
may  add,  as  is  notorious,  that  they  are  accustomed  to  swear
to  God  on  the  cross  in  order  to  affirm  what  they  say,  both

* See  a note  at  p.  194  of  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon  for  an
account  of  Pedro  de  Candia’s  adventure,  referred  to  in  the  text.


112


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


before  judgment  and  at  other  times  ; and  many  do  it  when
there  is  no  necessity  for  swearing,  and  solely  from  a bad
habit ; but  neither  the  Yncas,  nor  any  of  the  people  in  their
dominions,  ever  swore  or  even  knew  what  swearing  was  in
former  times.  The  veneration  and  respect  with  which  they
treated  the  names  of  Pachacamac  and  of  the  Sun  have  already
been  noticed,  and  they  never  used  these  words  except  to
adore  them.  When  they  examined  any  witness,  however
serious  the  case  might  be,  the  judge  said  (instead  of  admin-
istering an  oath)  “ Do  you  promise  to  say  truth  to  the
Ynca?”  The  witness  answered  “Yes,  I promise.”  The
judge  then  said — “Beware  that  you  must  speak  without  any
mixture  of  falsehood,  and  without  concealing  anything  that
took  place,  and  that  you  must  relate  all  you  know  of  this
matter.”  The  witness  then  repeated  his  declaration — “ So
I promise  of  a truth  :”  and  they  left  him  to  relate  all  he
knew  of  the  affair,  without  interfering  or  saying  “We  did
not  ask  you  this,  but  this  other.”  The  witness  was  not
usually  guilty  of  falsehood,  because  these  people,  besides
being  very  timid,  and  very  religious  in  their  idolatry,  knew
well  that,  if  their  falsehood  was  discovered,  they  would  be
very  severely  punished,  frequently  with  death,  if  the  offence
was  a grave  one.  This  punishment  was  inflicted,  not  so
much  on  account  of  the  mischief  that  the  falsehood  might
cause,  as  because  the  offender  had  lied  to  the  Ynca,  and
disregarded  the  royal  command,  ordering  that  no  lie  should
be  told.  The  witness  knew  that  to  speak  to  any  judge  was
to  speak  to  the  Y’nca  himself,  whom  they  adored  as  God;
and  this  was  their  chief  reason  for  not  telling  lies.

After  the  Spaniards  conquered  that  empire,  a very  serious
murder  took  place  in  the  province  of  the  Quechuas.  The
Corregidor  of  Cuzco  sent  a judge  there,  to  investigate  the
case.  This  judge,  in  taking  the  deposition  of  the  Curaca  or
Lord  of  Vassals,  placed  him  before  the  cross,  and  told  him
to  swear  to  God  and  the  cross  that  he  would  speak  the


ROYA  I.  COMM  ENT  A RI  KS.


113


truth.  The  Indian  replied  that,  as  he  was  not  baptised,  he
did  not  swear  as  the  Christians  swore.  The  judge  then  said
that  he  must  swear  by  his  gods  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the
Yncas.  The  Curaca  answered  “ We  only  use  those  names
to  worship  them,  and  it  is  not  lawful  for  me  to  swear  by
them.”  The  judge  inquired  what  evidence  there  would  be
of  the  truth  of  what  the  Curaca  said,  if  he  would  not  take
any  oath.  “My  promise  will  suffice,”  said  the  Curaca;  “for
I understand  that  I speak  as  it  were  before  your  king,  see-
ing that  you  come  to  do  justice  in  his  name:  for  thus  we  felt
in  giving  testimony  before  the  officers  of  our  Yncas.  But,
to  give  you  the  assurance  you  require,  I will  swear  by  the
earth,  declaring  that  it  may  open  and  swallow  me  up  alive,
as  I stand,  if  I should  tell  a lie.”  The  judge  accepted  this
oath,  seeing  that  he  could  get  no  other,  and  put  the  ques-
tions respecting  the  murderers,  with  a view  to  ascertaining
who  they  were.  The  Curaca  proceeded  with  his  replies ;
but  when  he  saw  that  they  asked  him  nothing  respecting  the
men  who  had  been  killed,  and  who  had  been  the  aggressors,
he  said  he  must  relate  all  he  knew  of  the  transaction,
because  if  he  related  one  portion,  and  was  silent  about
another,  he  should  be  guilty  of  lying,  as  he  would  not
have  spoken  the  whole  truth  according  to  his  promise.
Although  the  judge  declared  that  it  would  suffice  if  he
answered  the  questions  that  were  put  to  him,  he  per-
sisted in  saying  that  he  should  not  be  keeping  his  promise
unless  he  related  all  he  knew.  The  judge  took  his  deposi-
tion in  the  best  way  he  could,  and  returned  to  Cuzco,  where
the  conversation  he  had  had  with  the  Curaca  caused  much
astonishment.


n


114


SECOND  BOOK  OF  TIIE


CHAPTER  IV.

OF  MANY  GODS  IMPROPERLY  ATTRIBUTED  TO  THE  INDIANS
BY  THE  SFANISH  HISTORIANS.

Returning  to  the  idolatry  of  the  Yncas,  we  assert  more  at
large  than  we  have  done  before,  that  they  had  no  other  gods
than  the  sun,  which  they  worshipped  outwardly.  To  the
sun  they  built  temples,  with  walls  lined  above  and  below
with  plates  of  gold  : to  it  they  offered  many  things  as  sacri-
fices ; to  it  they  presented  great  gifts  of  gold  and  of  all  the
most  precious  things  they  possessed,  in  acknowledgment  of
what  it  had  done  for  them.  They  adjudicated  the  third
part  of  all  the  cultivated  land  of  the  countries  they  con-
quered, and  of  the  harvests,  to  be  the  property  of  the  sun,
besides  innumerable  flocks.  They  erected  houses,  carefully
secluded,  for  women  dedicated  to  his  service,  who  preserved
perpetual  virginity.

Besides  the  sun  they  worshipped  Pachacamac  (as  has  been
said)  inwardly,  as  an  unknown  God.  They  held  him  in
greater  veneration  than  the  sun.  They  did  not  offer
sacrifices  nor  build  temples  to  him ; because  they  said  that
he  was  not  known  to  them,  never  having  allowed  himself  to
he  seen.  In  its  proper  place  we  shall  speak  of  the  famous
and  most  wealthy  temple  in  the  valley  called  Pachacamac,
dedicated  to  this  unknown  God.

Thus  the  Yncas  did  not  worship  more  gods  than  the  two
we  have  named;  one  visible,  the  other  invisible.  For  those
princes  and  their  amautas,  who  were  the  philosophers  and
doctors  of  their  commonwealth,  although  they  had  no  know-
ledge of  letters  (never  having  used  them),  understood  that
it  was  a very  unworthy  and  degrading  thing  to  impute
honour,  power,  and  divine  virtue  to  the  inferior  things
under  heaven.  So  they  established  a law,  and  ordered  it  to


HOYA r.  COMM E N TA HIES.


115


be  obeyed,  that  it  should  be  known  throughout  the  whole
empire  that  the  worship  should  be  given  to  Pachacamac  as
Supreme  God  and  Lord  alone,  and  to  the  sun  for  the  good
he  did  to  all  ; the  moon  also  being  venerated  and  honoured
because  she  was  the  wife  and  sister  of  the  sun,  and  the  stars
as  ladies  and  handmaids  of  her  house  and  court.

Further  on,  in  the  proper  place,  we  shall  treat  of  the  god
Huirá- ccocha,  which  was  a phantom  that  appeared  to  a
prince,  the  heir  of  the  Yncas,  saying  that  he  was  a child  of
the  sun.  The  Spaniards  refer  many  other  gods  to  the
Yncas,  owing  to  their  confusion  of  the  first  with  the  second
age,  and  to  their  ignorance  of  the  language,  and  consequent
inability  to  obtain  information  from  the  Indians.  This
ignorance  has  been  the  cause  of  all  the  gods  of  the  con-
quered countries  being  imputed  to  the  Yncas.  In  particular,
the  mistake  arose  from  the  Spaniards  not  understanding  the
numerous  different  meanings  of  the  word  huaca .*  When
the  last  syllable  is  pronounced  from  the  top  of  the  palate,  it
means  an  idol,  such  as  Jupiter,  Mars,  Venus,  but  it  is  a
noun,  which  does  not  admit  of  a verb  being  formed  from  it,
to  signify  worship.  Besides  this  first  and  principal  mean-
ing, the  word  has  many  others,  examples  of  which  we  shall
now  give,  that  the  subject  may  be  better  understood.  Huaca
signifies  a sacred  thing,  such  as  were  all  those  in  which  the
devil  spoke.  These  were  idols,  rocks,  and  great  stones  or  trees
into  which  the  enemy  entered,  to  make  the  people  think  he
was  a god.  They  also  applied  the  word  huaca  to  things
offered  to  the  sun,  such  as  figures  of  men,  birds,  and  beasts
made  of  gold,  silver  or  wood,  and  other  offerings,  all  of
which  they  held  to  be  sacred  because  the  sun  had  received
them  and  they  were  his.  For  this  reason  they  were  held  in
great  veneration.  They  also  give  the  name  huaca  to  all
temples,  whether  large  or  small,  and  to  the  sepulchres  they

* This  word  appears  to  have  had  a meaning  analogous  to  taboo
amongst  the  South  Sea  Islanders,  though  not  exactly  similar.

H 2


116


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


made  in  the  fields,  also  to  the  corners  in  their  houses,
where  the  devil  spoke  to  their  priests  and  to  others  who
conversed  with  him  familiarly.  They  held  these  corners
to  be  sacred,  and  treated  them  as  oratories  or  sanctuaries.
They  likewise  applied  the  same  name  to  all  those  things
which,  from  their  beauty  and  excellence,  were  superior  to
other  things  of  a like  kind,  such  as  a rose,  an  apple,  or  a
pippin  which  was  better  than  any  other  on  the  same  tree ;
or  trees  which  were  better  than  other  trees  of  the  same  kind.
On  the  other  hand,  they  also  gave  the  same  lmaca  to  things
that  were  ugly  and  monstrous,  or  that  caused  horror  and
fright.  Thus  they  called  the  great  serpents  of  the  Antis,
which  are  twenty-five  to  thirty  feet  long,  haacas.  They
also  gave  the  name  huaca  to  things  which  were  out  of  the
usual  course  of  nature,  such  as  a woman  that  has  given  birth
to  twins,  on  account  of  the  strangeness  of  the  birth.  They
took  the  woman  out  into  the  streets  with  much  ceremony,
crowned  her  with  garlands,  and  danced  and  sang,  in  token
of  her  great  fruitfulness.  Other  nations  took  the  matter  in
another  way,  and  mourned,  holding  such  births  to  be  a bad
omen.  The  same  name  was  given  to  sheep  that  bore  two  at
one  birth.  I speak  of  the  sheep  of  that  land*  which,  being
large,  usually  only  give  birth  to  one  at  a time,  like  cows  and
mares.  The  twin  lambs  were  held  to  be  the  most  accept-
able sacrifices,  and  were  therefore  called  liuaca,  and  for  the
same  reason  they  call  an  egg  with  two  yolks  a lmaca.  The
same  name  was  given  to  children  born  feet  first,  or  doubled
up,  or  with  six  fingers  or  toes,  or  hump-backed,  or  with  any
other  defect  in  the  body  or  face,  such  as  a hare  lip,  which
is  very  common,  or  a squint.  They  also  gave  the  name  to
very  copious  fountains,  and  to  stones  found  in  rivers  or
brooks  when  they  are  of  unusual  shape  or  colour.

They  called  the  great  chain  of  snowy  mountains  lmaca  for
its  length  and  height,  which  certainly  are  most  wonderful  to


* Llamas.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


117


those  who  attentively  reflect.  They  also  gave  the  name  to
very  high  peaks,  and  to  high  towers,  and  to  lofty  passes
met  with  on  the  roads,  some  of  which  are  three,  four,  five,
and  six  leagues  in  height,  and  almost  as  steep  as  a wall.
The  Spaniards,  corrupting  the  word,  call  these  passes  apa-
chetas, which  the  Indians  worshipped  and  made  offerings  to.
Of  the  passes  we  shall  speak  presently,  as  well  as  of  the  na-
ture of  the  offerings.  They  called  all  these,  and  other
similar  things,  huacas,  not  because  they  believe  them  to  be
gods  or  adored  them;  but  because  of  their  special  superiority
or  peculiarity,  and  for  this  reason  they  treated  them  with
veneration  and  respect.  But,  although  these  significations
are  so  distinct,  the  Spaniards  only  understand  the  first  and
principal  one,  which  is  an  idol,  and  they  consequently  be-
lieved that  the  Yncas  worshipped  as  idols  all  the  things  they
called  huacas  ; as  did  the  Indians  of  the  first  age.

With  respect  to  the  word  apachitas,  which  the  Spaniards
apply  to  passes  over  the  very  high  mountains ; it  must  be
known  that  the  correct  form  is  apachecta.  It  is  the  dative
(the  genitive  being  apachecpa)  of  the  present  participle
apachec,  which  is  the  nominative.  The  syllable  ta  is  the
dative.*  It  means  that  which  is  raised,  without  saying  what
it  is  that  is  raised  ; but,  in  conformity  with  the  idiom  of  the
language,  as  we  have  before  said,  the  Indians  include  much
meaning  in  one  word.  By  this  word  they  intend  to  say —
“We  give  thanks  and  make  an  offering  to  Him  who  enables
us  to  raise  this  burden,  giving  us  strength  and  vigour  to
ascend  such  rugged  heights  as  these.”  They  never  used  the
word  until  they  had  reached  the  summit  of  the  pass,  and  for
this  reason  the  Spanish  historians  say  that  they  called  the
summits  of  the  passes  apacliitas , because  they  were  heard  to
say  this  word  apachecta. f As  the  Spaniards  did  not  know

* Apani,  I carry ; Apachini,  I cause  another  to  carry ; Apachec
would  be  the  present  participle.

t The  phrase  used  by  the  Indians  was  Apachecta  muchani,  “ I give


118


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


the  meaning  of  the  words  used  by  the  Indians,  they  gave
this  name  to  the  passes.  The  Indians  felt,  by  a natural
light,  that  they  ought  to  give  thanks  and  make  some  offer-
ing to  Pachacamac,  the  unknown  God,  whom  they  in-
wardly worshipped,  for  having  aided  them  in  this  labour.
Thus,  as  soon  as  they  had  ascended  the  pass,  they  unloaded
themselves,  and,  with  eyes  raised  to  heaven  and  the  same
marks  of  adoration  as  I have  mentioned  that  they  showed
when  using  the  word  Pachacamac,  they  repeated  two  or
three  times  the  dative  apachecta,  and  in  making  an  offering
they  pulled  a hair  out  of  their  eyebrows,  or  took  the  herb
called  cuca  from  their  mouths,  as  a gift  of  the  most  precious
thing  they  had.  Or,  if  there  was  nothing  better,  they
offered  a small  stick  or  piece  of  straw,  or  even  a piece  of
stone  or  earth.  There  were  great  heaps  of  these  offerings
at  the  summits  of  passes  over  the  mountains.  They  did  not
look  at  the  sun  when  they  performed  these  ceremonies,  be-
cause the  worship  was  not  offered  to  him,  but  to  Pachacamac,
and  the  offerings  were  intended  more  as  tokens  of  their
feelings  than  as  offerings,  for  they  well  understood  that  such
vile  things  were  unfit  for  such  a purpose.  I am  a witness  to
all  this,  as  I have  seen  it  on  my  journeys  with  the  Indians
many  times,  and  I may  add  that  they  did  not  perform  the
ceremony  when  they  were  travelling  without  burdens,  but
only  when  they  were  laden.  Now,  in  these  times,  through
the  mercy  of  God,  crosses  are  placed  on  the  tops  of  passes,
which  they  worship  in  acknowledgment  of  the  grace  that
has  been  conferred  by  our  Lord  Christ.

thanks  that  this  has  been  carried.”  The  custom  described  in  the  text,
by  the  Ynca,  is  observed  in  Peru  to  this  day ; and  a heap  of  stones  may
still  be  seen  at  the  summit  of  every  pass.  These  heaps  are  corruptly
called  by  the  Spaniards  pachetas.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


lit)


CHAPTER  V

OF  MANY  OTHER  MEANINGS  OF  THE  WORD  IlUACA.

This  same  word  liuaca,  when  the  last  syllable  is  pro-
nounced in  the  throat,  becomes  a verb,  meaning  “to  mourn.”
Owing  to  this,  two  Spanish  historians,  who  did  not  under-
stand the  difference,  said — “The  Indians  enter  their  temples
and  perform  their  sacrifices,  mourning  and  lamenting.”
Huacca*  has  the  latter  meaning,  and  is  very  different  from
liuaca , one  word  being  a verb  and  the  other  a noun.  -But
truly  the  difference  in  meaning  depends  entirely  on  different
pronunciation,  without  change  of  letter  or  accent ; for  the
last  syllable  of  the  latter  is  pronounced  in  the  upper  part  of
the  palate,  and  of  the  former  from  the  inside  of  the  throat.
The  Spaniards  pay  no  attention  to  the  pronunciation  of  these
words,  nor  of  any  others  in  the  language,  because  they  are
different  from  the  Spanish.  This  is  shown  from  what
occurred  to  me  with  a Dominican  monk,  who  had  been  for
four  years  professor  of  the  general  language  of  Peru.  Know-
ing that  I was  a native  of  that  land,  he  communicated  with  me,
and  I visited  him  many  times  in  San  Pablo  de  Cordova.  One
day  it  happened  that  we  were  speaking  of  that  language,
and  of  the  many  different  meanings  that  the  same  word  had.
1 mentioned,  for  example,  the  word  paclia,  which,  when
pronounced  softly  as  the  letters  would  sound  in  Spanish,
means  the  universe,  heaven,  the  earth,  and  ground.  The
friar  replied  that  it  also  signified  clothes,  furniture,  or
apparel. f I answered  “It  is  true;  but  tell  me,  Father,  what
difference  there  is  in  the  pronunciation  when  it  has  the
latter  meaning?”  He  replied  “I  do  not  know.”  I then  ex-

* Huaccani,  I mourn.

t Pacha,  the  earth ; Ppacha,  clothes  ; Paccha,  a fountain.


120


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


claimed  “Are  you  a master  of  the  language,  and  yet  ignorant
of  this!  Well,  you  must  know  that  to  mean  apparel  or
clothes  the  first  syllable  must  be  pronounced  by  pressing  the
lips  together,  and  breaking  them  open  with  the  air  of  the
mouth  and  I explained  to  him  the  pronunciation  of  this
and  other  words  viva  voce,  for  it  can  be  taught  in  no  other
way;  at  which  the  professor,  and  the  other  monks  who  were
present  at  the  discussion,  were  greatly  astounded.  From
what  I have  said  it  will  be  fully  seen  how  ignorant  the
Spaniards  are  of  the  details  of  this  language ; for  even  this
monk,  who  was  a professor  of  it,  did  not  know  them.  Thus
they  write  down  many  erroneous  statements,  such  as  that  the
Yncas  and  their  vassals  worshipped  all  the  things  they  called
huacas  as  gods,  being  ignorant  of  the  various  significations
of  that  word.  And  this  is  enough  of  the  idolatry  and  gods
of  the  Yncas;  in  which  idolatry,  and  also  in  that  more  an-
cient form,  there  is  much  to  admire  in  these  Indians,  as  well
those  of  the  second  age  as  those  of  the  first,  in  that,  with  so
great  a confusion  of  gods,  they  never  worshipped  pleasures
and  vices,  like  those  of  the  ancient  heathenry  in  the  old
world,  who  adored  those  confessedly  guilty  of  adultery,
murder,  drunkenness,  and  lewdness.  \7et  the  latter  were
people  boasting  much  of  their  letters  and  learning,  while  the
former  were  far  from  all  good  teaching.

The  idol  Tangatancja,  which  one  author  says  they  wor-
shipped in  Chuquisaca,*  and  declared  of  it  that  it  was  three
in  one  and  one  in  three,  I have  been  able  to  find  no  notice
of,  nor  is  there  such  a word  in  the  general  language  of  Peru.
It  may  be  a word  in  the  language  of  that  province,  which  is
180  leagues  from  Cuzco.  I suspect  that  the  word  is  corrupt,
because  the  Spaniards  corrupt  all  the  words  they  get  into
their  mouths,  and  that  it  should  be  acatanca,  which  means

* Acosta,  lib.  v,  cap.  27.  The  credulous  Jesuit  was  told  of  this  idol
by  a priest  at  Chuquisaea.  Of  course,  the  devil,  who  is  always  trying
to  imitate  the  mysteries  of  the  church,  invented  the  idol  Tangatanga!


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


121


a scarabseus  or  black  beetle.  This  word  is  composed  of  the
noun  aca  (dung)  and  the  verb  tanca * (the  last  syllable  pro-
nounced inside  the  throat),  which  means  to  push.  Aca-
tanca,  therefore,  means  “ he  who  pushes  the  dung.”

I am  not  at  all  surprised  that  in  Chuquisaca,  in  that  first
age  of  ancient  heathenism,  before  the  time  of  the  Kings
Yncas,  they  should  have  worshipped  a beetle,  because,  in
those  days,  they  adored  other  things  as  vile,  but  not  after-
wards, because  it  was  prohibited  by  the  Yncas.  When  the
Indians  said  that  their  god  was  one  in  three  and  three  in  one,
it  must  have  been  a new  invention  of  theirs,  made  after  they
had  heard  of  the  trinity  and  unity  of  our  Lord  God,  to
curry  favour  with  the  Spaniards,  by  saying  that  they  had
some  things  resembling  our  holy  religion,  like  this  trinity,
and  like  the  trinity  which  the  same  author  says  that  they
imputed  to  the  sun  and  the  lightning  ; also  that  they  had
confessors,  and  confessed  their  sins  like  Christians.  All
these  things  were  invented  by  the  Indians  in  the  expecta-
tion that  they  might  gain  something  by  the  resemblance.  I
affirm  this  as  an  Indian,  and  as  knowing  the  nature  of  the
Indians.  And  I also  declare  that  they  had  no  idols  with  the
name  of  the  Trinity,  and  that,  though  the  general  language
of  Peru  sometimes  comprehends  three  or  four  different
things  in  one  word,  as  lightning,  thunder,  and  thunderbolts
in  the  word  yllapa  ; the  hand  and  arm  in  the  word  maqui  ;
and  the  thigh,  leg,  and  foot  in  chaqui,  besides  many  others ;
yet  that  they  did  not  worship  idols  in  the  name  of  the
Trinity,  nor  had  they  such  a word  in  their  language.  If  the
devil  had  made  them  worship  him  under  that  name,  I should
not  be  surprised,  for  he  could  not  do  anything  with  infidel
idolaters  who  were  so  far  away  from  Christian  truth.

I may  add  that  the  same  word  chaqui , with  the  first  syl-
lable pronounced  from  the  top  of  the  palate,  becomes  a verb


* Tancani , I push.


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


1 22
1 .v<v

meaning  to  be  thirsty  or  dry,  or  to  dry  anything  that  is  wet,
which  is  another  case  of  three  meanings  for  one  word.*


CHAPTER  VI.

WHAT  AN  AUTHOR  SAYS  CONCERNING  THEIR  GODS.

In  the  papers  of  Father  Bias  Valera  I found  what  follows,
which  I have  taken  the  trouble  to  translate  and  insert  in  this
place,  because  it  is  apposite  to  the  point  we  have  been  dis-
cussing, and  because  of  the  value  of  the  observations  made
by  this  authority.  Speaking  of  the  sacrifices  which  the  In-
dians of  Mexico  offered  up,  and  of  those  in  other  countries,
and  of  the  gods  they  worshipped,  he  says  as  follows : —
“One  cannot  explain  in  words,  nor  imagine  without  horror
and  dismay,  how  contrary  to  religion,  terrible,  cruel,  and
inhuman  were  the  sacrifices  which  the  Indians  were  accus-
tomed to  offer  up  in  the  time  of  their  heathenry,  nor  the
multitude  of  gods  they  had,  insomuch  that  in  the  citv  of
Mexico  and  its  suburbs  there  were  more  than  two  thousand.
The  general  name  for  their  gods  and  idols  was  Teutl,  though
each  one  had  a particular  name.  But  that  which  Pedro
Martyr,  the  Bishop  of  Chiapas,  and  others  affirm,  that  the
Indians  of  the  island  of  Cucumela,  subject  to  the  province
of  Yucatan,  had  for  their  God  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and  that
they  worshipped  it]  and  that  the  natives  of  Chiapa  knew  of
the  most  Holy  Trinity  and  of  the  incarnation  of  our  Lord  ;
these  were  interpretations  which  those  authors  and  other
Spaniards  invented  out  of  their  imaginations,  and  then
applied  to  those  mysteries.  In  the  same  way,  in  their
histories  of  Cuzco,  they  referred  the  three  statues  of  the  sun
to  a belief  in  the  Trinity,  as  well  as  those  to  thunder,  light-
ning, and  thunderbolts.  If  in  this  our  day,  after  having  re-
* Chaqui,  a loot ; Chhaqui,  dry  ; Chhaquincuni,  I am  thirsty.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


123


ceived  so  much  instruction  from  priests  and  bishops,  these
barbarians  scarcely  know  yet  whether  there  be  any  Holy
Ghost, — how  could  they,  while  in  such  thick  darkness,  have
so  clear  an  idea  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Incarnation  and  of
the  Trinity  ? The  method  that  our  Spaniards  adopted  in
writing  their  histories  was  to  ask  the  Indians,  in  Spanish,
touching  the  things  they  wanted  to  find  out  from  them.
These,  from  not  having  a clear  knowledge  of  ancient  things,
or  from  bad  memories,  told  them  wrong,  or  mixed  up
poetical  fables  with  their  replies.  And  the  worst  of  it  was
that  neither  party  had  more  than  a very  imperfect  knowledge
of  the  language  of  the  other,  so  as  to  understand  the  inquiry,
and  to  reply  to  it.  This  arose  from  the  great  difficulty
there  is  to  understand  the  Indian  language,  and  from  the
slight  knowledge  the  Indians  then  had  of  Spanish.  Thus
the  Indian  understood  little  of  what  the  Spaniard  said  in  his
questions,  and  the  Spaniard  comprehended  still  less  of  the
Indian’s  reply.  So  that  very  often  the  Spaniard  and  the
Indian  both  understood  the  opposite  of  what  they  had  said
to  each  other:  still  oftener  they  arrived  at  some  approach  to
what  had  been  said,  but  not  at  the  exact  meaning.  In  this
great  confusion,  the  priest  or  layman  who  asked  the  ques-
tions placed  the  meaning  to  them  which  was  nearest  to  the
desired  answer,  or  which  was  most  like  what  the  Indian  was
understood  to  have  said.  Thus  they  interpreted  according
to  their  pleasure  or  prejudice,  and  wrote  things  down  as
truths  which  the  Indians  never  dreamt  of.  For  no  mystery
of  our  holy  Christian  religion  can  really  be  taken  from  their
true  histories.  Nevertheless  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
devil,  in  his  great  pride,  obtained  worship  for  himself  as
God,  not  only  in  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  heathens,
but  even  in  some  customs  of  the  Christian  religion.  He  has
introduced  these  rites  (like  an  envious  monkey)  in  many  re-
gions of  the  Indies,  so  that  he  may  be  more  honoured
amongst  those  miserable  men.  Thus,  in  one  country,  oral


124


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


confession  was  practised,  to  free  men  from  their  sins ; in
another  the  washing  of  the  heads  of  children  ; in  another
very  severe  fasts  were  kept.  In  other  districts  they  suf-
fered death  for  their  religion’s  sake : so  that,  as  in  the
Old  World,  the  faithful  Christians  offered  themselves  as
martyrs  for  the  Catholic  faith,  so  in  the  New  World  the
heathens  offered  themselves  to  death  for  the  sake  of  the
accursed  devil.  But  the  assertion  that  leona  is  their  word
for  God  the  Father,  and  Bacab  for  God  the  Son,  and  Estruac
for  God  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  that  Chiripia  is  the  most  holy
Virgin  Mary,  and  Ischen  the  blessed  St.  Anne,  and  that
Bacab  killed  by  Eopuco  represents  Christ  our  Lord  cruci-
fied by  Pilate  : all  these  and  similar  things  are  inventions
and  fictions  of  Spaniards,  and  the  natives  are  entirely
ignorant  of  them.  The  truth  is  that  the  above  were  the
names  of  men  and  women  whom  the  natives  of  that  land
worshipped  as  gods  and  goddesses.  Some  of  these,  which
were  very  filthy,  were  looked  upon  as  the  gods  of  the  vices  :
such  as  Tlasolteutl,  god  of  lust ; Ometochtli,  god  of  drunk-
enness ; Vitsilopuchtli , god  of  murder.  leona  was  the
father  of  all  these  gods.  It  is  said  that  he  begot  them  on
certain  concubines  ; and  he  was  looked  upon  as  the  god  of
the  fathers  of  families.  Bacab  was  the  god  of  the  sons  of
families ; Estruac  was  god  of  the  air ; Chiripia  was  the
mother  of  the  gods,  and  the  earth  itself.  Ischen  was  the
nurse  of  the  gods.  Tlaloc  god  of  the  waters.  Other  gods
were  worshipped  as  the  authors  of  moral  virtues.  Such  was
Quesalcoatl,  the  aerial  god  and  reformer  of  manners.  Others
were  venerated  as  the  patrons  of  human  life  in  its  various
stages.  They  had  innumerable  figures  and  images  of  their  false
gods  for  various  uses  and  purposes.  Many  of  them  were
very  filthy.  Some  gods  were  in  common,  others  special.
They  had  annual  rotations,  and  they  were  changed  each
year  in  accordance  with  their  superstitions.  The  old  gods
were  forsaken  as  infamous,  or  because  they  had  been  of  no


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


1 25

use,  and  other  gods  and  demons  were  elected.  Other  ima-
ginary gods  were  believed  to  preside  and  rule  the  ages  of
children,  young  people,  and  the  aged.  Sons  when  they  in-
herited, either  accepted  or  repudiated  the  gods  of  their
fathers,  for  they  were  not  allowed  to  hold  their  pre-eminence
against  the  will  of  the  heir.  Old  men  worshipped  other
greater  deities,  but  they  likewise  dethroned  them,  and  set
up  others  in  their  places  when  the  year  was  over,  or  the  age
of  the  world,  as  the  Indians  had  it.  Such  were  the  gods
which  all  the  natives  of  Mexico,  Chiapa,  and  Guatemala
worshipped,  as  well  as  those  of  Vera  Paz,  and  many  other
Indians.  They  thought  that  the  gods  selected  by  them-
selves were  the  greatest  and  most  powerful  of  all  the  gods.
All  the  gods  that  were  worshipped,  when  the  Spaniards  first
arrived  in  that  land,  were  made  and  set  up  after  the  renew-
ing of  the  sun  in  the  last  age;  and,  according  to  Gomara,
each  sun  of  these  people  contains  860  years,  though,  accord-
ing to  the  account  of  the  Mexicans  themselves,  it  was  much
less.  This  method  of  counting  the  age  of  the  world  by  suns
was  a common  usage  among  the  people  of  Mexico  and  Peru,
and,  according  to  their  account,  the  years  of  the  last  sun
were  reckoned  from  the  year  1403  of  our  Lord’s  era.  Thus
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  ancient  gods,  which  were
worshipped  by  the  natives  of  the  empire  of  Mexico  in  the
sun  before  the  last,  must  have  perished  in  the  sea,  and  that
they  invented  many  other  gods  in  their  place.  From  this  it
must  be  manifest  that  the  interpretation  by  which  leona,
Barac,  and  Estruac  are  made  to  signify  the  Father,  the  Son,
and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  false.

“ All  the  other  people  inhabiting  the  northern  parts,  cor-
responding to  the  northern  regions  of  the  Old  World,  such
as  the  provinces  of  the  great  Florida,  and  all  the  islands,  did
not  have  idols  nor  conjuring  gods.  They  only  worshipped
what  Vario  calls  natural  gods,  such  as  the  elements,  the  sea,
lakes,  rivers,  springs,  forests,  wild  beasts,  serpents,  corn,  and


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


126

other  things  of  this  class.  This  custom  had  its  beginning
and  origin  amongst  the  Chaldees,  whence  it  spread  over
many  and  divers  nations.  Those  who  ate  human  flesh  occu-
pied the  whole  empire  of  Mexico,  all  the  islands,  and  most
of  the  countries  bordering  on  Peru.  They  kept  up  the
custom  in  the  most  bestial  way,  until  they  were  brought
under  the  rule  of  the  Yncas,  or  of  the  Spaniards.”

All  this  is  from  Bias  Valera.  In  another  part  he  says  that
“ the  Yncas  did  not  worship  anything  but  the  sun  and  the
planets,”  and  that  “ in  this  they  imitated  the  Chaldees.”


CHAPTER  VII.

THEY  KNEW  OF  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL,  AND  OF
THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION.

The  Amautas  held  that  man  was  composed  of  a body  and
a soul,  that  the  soul  was  immortal,  and  that  the  body  was
made  of  earth,  for  they  saw  that  it  was  turned  into  earth.
So  they  called  it  allpacamasca,  which  means  “ animated
earth.”*  But  to  distinguish  it  from  the  body  of  brutes,  they
added  runa,  which  means  a reasoning  and  intelligent  man,
while  the  brutes  are  called  llama.  They  allowed  to  the
brutes  what  is  called  a vegetative  and  sensitive  mind,  be-
cause they  saw  them  grow  and  that  they  could  feel,  but  they
did  not  think  the  brutes  had  reason.  They  believed  that
there  would  be  another  existence  after  this,  with  punishment
for  the  bad  and  rest  for  the  good.  They  divided  the  uni-
verse into  three  worlds,  calling  heaven  hanan  pacha , which
means  the  upper  earth,  where  they  said  that  the  good  went
to  be  rewarded  for  their  virtues;  this  world  of  birth  and  dis-
solution hurin  pacha,  or  the  lower  earth,  and  the  centre  of
the  earth  ucu-pacha , which  means  the  lowest  earth,  where
* Alpa , earth;  camasca,  created,  from  camani,  I create.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


1ST


they  said  that  the  wicked  were  sent;  and  to  describe  it  more
clearly  they  gave  it  another  name — supaypa-huasin.  This
word  means  “the  house  of  the  devil.”  They  did  not  under-
stand that  the  future  life  was  spiritual,  but  believed  it  to  be
corporeal  like  this  one.  They  held  that  the  rest  of  the  upper
world  consisted  in  a quiet  life,  free  from  the  toil  and  care  in
which  this  life  is  passed ; and  that  the  life  of  the  lowest
world,  which  we  call  hell,  was  full  of  all  manner  of  infirmi-
ties and  sorrows,  care  and  toil,  and  that  there  will  be  suffer-
ing without  cessation,  nor  any  comfort  whatever,  in  that
place.  Thus  they  divided  this  present  life  into  two  parts  for
a future  state,  giving  all  the  joy,  rest,  and  pleasure  of  it  to
those  who  had  been  virtuous,  and  all  the  sorrow  and  trouble
to  those  who  had  led  evil  lives.  They  did  not  include
carnal  delights  nor  other  vices  among  the  enjoyments  of  the
other  life,  but  only  the  rest  of  the  mind  with  total  absence
of  care,  and  the  rest  of  the  body  without  bodily  labour.

The  Yncas  also  believed  in  a universal  resurrection,  not
for  glory  or  punishment,  but  for  a renewal  of  this  temporal
life ; for  their  understanding  did  not  rise  above  the  actual
state  of  existence.  They  took  extreme  care  to  preserve  the
nail-parings  and  the  hairs  that  were  shorn  off  or  torn  out
with  a comb ; placing  them  in  holes  or  niches  in  the  walls,
and  if  they  fell  out,  any  other  Indian  that  saw  them  picked
them  up  and  put  them  in  their  places  again.  I very  often
asked  different  Indians,  at  various  times,  why  they  did  this,
in  order  to  see  what  they  would  say,  and  they  all  replied  in
the  same  words,  saying — “ Know  that  all  persons  who  are
born  must  return  to  life”  (they  have  no  word  to  express  re-
suscitation), “and  the  souls  must  rise  out  of  their  tombs  with
all  that  belonged  to  their  bodies.  We,  therefore,  in  order
that  we  may  not  have  to  search  for  our  hair  and  nails  at  a
time  when  there  will  be  much  hurry  and  confusion,  place
them  in  one  place,  that  they  may  be  brought  together  more
conveniently,  and,  whenever  it  is  possible,  we  are  also  care-
ful to  spit  in  one  place.”


128


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara  (cap.  126),  speaking  of  the
mode  of  interring  the  kings  and  great  lords  of  Peru,  writes
the  following  passage,  which  is  here  quoted  word  for  word.
“When  the  Spaniards  opened  these  tombs  and  scattered  the
bones,  the  Indians  entreated  that  they  would  desist,  because
the  dead  were  waiting  there  to  rise  again  ; for  they  believe  in
the  resurrection  of  the  dead  and  the  immortality  of  the  soul,
etc.”  This  makes  clear  what  we  have  been  savins:;  for
though  the  author  wrote  in  Spain,  without  ever  having  been
in  the  Indies,  he  received  the  same  account.  The  account-
ant Agustin  de  Zarate  (lib.  i,  cap.  12)  repeats  almost  the
same  words  in  treating  of  this  subject,  and  Pedro  de  Cieza
(cap.  62)  says  that  “ the  Indians  held  the  immortality  of  the
soul  and  the  resurrection  of  bodies.”  I read  Gomara  and
these  other  authorities  after  I had  written  on  the  subject  of
what  my  relations  believed  in  the  time  of  their  heathenry,
but  I hesitated  much  because  I feared  that  a statement  so
far  from  paganism  as  that  there  was  a belief  in  a resurrec-
tion would  seem  to  be  an  invention  of  my  own,  no  Spaniard
having  mentioned  it.  I declare,  therefore,  that  I met  with
these  passages  after  I had  written  on  the  subject,  that  it  may
be  understood  that  I have  followed  the  Spaniards  in  nothing,
except  when  I find  that  they  confirm  what  I have  heard
from  my  relations  touching  their  ancient  traditions.  The
same  thing  happened  touching  their  law  against  sacrilege
and  adultery  with  the  women  of  the  Ynca  or  of  the  Sun  (as
we  shall  see  farther  on);  for,  after  I had  written  on  the  sub-
ject, I happened  to  read  the  same  account  in  the  history  of
the  accountant-general  Agustin  de  Zarate,  which  gave  me
much  satisfaction.  How  and  through  what  tradition  the
Yncas  received  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body,
which  is  an  article  of  the  faith,  I cannot  tell,  nor  is  it  for  a
soldier  like  myself  to  inquire.  I believe  that  it  can  never
be  known  with  certainty  until  the  most  high  God  is  pleased
to  reveal  it.  I can  affirm  with  truth  that  they  hold  that


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


129


belief.  All  this  account  I have  written  in  my  history  of
Florida,  taking  it  from  its  proper  place  by  order  of  the
venerable  fathers  of  the  Holy  Company  of  Jesus,  Miguel
Vazquez  de  Padilla,  a native  of  Seville,  and  Gerónimo  de
Prado,  a native  of  Ubeda,  who  ordered  me  to  do  so ; and  it
was  done  reluctantly  and  by  reason  of  certain  tyrannical
acts.  I now  insert  it  again  in  the  proper  place,  that  the
edifice  may  not  want  so  important  a stone.  And  so  we  shall
proceed  to  place  others,  for  all  the  childish  superstitions  of
these  Indians  cannot  be  written  down  in  one  passage:  such
as  that  the  soul  leaves  the  body  while  it  is  sleeping.  They
asserted  that  the  soul  could  not  sleep,  and  that  the  things
we  dream  are  what  the  soul  sees  in  the  world  while  the
body  sleeps.  Owing  to  this  vain  belief,  they  paid  much
attention  to  dreams,  and  their  interpretation,  saying  that
they  were  signs  and  omens  which  presaged  either  much
evil  or  much  good.


CHAPTER  VIII.

OF  THE  THINGS  THAT  THEY  SACRIFICED  TO  THE  SUN.

The  sacrifices  which  the  Yncas  offered  to  the  sun  con-
sisted of  many  different  things,  such  as  domestic  animals,
large  and  small.  The  principal  and  most  esteemed  sacrifice
was  that  of  lambs  ; next  to  which  came  that  of  sheep,  then
that  of  barren  ewes.  They  also  sacrificed  rabbits,  and  all
birds  used  for  food,  all  the  pulses  and  cereals,  the  herb  cuca,
and  the  finest  cloths.  They  burnt  these  things  as  a thank-
offering  to  the  sun,  for  having  created  them  for  the  support
of  man.  They  also  offered  up  large  quantities  of  the  bever-
age they  drink,  made  of  water  and  maize.  At  their  ordi-
nary meals,  when  they  brought  this  liquor  to  drink,  after
they  had  finished  eating  (for  while  they  were  eating  they

i


130


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


never  drank),  they  dipped  the  point  of  the  middle  finger
into  the  bowl,  and,  gazing  attentively  at  the  sky,  they  fil-
liped off  the  drop  of  liquor  which  adhered  to  the  tip  of  the
finger,  thus  offering  it  to  the  Sun,  in  gratitude  for  the  grant
of  this  liquor.  At  the  same  time  they  kissed  the  air  two  or
three  times,  which,  as  we  have  already  said,  was  a token  of
adoration  amongst  these  Indians.  Having  performed  these
ceremonies  with  the  first  cups,  they  drink  the  rest  without
more  ado.

I saw  this  ceremony  or  idolatrous  practice  performed  by
unbaptised  Indians,  for  in  my  time  there  were  still  many
old  Indians  waiting  for  baptism,  and,  from  necessity,  I my-
self baptised  some.  Thus  the  Yncas  were  almost  exactly
like  the  Indians  of  the  first  age  in  their  sacrifices.  The  only
difference  was  that  they  did  not  sacrifice  human  flesh  or  blood,
but  abominated  and  prohibited  the  practice  of  sacrificing,  as
well  as  of  eating  it ; and  if  some  historians  have  written
otherwise,  it  was  because  their  informants  deceived  them,
through  not  distinguishing  between  distinct  periods  and
different  provinces.  In  some  countries  they  did  make  sacri-
fices of  men,  women,  and  children.  Thus  a historian,
writing  of  the  Yncas,  says  that  they  sacrificed  men ; and  he
mentions  twro  provinces  where  he  says  that  they  offered  up
these  sacrifices,  one  of  which  is  little  under  a hundred
leagues  from  Cuzco  (the  city  where  the  Yncas  made  their
sacrifices),  and  the  other  is  one  of  two  provinces  with  the
same  name,  one  of  which  is  two  hundred  leagues  to  the
south  of  Cuzco,  and  the  other  more  than  four  hundred
leagues  to  the  north.  From  this  it  is  clear  that,  from  not
distinguishing  the  period  and  locality,  they  often  attribute
many  things  to  the  Yncas  which  they  prohibited  to  those
who  were  subject  to  their  dominion,  but  who  practised  them
in  that  first  age,  before  the  time  of  the  Kings  Yncas.

I am  a witness  to  having  heard  my  father  and  his  contem-
poraries frequently  compare  the  states  of  Mexico  and  Peru  ;


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


131


and  in  speaking  of  these  sacrifices  of  men,  and  of  the  prac-
tice of  eating  human  flesh,  they  praised  the  Yncas  of  Peru
because  they  neither  practised  nor  permitted  such  acts,
while  they  execrated  the  Mexicans  for  doing  both  the  one
and  the  other  in  the  city,  in  so  diabolical  a fashion,  as  is  re-
lated in  the  history  of  the  conquest.  And  it  is  confidently
asserted,  though  kept  a secret  at  the  time,  that  the  writer
of  the  history  was  also  the  conqueror.  I believe  this,
because,  both  in  my  native  land  and  in  Spain,  I have
heard  worthy  knights  speak  of  it  with  much  confidence.
Indeed  the  work  itself  proves  this  to  any  one  who  studies  it
carefully ; and  it  is  to  he  regretted  that  his  name  should
not  be  published  with  it,  that  it  might  possess  greater
authority,  and  that  the  author  might  thus  more  completely
imitate  the  great  Julius  Caesar.

Returning  to  the  sacrifices,  I affirm  that  the  Yncas  neither
practised  nor  consented  to  the  offering  up  of  men  or  children,
even  during  the  sickness  of  their  kings  (as  another  historian
asserts),  because  they  did  not  look  upon  sickness  as  an  evil,
as  did  the  baser  sort  of  people.  They  considered  illnesses
to  be  messengers  from  their  father  the  Sun,  which  he  sent
to  call  his  son  to  come  and  rest  with  *him  in  heaven.  Thus
the  usual  phrase  in  use  among  these  Kings  Yncas,  at  the
approach  of  death,  was — “ My  father  calls  me  to  come  and
rest  with  him.”  And  in  evidence  of  the  vain  belief  of  the
Indians  respecting  the  Sun  and  his  children,  they  would
not  act  in  opposition  to  his  supposed  will  by  offering  sacri-
fices when  they  were  ill,  but  openly  declared  that  he  had
called  them  to  his  rest.  This  is  sufficient  proof  that  they
did  not  sacrifice  human  beings ; and  furthey  on  I shall  re-
late more  fully  what  their  usual  sacrifices  were,  and  describe
their  solemn  festivals  in  honour  of  the  Sun.

On  entering  the  temples,  or  when  they  were  already
within  them,  they  put  their  hands  to  their  eyebrows  as  if
they  would  pull  out  the  hairs,  and  then  made  a motion  as  if

i 2


132


SECOND  BOOK  OE  THE


they  were  blowing  them  towards  the  idol,  in  token  of
adoration,  and  as  an  offering.  The  king  only  performed
this  ceremony  to  the  idols,  trees,  or  other  things  where  the
devil  entered  to  speak  with  these  peoples.  The  priests  and
witches  did  the  same,  when  they  entered  the  corners  and
secret  places  where  they  conversed  with  the  devil ; for  they
believed  that  this  custom  was  pleasing  to  their  deity,  and
that  he  would  hear  and  answer  their  prayers,  because  they
thus  offered  to  him  their  persons.  I affirm  also  that  I saw
this  idolatrous  custom  practised.


CHAPTER  IX.

OF  THE  PRIESTS,  KITES,  AND  CEREMONIES,  AND  OF  THE
LAWS  ATTRIBUTED  TO  THE  FIRST  ANCA.

They  had  priests  to  offer  the  sacrifices.  The  priests  of  the
House  of  the  Sun  at  Cuzco  were  all  Yucas  of  the  blood  royal,
and  all  those  who  performed  other  services  in  the  temple  were
Yncas  by  grant.  They  had  a high  priest,  who  was  an
uncle  or  brother  of  the  king,  or  at  least  a legitimate  member
of  the  royal  family.  The  priests  did  not  use  any  peculiar
vestments,  but  wore  their  usual  dress.  In  the  other  pro-
vinces, where  there  were  temples  of  the  Sun,  which  were
numerous,  the  natives  were  the  priests,  being  relations  of
the  local  chiefs.  But  the  principal  priest  (or  bishop)  in  each
province  was  an  Ynca,  who  took  care  that  the  sacrifices  and
ceremonies  should  be  in  conformity  with  those  of  the  metro-
politan. For  in  all  the  chief  offices,  whether  of  peace  or
war,  an  Ynca  was  placed  as  chief,  the  natives  being  in
office  under  him.  They  also  had  many  houses  of  virgins,
some  observing  perpetual  virginity  without  ever  going
abroad,  and  others  being  concubines  of  the  king,  of  whom  I


ROYA f.  COMMENTARIES.


i o o
1 O O

shall  speak  more  fully  further  on,  touching  upon  their  rank,
their  seclusion,  their  duties,  and  their  devotions.

It  must  be  known  that  whenever  the  Kings  Yncas  esta-
blished a new  law,  whether  a sacred  one  relating  to  then-
vain  religion,  or  a secular  one  having  reference  to  temporal
government,  they  always  attributed  it  to  the  first  Ynca,
Manco  Ccapac,  saying  that  he  had  ordained  all  laws,  some
of  which  he  had  left  in  force,  and  others  merely  sketched
out,  so  that  his  future  descendants  might  institute  them  in
due  time.  For  as  they  declared  that  the  first  Ynca  was  a
child  of  the  Sun,  come  from  heaven  to  rule  over  and  give
laws  to  the  Indians,  they  concluded  that  his  father  had
taught  him  the  laws  which  he  was  to  institute  for  the
common  benefit  of  mankind,  and  the  sacrifices  that  were  to
be  offered  in  the  temples.  They  insisted  upon  this  fable,  in
order  to  give  authority  to  all  that  they  might  command  and
ordain;  and  for  this  reason  it  cannot  be  stated  with  certainty
which  Ynca  it  was  that  instituted  any  given  law.  As  they
were  without  letters,  they  wanted  also  many  things  which
are  preserved  for  posterity  by  their  means.  It  is  certain,
however,  that  the  Yncas  made  the  laws  and  ordinances  by
which  the  people  were  governed,  establishing  new  ones,  and
reforming  other  old  ones,  according  to  the  requirements  of
the  times.  One  of  their  kings,  as  we  shall  see  when  we
come  to  his  life,  was  looked  upon  as  a great  legislator
because  he  made  many  new  laws,  and  revised  all  the  exist-
ing ones.  He  vyas  also  held  to  be  a great  priest,  owing  to
his  having  ordained  many  rites  and  ceremonies  in  the  sacri-
fices, and  endowed  many  temples  with  great  riches ; and  a
great  captain  because  he  annexed  many  kingdoms  and  pro-
vinces. But  they  do  not  tell  us  exactly  what  laws  he  insti-
tuted or  what  sacrifices  he  ordained ; and  they,  for  want  of
more  precise  knowledge,  attributed  the  laws,  as  well  as  the
origin  of  the  empire,  to  the  first  Ynca.

Following  this  order,  we  will  state  here  what  was  the


184


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


first  law,  on  which  the  whole  government  of  this  state  was
founded.  Having  done  this,  and  related  some  other  things,
we  shall  then  record  the  conquests  achieved  by  each
king,  and,  while  relating  their  deeds  and  the  occurrences  of
their  lives,  we  shall,  from  time  to  time,  mention  other  laws
and  many  of  their  customs  and  modes  of  sacrifice,  and  de-
scribe the  temples  of  the  Sun,  the  houses  of  virgins,  their
principal  festivals,  the  ceremony  of  arming  knights,  the  ser-
vice of  their  houses,  and  the  grandeur  of  the  court,  in  order
that  the  variety  of  matters  may  cause  their  perusal  to  be
less  tiring.  But  first  it  is  convenient  that  I should  collate
what  has  already  been  said  with  the  way  in  which  the  same
subjects  have  been  treated  by  the  Spanish  historians.


CHAPTER  X.

THE  AUTHOR  COLLATES  HIS  OWN  STATEMENTS  WITH  THOSE
OF  THE  SPANISH  HISTORIANS.

In  order  that  it  might  be  seen  that  what  I have  already  said
touching  the  origin  of  the  Yncas,  and  the  state  of  affairs  be-
fore their  time,  is  not  an  invention  of  my  own,  but  that  it  is
taken  from  the  common  reports  furnished  to  the  Spanish
historians  by  the  Indians,  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  desirable
that  I should  insert  one  of  the  chapters  which  Pedro  de
Cieza  de  Leon,  a native  of  Seville,  writes  in  the  first  part  of
his  Chronicle  of  Peru,  which  treats  of  the  boundaries  of
provinces,  the  description  of  them,  the  foundation  of  new
cities,  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  Indians,  and  other
things.  The  above  words  are  given  by  this  author,  as  the
title  of  his  work.  He  wrote  in  Peru;  and  that  he  might  be
able  to  write  with  greater  accuracy,  as  he  himself  says,  he
travelled  over  a distance  of  1200  leagues,  from  the  port  of
Uraba  to  the  town  of  La  Plata.  In  each  province  he  wrote


no  Y A I.  COM  ME  N T A R L KS .


135


the  account  he  obtained  of  the  customs  of  the  natives,
dividing  his  narrative  into  proper  periods.  He  relates  the
condition  of  each  nation  before  it  came  under  the  sway  of
the  Yncas,  and  also  what  happened  after  that  event.  He
was  occupied  for  nine  years  in  collecting  and  writing  down
the  accounts  he  received  from  the  natives,  from  the  year
1541  to  1550:  and  having  related  what  he  observed  between
Uraba  and  Pasto,  he  sets  apart  a special  chapter  (the  thirty
eighth)  before  crossing  the  frontier  of  the  ancient  empire  of
the  Yncas,  in  which  he  writes  as  follows  :* —

“ As  I shall  often  have  to  treat  of  the  Yncas,  and  give  an
account  of  many  of  their  buildings,  and  of  other  notable
things,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  appropriate  that  I should  say
something  concerning  them  in  this  place,  that  readers  may
know  who  these  Yncas  were,  and  not  misunderstand  their
importance,  or  fall  into  mistakes  about  them.  I,  however,
have  written  a special  book  upon  them  and  their  deeds,
which  is  very  copious.

“From  the  accounts  which  the  Indians  of  Cuzco  have
given  us,  we  gather  that,  in  ancient  times,  there  were  great
disorders  in  all  the  provinces  of  that  kingdom  which  we
now  call  Peru,  and  that  the  natives  were  so  savage  and
stupid  as  to  be  beyond  belief ; for  they  say  that  these  early
tribes  were  bestial,  and  that  many  ate  human  flesh,  others
taking  their  mothers  and  daughters  for  their  wives.  Besides
all  this,  they  committed  other  greater  sins,  having  much
intercourse  with  the  devil,  whom  they  all  served  and  held
in  high  estimation.  They  had  their  castles  and  forts  in  the
mountain  fastnesses,  and,  on  very  slight  provocation,  they
made  war  upon  each  other,  killing  and  taking  prisoners
without  mercy.  Notwithstanding  that  they  committed  all
these  crimes  and  worked  wickedness,  they  are  said  to
have  been  given  to  religion,  which  is  the  reason  why,  in
many  parts  of  this  kingdom,  great  temples  have  been  found
* See  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  p.  136.


130


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


where  they  prayed  to,  adored,  and  had  interviews  with  the
devil,  making  great  sacrifices  before  their  idols.  The
people  of  this  kingdom  lived  in  this  manner,  and  great
tyrants  rose  up  in  the  provinces  of  Collas,  in  the  valleys  of
the  Yuncas,  and  in  other  parts,  who  made  fierce  wars  upon
each  other.,  and  committed  many  robberies  and  murders ;
insomuch  that  they  caused  great  calamities,  and  many
castles  were  destroyed,  while  the  devil,  the  enemy  of  human
nature,  rejoiced  that  so  many  souls  should  be  lost.

“ While  all  the  provinces  of  Peru  were  in  this  state,  two
brothers  rose  up,  the  name  of  one  of  whom  was  Manco
Ccapac.  The  Indians  relate  great  marvels  and  very  plea-
sant fables  respecting  these  men,  which  may  be  read  by
any  one  who  pleases,  when  the  book  written  by  me  on  the
subject  sees  the  light.  This  Manco  Ccapac  founded  the  city
of  Cuzco,  and  established  laws  for  the  use  of  the  people.  lie
and  his  descendants  were  called  Yncas,  a word  which  signi-
fies lords  or  kings.  They  conquered  and  dominated  over
all  the  country,  from  Pasto  to  Chile,  and  their  banners
were  carried  to  the  south  as  far  as  the  river  Maulé,  and
north  to  the  Ancasmayu.  These  rivers  were  the  boundaries
of  the  empire  of  these  Yncas,  which  was  so  great,  that
from  one  end  to  the  other  is  a distance  of  one  thousand
three  hundred  leagues.  The  Yncas  built  great  fortresses,
and  in  every  province  they  had  their  captains  and  governors.
They  performed  such  great  deeds,  and  ruled  with  such
wisdom,  that  few  in  the  world  ever  excelled  them.  They
were  very  intelligent  and  learned  without  having  letters,
which  had  not  been  invented  in  these  Indies.  They  intro-
duced good  customs  into  all  the  conquered  provinces,  and
gave  orders  that  the  people  should  wear  usutas  in  the  place
of  leathern  sandals.  They  thought  much  of  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  and  of  other  secrets  of  nature.  They  believed
that  there  was  a Creator  of  all  things,  and  they  held  the
sun  to  be  a god,  to  whom  they  built  great  temples ; but,


HOYA  I,  COMMENTARIES.


137


deceived  by  the  devil,  they  worshipped  among  trees  and  on
stones,  like  heathens.  In  the  principal  temples  they  kept  a
great  quantity  of  very  beautiful  virgins,  just  as  was  done
in  the  temple  of  Yesta  at  Rome,  and  the  rules  concerning
them  were  almost  the  same.  They  chose  the  bravest  and  most
faithful  captains  they  could  find  to  command  their  armies.
They  were  very  astute  and  artful  in  turning  enemies  into
friends  wfithout  having  resort  to  war,  but  they  chastised
rebels  with  severity  and  cruelty.  But,  as  I have  already
said,  I have  a book  concerning  the  Yncas,  so  that  what  I
have  now  written  will  suffice  to  enable  those  who  may  read
it  to  understand  who  these  kings  were,  and  their  great
power,  and  I will  therefore  return  to  my  road.”

All  this  is  contained  in  the  thirty-eighth  chapter,  and  it
will  be  seen  that  his  account  is  substantially  the  same  as  my
own,  both  in  the  former  chapters  and  in  those  further  on,
where  I shall  describe  very  fully  the  idolatry,  conquests,
and  government  in  peace  and  war  of  these  Kings  Yncas.
Cieza  de  Leon  continues  to  dwell  on  the  same  subjects  in
the  following  eighty-three  chapters  of  his  work  on  Peru,  and
he  always  speaks  in  praise  of  the  Yncas.  In  the  provinces
where  he  relates  that  they  sacrificed  men,  ate  human  flesh,
went  naked,  were  ignorant  of  any  mode  of  cultivating  the
ground,  and  worshipped  vile  and  filthy  things, — he  always
adds  that,  with  the  dominion  of  the  \ ncas,  they  abandoned
these  evil  customs,  and  learnt  those  of  their  conquerors.
Also,  in  speaking  of  many  other  provinces  which  still  prac-
tised these  bad  customs,  he  says  that  the  government  of  the
Yncas  had  not  yet  extended  so  far.  Treating  of  the  Indians
in  such  provinces  as  did  not  practise  these  barbarous  customs,
but  had  attained  some  degree  of  civilisation,  he  says  that
these  Indians  had  been  improved  by  the  rule  of  the  Yncas.
Thus  he  always  gives  the  honour  of  having  abolished
abuses  and  introduced  good  laws  to  the  Yncas,  ns  we  also
shall  allege  in  the  proper  places,  occasionally  repeating  his


138


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


very  words.  The  reader  who  may  desire  to  see  them  more
at  large  should  read  his  work,  where  he  will  find  much,
devilry  in  the  customs  of  the  Indians.  It  would  not  he  in
the  imagination  of  man  to  conceive  things  so  horrible  ; but,
seeing  that  the  devil  was  the  author  of  them,  there  is  nothing
in  them  to  astonish,  seeing  that  he  taught  the  same  things
to  the  ancient  heathens,  and  even  now  continues  to  teach
them  to  those  who  have  not  received  the  light  of  the  Catholic
faith.

Throughout  the  whole  of  his  history,  Pedro  de  Cieza,
although  he  says  that  the  Yncas  and  their  priests  conversed
with  the  devil,  and  were  guilty  of  other  very  superstitious
practices,  never  affirms  that  they  sacrificed  men  or  children;*
except,  in  speaking  of  a temple  near  Cuzco,  when  he
alleges  that  they  offered  up  human  blood  there,  making  it
up  into  a loaf  or  cake.  This  was  done  by  bleeding  between
the  eyebrows,  as  we  shall  explain  in  its  place,  but  not  by
the  death  of  children  or  men.  He  conversed,  as  he  tells  us,
with  many  Curacas  who  knew  Huayna  Ccapac,  the  last  of
the  Kings  Yncas,  from  whom  he  received  many  of  the
accounts  which  he  has  recorded.  These  reports  (given
more  than  fifty  years  ago)  are  different  from  those  of  the
present  day,  because  they  were  more  fresh,  and  given  when
the  narrators  were  nearer  to  the  period  in  question.  All
this  has  been  written  against  the  opinion  that  the  Yncas
sacrificed  men  and  cdildren,  for  it  is  certain  that  they  did
no  such  thing.  There  are  those  who  would  say  that  this  is
of  no  consequence,  for  that  the  crime  of  idolatry  includes
all  others.  But  a thing  so  inhuman  as  this  ought  not  to  be
asserted  of  any  people  without  very  certain  proof.  Father
Bias  Valera,  speaking  of  the  antiquities  of  Peru,  and  of  the

* Cieza  de  Leon  states  that  human  blood  of  persons  whom  they  had
killed  was  offered  up  to  the  idol  at  Pachacamac ; but  he  also  tells  us
that  this  was  before  the  conquest  of  Pachacamac  by  the  Yncas  (chap,
lxxii,  p.  251).


HOYA],  CO  M M EN  T A R 1 KS.


139


saci'ifices  that  the  Yucas  offered  to  the  Sun,  whom  they
looked  upon  as  their  father,  writes  the  following  passage,
which  is  here  copied  out  word  for  word.  “ In  whose
honour  his  successors  offered  great  sacrifices  to  the  Sun,  of
sheep  and  other  animals,  but  never  of  men,  as  Polo,*  and
those  who  follow  him,  falsely  assert.”f

* The  Licentiate  Polo  de  Ondegardo  was  in  Peru  when  Gasea  de-
feated Gonzalo  Pizarro.  He  was  Corregidor  of  Cuzco,  and  wrote  two
Relaciones , dated  1561  and  1570,  on  the  subject  of  the  government  and
civilisation  of  the  Yncas.  The  original  MSS.  are  in  the  Escurial,  but
there  is  a copy  at  Simancas,  and  another  was  made  for  Lord  Kings-
borough,  which  afterwards  became  the  property  of  Mr.  Prescott.

t The  Yncas  did  not  offer  up  human  sacrifices.  The  authority  of
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  and  of  Bias  Valera  is  clear  and  distinct  upon  this
point,  and  must  outweigh  all  the  malicious  or  ignorant  tales  of  Spanish
historians ; especially  as  Cieza  de  Leon,  the  best  and  most  reliable
Spanish  authority,  nowhere  asserts  that  human  sacrifices  formed  part
of  the  religious  practice  of  the  Yncarial  worship.  Valverde,  also,  the
fanatical  Bishop  of  Cuzco,  distinctly  asserts  that  the  Yncas  did  not  offer
up  human  sacrifices.

Mr.  Prescott  decides  this  question  in  favour  of  the  other  Spanish
writers,  who,  of  course,  with  their  superstitious  credulity,  violent  preju-
dices against  the  religion  of  the  Yncas,  and  ignorance  of  the  language,
are  very  unreliable  on  such  a point,  and  against  the  Ynca.  He  quotes,
in  favour  of  the  truth  of  the  accusation  that  human  sacrifices  were
offered  up,  Sarmiento,  Ondegardo,  Balboa,  Montesinos,  Cieza  de  Leon,
Acosta.  Sarmiento  and  Ondegardo  are  in  manuscript,  and  I have  not
had  the  advantage  of  examining  them,  but  we  are  told  by  Mr.  Prescott
that  the  former  writer  cannot  be  vindicated  from  the  superstition  which
belongs  to  his  time.  Balboa  and  Montesinos  are  authors  who  wrote  long
after  the  conquest,  their  information  was  got  at  second-hand,  and  their
authority  carries  no  weight  with  it.  It  has  already  been  seen  (see  note
at  p.  138)  that  Cieza  de  Leon  refers  to  the  practices  at  Pachacamac,  be-
fore that  part  of  the  country  came  under  the  sway  of  the  Yncas.  Acosta
certainly  makes  the  accusation  boldly  and  unreservedly  enough.  He
says — “ In  many  nations  they  killed  the  persons  who  were  most  agree-
able to  their  friends,  to  accompany  them  when  dead.  Besides  doing  so
on  these  occasions,  they  were  accustomed,  in  Peru,  to  sacrifice  children
from  four  to  ten  years  of  age  when  the  Ynca  was  sick,  to  restore  him  to
health,  and  also  when  he  went  to  war,  to  secure  victory.  And  when
they  gave  the  fringe,  the  insignia  of  royalty,  to  the  new  Ynca,  they
sacrificed  two  hundred  boys,  from  four  to  ten  years  of  age,  a cruel  and


140


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


That  which  I have  said  touching  the  tradition  that  the
first  Ynca  came  from  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  is  also  related  by

inhuman  spectacle.  The  mode  of  sacrifice  was  to  strangle  the  victims
and  bury  them  with  certain  ceremonies.  At  other  times  they  beheaded
them,  anointing  their  own  faces  with  the  blood,  from  ear  to  ear.  They
also  sacrificed  maidens,  from  amongst  those  whom  the  Yncas  brought
from  the  convents.  One  abuse  of  this  kind  was  very  general  amongst
them.  When  any  principal  Indian,  or  even  a common  person,  was  sick,
and  the  soothsayer  said  that  he  must  certainly  die,  they  sacrificed  his
son  to  Viracocha  or  to  the  sun,  saying  that  the  God  must  be  satisfied
with  him,  and  must  not  take  the  life  of  the  father.”

He  then  compares  all  these  tales  with  the  practices  of  the  kings  of
Moab,  mentioned  in  Scripture,  and  winds  up  with  the  following  sapient
reflection — “ Hence  may  be  seen  the  malice  and  tyranny  of  the  devil,
who  has  desired  to  exceed  God  in  this  matter,  enjoying  worship  by  the
shedding  of  human  blood,  and  thus  securing  the  perdition  of  men,  both
in  body  and  soul,  through  the  rabid  hatred  he  feels  for  them,  as  their  so
cruel  adversary”  (lib.  v,  cap.  19).

Whether  the  credulous  Jesuit  confused  the  practices  of  other  Indian
tribes  with  those  of  the  Yncas,  or  whether  the  above  stories  were  pure
inventions  of  his  own  brain,  is  perhaps  doubtful.  Most  probably  his
narrative  is  a mixture  of  both ; but  his  authority  cannot  for  a moment
be  held  to  outweigh  that  of  Bias  Valera,  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Cieza  de
Leon,  and  Val  verde.

Mr.  Prescott  allows  himself  to  accept  Spanish  testimony  in  preference
to  that  of  the  Ynca,  on  this  point,  although,  as  has  been  seen,  even  the
Spaniards  are  by  no  means  unanimous  on  the  subject;  but  he  is  very
far  from  accepting  Acosta’s  statements  to  their  full  extent.  He  says —
“Sometimes  human  beings  were  sacrificed,  on  which  occasions  a child  or
beautiful  maiden  was  usually  selected  as  a victim.  But  such  sacrifices
were  rare,  being  reserved  to  celebrate  some  great  public  event.  They
were  never  followed  by  those  cannibal  repasts  familiar  to  the  Mexicans,
and  to  many  of  the  fierce  tribes  conquered  by  the  Yncas.  Indeed,  the
conquests  of  these  princes  might  well  be  deemed  a blessing  to  the  In-
dian nations,  if  it  were  only  for  their  suppression  of  cannibalism,  and
the  diminution,  under  their  rule,  of  human  sacrifices”  (i,  p.  97).

The  Peruvian,  Don  Mariano  Rivero,  also  prefers  the  authority  of  the
Spanish  historians  to  that  of  the  Ynca,  adding  Benzoni  to  Mr.  Prescott’s
list  of  authorities,  besides  some  others  who  wrote  at  second-hand ; but  I
can  find  nothing  in  Benzoni  to  justify  the  reference.  So  again  Rivero’s
reference  to  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  in  proof  of  human
sacrifices  amongst  the  Yncas,  is  quite  unjustifiable.  That  chapter  treats
exclusively  of  the  customs  of  the  Indians  of  Paucora,  in  New  Granada,
aud  never  once  mentions  the  Yncas.  Rivero,  on  the  strength  of  these


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


141


Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara  in  his  General  History  of  the
Indies  (cap.  120),  where  he  speaks  of  the  lineage  of  that

false  quotations,  says  “Against  so  many  proofs  the  testimony  of  Garci-
lasso  is  of  no  value,  notwithstanding  the  pains  he  takes  to  exculpate  his
ancestors  from  all  suspicion  on  this  point.”  He  then  goes  on  to  improve
upon  the  fables  of  Acosta,  saying  “ it  was  no  unusual  thing  to  sacrifice
two  hundred  at  one  time.”  ( Antigüedades  Peruanas.)

Mr.  Helps,  although  he  “fears  the  balance  of  evidence  is  clearly  in
favour  of  the  statement  that  human  sacrifices,  at  least  of  children,  were
not  unknown,  or  had  not,  at  some  times  and  in  some  places,  been  un-
known amongst  the  Peruvians,”  rebukes  the  hasty  conclusion  of  Rivero.
“ We  should  pause  aud  ponder  much,”  he  says,  “before  we  take  away
the  character  of  a great  people  on  such  an  important  point  as  that  of
human  sacrifice.”

The  question  may  thus  be  summed  up.  We  may  leave  out  of  the
discussion  such  writers  as  Gomara  and  Herrera,  who  were  never  in  the
Indies,  or  as  Montesinos,  who  wrote  long  after  the  conquest.  It  may  be
admitted  also  that  human  sacrifices  took  place  amongst  many  of  the
tribes  conquered  by  the  Yncas,  possibly  even  after  their  subjugation.
For  instance,  Cieza  de  Leon  mentions  such  an  event  as  having  taken
place  at  Xauxa.  The  early  writers  were  fanatically  hostile  to  the  reli-
gion of  the  Yncas,  were  ignorant  of  or  imperfectly  acquainted  with  their
language,  and  did  not  make  the  necessary  distinctions  between  the
Ynca  Indians  and  the  tribes  they  had  recently  subjugated.  Under  such
circumstances  they  might  easily  be  led  to  state  that  the  Yncas  sacri-
ficed human  beings,  from  having  heard  of  such  sacrifices  in  districts
within  the  limits  of  their  empire,  without  being  conscious  of  deception.
Thus  the  allegations  of  Ondegardo,  Sarmiento,  and  Acosta  may  be
accounted  for.

On  the  other  hand  we  have  the  evidence  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  undoubt-
edly the  most  trustworthy  Spanish  authority ; of  the  fanatical  monk
Valverde,  who  certainly  would  not  willingly  say  anything  in  favour  of
the  Indians;  of  the  learned  and  painstaking  missionary  Bias  Valera  ;
and,  above  all,  of  the  Yuca  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  who  alone  conversed
with  the  Yncas  as  one  of  themselves,  aud  learnt  their  language  from  an
Yuca  princess — his  mother;  that  the  Yncas  did  not  oifer  up  human
sacrifices.

It  is  with  great  diffidence  that  I venture  to  differ  from  such  authori-
ties as  Mr.  Prescott  and  Mr.  Helps,  but  I am  unable  to  entertain  any
doubt  that  the  weight  of  evidence  is  in  favour  of  the  Yncas  on  this
point,  and  against  their  superstitious  and  half-informed  accusers.  This
I firmly  believe ; but  at  the  same  time  the  perpetration  of  a human
sacrifice,  on  very  rare  occasions,  would  not  in  itself  lower  the  Yncas
very  materially  in  the  scale  of  civilised  nations.  It  is  not  worse  than


14.-2


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


Atahualpa  whom  the  Spaniards  captured  and  killed.  Agustin
de  Zarate,  also,  who  was  accountant-general  of  his  majesty’s
revenue,  says,  in  his  History  of  Peru  (book  i,  cap.  13),
that  the  most  venerable  father  José  de  Acosta,  of  the  holy
Company  of  Jesus,  asserts  the  same  thing  in  the  famous
book  which  he  composed  on  the  natural  and  moral  philo-
sophy of  the  new  world  (book  i,  cap.  25).  In  this  book  he
very  frequently  speaks  in  praise  of  the  Yncas,  so  that  I do
not  write  new  things,  but,  as  a native  Indian  of  that  land,
I amplify  and  correct  that  which  the  Spanish  historians,
being  strangers,  have  incorrectly  or  briefly  related,  owing
to  their  ignorance  of  the  language,  and  to  not  having  sucked
in  this  knowledge  with  their  mother’s  milk,  as  I have  done.
I now  go  on  to  describe  the  order  prescribed  by  the  Yncas
in  the  government  of  their  empire.


CHAPTER  XI.

THEY  DIVIDED  THE  EMPIRE  INTO  FOUR  DISTRICTS,  AND
REGISTERED  THEIR  VASSAI.S.

The  Kings  Yncas  divided  their  empire  into  four  parts,
which  they  called  Ttahuantin-suyu.  The  word  signifies
“ the  four  quarters  of  the  world,”  corresponding  to  the  four
cardinal  points  of  the  heaven — east,  west,  north,  and  south.
They  placed  the  city  of  Cuzco  in  the  centre,  for  in  the
peculiar  language  of  the  Yncas  this  word  means  the  navel
of  the  earth.  This  meaning  is  very  appropriate,  for  the
whole  of  Peru  is  long  and  narrow,  like  a human  body,  and
the  city  is  almost  in  the  middle.  They  called  the  eastern

putting  hundreds  of  men  and  women  to  a death  of  frightful  suffering
for  a presumed  erroneous  belief,  quite  independent  of  the  will,  as  was
the  frequent  practice  of  their  cruel  conquerors ; nor  is  it  so  barbarous,
inhuman,  and  cowardly  as  the  killing  of  witches,  which  took  place  in
Germany  as  late  as  1749 ; or  as  burning  women  to  death,  which  was  a
practice  amongst  the  English  until  1763  a.d.


KOYAL  COMMENTARIES.


143


division  Anti-suyu,  from  a province  called  Anti,  which  is  to
the  eastward  ; and  for  the  same  reason  they  called  the  whole
of  that  great  cordillera  of  snowy  mountains  which  runs
along  the  eastern  side  of  Peru  Anti , to  indicate  that  it  is  to
the  eastward.  They  called  the  western  division  Cunti-suyu,
from  another  very  small  province  called  Cunti.  The  northern
part  was  known  as  Chincha-suyu,  from  a great  province
called  Chincha  to  the  northward  of  the  city;  and  the
southern  province  was  Colla-suyu,  so  named  from  a very
large  country  called  Colla,  which  is  in  the  south.  By  these
four  names  was  understood  the  territories  in  those  directions,
although  the  empire  extended  many  leagues  beyond  the
limits  of  the  districts  formerly  so  called.  For  instance,
Chile,  which  is  more  than  six  hundred  leagues  beyond  the
province  of  Colla,  was  within  the  Colla-suyu  division  ; and
the  kingdom  of  Quitu  belonged  to  the  division  of  Cliinclia-
suyu,  although  it  is  more  than  four  hundred  leagues  to  the
north  of  Chincha.  So  that  iu  point  of  fact  the  use  of  one
of  these  divisions  in  a discourse  was  the  same  as  saying  to
the  east  or  west ; and  the  four  high  roads  issuing  from
the  city  were  also  so  called,  because  they  led  to  the  four
divisions  of  the  empire.

As  the  fundamental  principle  of  their  government,  the
Yncas  ordained  a law  by  which  it  seemed  to  them  that  they
would  prevent  all  the  evils  that  might  have  a tendency  to
arise  in  their  empire.  They  ordered  that,  in  all  the  towns
of  their  dominions,  both  large  and  small,  the  inhabitants
should  be  registered  by  decades  of  ten,  and  that  one  of
these  should  be  selected  as  a decurión,  to  have  charge  over
the  other  nine.  Five  of  these  decurions,  each  having
charge  of  nine  other  men,  had  a man  from  among  their
number  who  had  rule  over  them,  and  thus  commanded
fifty  men.  Two  of  these  rulers  of  fifty  had  a superior,  who
thus  commanded  a hundred  men.  Five  centurions  were
subject  to  another  chief,  who  ruled  five  hundred ; and  two


SECOND  BOOK.  OF  THE


144

of  these  obeyed  a general  commanding  a thousand  men.
These  officers  did  not  command  more  than  a thousand  men,
because  it  was  considered  that  this  number  was  as  many  as
one  man  could  properly  superintend.  Thus  there  were
chiefs  over  ten,  fifty,  a hundred,  five  hundred,  and  a
thousand,  subordinate  one  to  the  other,  from  the  decurión
to  the  chief  over  a thousand,  whom  we  should  call  a general.


CHAPTER  XII.

TWO  DUTIES  WHICH  THE  DECUKIONS  PERFORMED.

The  decurión  was  obliged  to  perform  two  duties  in  rela-
tion to  the  men  composing  his  division.  One  was  to  act
as  their  caterer,  to  assist  them  with  his  diligence  and  care
on  all  occasions  when  they  required  help,  reporting  their
necessities  to  the  governor  or  other  officer,  whose  duty  it
was  to  supply  seeds  when  they  were  required  for  sowing  ;
or  cloth  for  making  clothes  ; or  to  help  to  rebuild  a house  if  it
fell  or  was  burnt  down  ; or  whatever  other  need  they  had,
great  or  small.  The  other  duty  was  to  act  as  a crown
officer,  reporting  every  offence,  how  slight  soever  it  might
be,  committed  by  his  people,  to  his  superior,  who  either
pronounced  the  punishment,  or  referred  it  to  another  officer
of  still  higher  rank.  For  the  judges  were  appointed  to
hear  cases,  according  to  their  importance,  one  being  superior
to  another.  The  object  of  this  was  that  there  might  be
officers  who  could  treat  some  cases  summarily,  in  order  that
it  might  not  be  necessary  to  go  before  superior  judges  with
appeals.  It  was  considered  that  light  punishments  gave
confidence  to  evil  doers ; and  that,  owing  to  numerous
appeals,  civil  suits  might  be  endless,  causing  the  poor  to
despair  of  getting  justice  and  to  give  up  their  goods  rather
than  endure  so  much  annoyance,  for  to  recover  ten  it  might


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


145


be  necessary  to  spend  thirty.  It  was  therefore  provided
that  in  each  village  there  should  be  a judge,  who  should
finally  settle  the  disputes  that  might  arise  amongst  the  in-
habitants; but  when  the  dispute  was  between  two  provinces
respecting  boundaries,  or  rights  of  pasturage,  the  Ynca  sent
a special  judge,  as  we  shall  relate  further  on.

If  any  of  the  inferior  or  superior  officers  were  careless  in
performing  their  duties  as  caterers,  they  were  punished
more  or  less  severely,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  offence.
And  he  who  did  not  report  the  neglect  of  his  inferiors,  even
when  the  delay  was  only  for  a single  day,  without  sufficient
cause,  made  the  fault  his  own,  and  received  double  punish-
ment, once  for  not  having  done  his  own  duty  properly,  and
again  for  the  fault  of  his  inferior,  which  he  had  made  his
own,  by  his  silence.  And  as  every  officer  had  a superior
over  him,  they  took  care  to  perform  their  duties  with  all
possible  care  and  attention  ; and  thus  it  was  that  there  were
no  vagabonds  or  idlers,  and  that  no  one  did  what  he  ought
not  to  do ; for  they  all  had  an  accuser  close  at  hand,  and  the
punishments  were  severe.  The  most  common  punishment
was  death,  for  they  said  that  a culprit  was  not  punished  for
the  delinquencies  he  had  committed,  but  for  having  broken
the  commandment  of  the  Ynca,  who  was  respected  as  God.
And  although  the  aggrieved  person  separated  himself  from
the  quarrel,  justice  was  enforced  by  the  ordinary  judgment
of  officers,  who  inflicted  the  full  punishment  established  by
law  for  each  offence,  according  to  its  degree,  either  death,
or  flogging,  or  banishment,  or  the  like.

They  punished  a child  for  any  delinquency  he  might
commit,  according  to  the  gravity  of  his  offence,  even  although
it  should  only  be  a child’s  naughtiness.  But  the  punish-
ment was  remitted  or  made  lighter  according  to  the  circum-
stances. And  the  father  was  also  punished  severely,  for  not
having  instructed  and  corrected  his  child  from  infancy,  and
prevented  it  from  being  guilty  of  naughtiness  or  ill  manners.

K


146


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


It  was  the  duty  of  the  decurión  to  accuse  the  child,  as  well
as  the  father,  of  any  delinquency ; and  for  this  reason  the
children  were  brought  up  with  great  care,  that  they  might
not  be  guilty  of  naughtiness  or  commit  shameful  acts  either
in  the  streets  or  in  the  fields.  Thus,  what  with  the  naturally
meek  disposition  of  the  Indians,  and  the  instruction  of  their
parents,  the  youths  became  so  amenable,  that  there  was  no
difference  between  them  and  gentle  lambs.


CHAPTER  XIII.

CONCERNING  CERTAIN  LAWS  THAT  THE  YNCAS  INSTITUTED
IN  THEIR  GOVERNMENT.

They  never  imposed  a pecuniary  fine,  nor  punished  by  the
confiscation  of  goods,  because  they  said  that  to  do  so,  and  at
the  same  time  to  allow  the  delinquent  to  live,  was  not  to  rid
the  commonwealth  of  an  evil,  but  only  to  deprive  an  evil
doer  of  his  property,  leaving  him  with  liberty  to  do  more
evil.  If  any  curaca  rebelled  (a  crime  which  was  more
severely  punished  than  any  other  by  the  Yucas),  or  com-
mitted any  other  fault  which  was  worthy  of  death,  even  if  that
punishment  was  inflicted  upon  him,  his  successor  was  not
deprived  of  his  right;  but  received  the  command  with  a
warning  not  to  do  anything  to  merit  a similar  fate.  Pedro
de  Cieza  de  Leon,  in  chapter  xxi,*  has  the  following
passage  on  this  subject:

“They  also  adopted  another  plan  in  order  that  they  might
not  be  detested  by  the  natives.  They  never  deprived  the
native  chiefs  of  their  inheritance ; and  if  any  of  them  was  so
guilty  as  to  merit  deprivation,  the  vacant  office  was  given  to
his  sons  or  brothers,  and  all  men  were  ordered  to  obey
them.”

* It  should  be  xli.  See  my  translation,  p.  150.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


14-7


So  far  is  from  Pedro  de  Cieza.  The  same  rule  was
observed  in  their  wars,  the  native  chiefs  of  the  provinces
whence  troops  were  drawn  never  being  deprived  of  the
command  of  them.  They  were  left  in  the  enjoyment  of
their  appointments,  even  if  they  were  masters  of  the  camp,
while  commanders  of  the  blood  royal  were  placed  over  them.
They  enjoyed  serving  under  lieutenants  of  the  Yncas,  whose
members  they  said  they  were,  being  their  ministers  and
soldiers ; and  they  held  such  appointments  to  be  very  great
favours.  The  judge  had  no  power  to  mitigate  a penalty
ordained  by  the  law,  but  he  was  obliged  to  execute  it  in  its
integrity,  on  pain  of  death,  as  a breaker  of  the  royal  com-
mandment. They  said  that  to  give  the  judge  any  discretion
in  the  infliction  of  punishments  was  to  diminish  the  majesty
of  the  law  ordained  by  the  king,  with  the  advice  of  men  of
such  experience  and  wisdom  as  he  had  in  his  council,  which
experience  and  wisdom  were  wanting  to  the  inferior  judges.
It  was  also  considered  that  such  discretion  would  make  the
judges  venal,  and  open  the  door  to  petitions  and  bribes,
whence  would  arise  very  great  confusion  in  the  common-
wealth, each  judge  acting  according  to  his  caprice.  A judge,
therefore,  should  not  assume  the  position  of  a lawyer,  but
should  put  in  force  that  which  the  law  commanded,  how
severe  soever  it  might  be.  Assuredly  if  we  consider  the
severity  of  those  laws,  which  generally  (however  slight  the
offence  might  be,  as  we  have  already  said)  imposed  the
punishment  of  death,  they  may  be  said  to  have  been  the
laws  of  barbarians.  But  looking  to  the  benefit  which
accrued  to  the  commonwealth  from  this  very  rigour,  it  may,
on  the  other  hand,  be  affirmed  that  they  were  the  laws  of  a
wise  people  who  desired  to  extirpate  crime;  for  the  infliction
of  the  penalties  of  the  law  with  so  much  severity,  and  the
natural  love  of  life  and  hatred  of  death  in  men,  led  to  a
detestation  of  those  crimes  which  led  to  it.  Thus  it  was
that,  in  the  whole  empire  of  the  Yncas,  there  was  scarcely


K


148


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


a crime  to  be  punished  in  the  year.  For  the  whole  empire,
being  1300  leagues  long  and  containing  so  many  nations
and  languages,  was  governed  by  the  same  laws  and  ordi-
nances, as  if  it  had  been  no  more  than  one  house.  These
laws  were  also  regarded  with  much  love  and  respect,  because
they  were  held  to  be  divine ; for  as,  in  their  vain  belief,
they  held  their  kings  to  be  sons  of  the  sun,  and  the  sun  to
be  God,  and  they  considered  every  mere  order  of  the  king
to  be  a divine  decree,  how  much  more  would  they  venerate
the  special  laws  instituted  for  the  common  good.  They
said  that  the  sun  had  ordered  these  laws  to  be  made,  and
had  revealed  them  to  his  child  the  Ynca;  and  hence  a man
who  broke  them  was  held  to  be  guilty  of  sacrilege.  It  often
happened  that  such  delinquents,  accused  by  their  own  con-
sciences, came  to  declare  before  the  seat  of  justice  their
hidden  sins;  for,  besides  believing  that  their  souls  might  be
condemned,  they  held  it  to  be  a shameful  thing  that  evil
should  be  brought  upon  the  commonwealth  by  their  faults,
such  as  pestilence,  deaths,  bad  harvests,  or  other  special
misfortunes.  They  therefore  wished  to  appease  God  by
their  deaths,  rather  than  that,  through  their  crime,  more
evils  should  be  brought  upon  the  earth.  From  these  public
confessions,  I suspect,  the  assertions  of  the  Spanish  historians
have  arisen  that  the  Indians  of  Peru  confessed  in  secret,  as
we  Christians  do,  and  that  they  had  confessors.  This  is  an
eri'oneous  account,  which  the  Indians  must  have  given  to
please  the  Spaniards,  and  to  ingratiate  themselves  into
favour,  answering  their  inquiries  in  the  way  which  seemed
to  please  them  best,  and  not  in  conformity  with  the  truth.  For
there  certainly  were  no  secret  confessions  among  the  Indians.
I speak  of  those  of  Peru,  and  do  not  refer  to  other  kingdoms,
nations,  and  provinces,  of  which  I have  no  knowledge.  But
they  had  public  confessions,  as  I have  said,  in  which  they
sought  for  exemplary  punishment.*

* Don  Mariano  Rivero  gives  the  following  account  of  the  Indian
custom  of  confession : —


ROY  \ L COMMENTARIES.


149


They  did  not  have  appeals  from  one  tribunal  to  another,
in  any  suit,  either  civil  or  criminal;  for,  as  the  judge  had  no
discretion,  he  enforced  the  law  bearing  on  the  case  at  once,
and  thus  concluded  the  suit ; although  under  the  govern-
ment of  those  kings,  and  from  the  mode  of  life  of  their
vassals,  few  civil  suits  arose.  In  each  village  there  was  a
judge  to  hear  the  cases  which  arose  in  it,  who  was  obliged
to  enforce  the  law  within  five  days  of  having  heard  the  suit.
If  a case  came  before  him  of  more  than  usual  atrocity  or
importance,  requiring  a superior  judge,  it  went  before  the
judge  of  the  chief  town  of  the  province.  For  in  each  pro-
vince there  was  a superior  governor,  but  no  litigant  could
go  beyond  his  own  village  or  province  to  seek  for  justice.
The  Kings  Yncas  knew  well  that  for  a poor  man,  on  account
of  his  poverty,  it  was  not  well  to  seek  justice  out  of  his  own
country,  nor  in  many  tribunals,  owing  to  the  expenses  he
would  incur,  and  the  inconvenience  he  would  suffer,  which
often  exceed  in  value  what  he  goes  in  search  of,  and  thus
justice  disappears,  especially  if  the  law-suit  is  against  the

“ The  Indians  scrupulously  observed  the  office  of  Penitence.  Before
the  principal  festivals,  they  confessed  their  sins  to  a priest,  and  fasted
for  some  days.  The  priest  then  placed  some  sacrificial  ashes  on  a stone,
and  the  penitents  blew  them  into  the  air.  They  then  received  a stone
called  parca,  and  washed  their  heads  in  a tincu,  or  point  where  two
streams  unite.  Returning  to  the  priest,  they  said — ‘ Hear  me  ! ye
hills,  plains,  condors  that  fly  in  the  air,  owls,  lizards,  and  all  plants  and
animals,  for  I desire  to  confess  my  sins.’  On  beginning  the  confession
they  delivered  a ball  of  red  clay,  on  the  point  of  a cactus  thorn,  to  the
priest;  and  when  they  had  finished,  the  priest  pierced  the  ball  with  the
thorn  until  it  fell  to  pieces.  If  it  separated  into  three  pieces  the  con-
fession was  a good  one ; if  into  two  it  was  bad,  and  the  penitent  had  to
begin  over  again.  To  prove  that  nothing  had  been  omitted,  the  peni-
tent had  then  to  put  a handful  of  maize  into  a bowl.  If  the  number  of
grains  was  even  the  confession  had  been  properly  made ; if  odd  it  was
considered  useless.  The  penance  imposed  by  the  priest  consisted  of
abstinence  from  salt  and  pepper  (aji),  and  of  corporal  chastisement,  such
as  whipping.  Sometimes  the  penitent  had  to  put  on  new  clothes,  so  as
to  leave  his  sins  in  the  old  ones.  Antigüedades  Peruanans,  p.  178.


150


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


rich  and  powerful,  who,  with  their  might,  stifle  the  rights  of
the  poor.*  Desiring  to  avoid  such  inconveniences,  these
princes  gave  no  discretion  to  the  judges,  nor  did  they  allow
many  tribunals,  nor  the  practice  of  litigants  leaving  their
own  provinces.  The  ordinary  judges  gave  a monthly
account  of  the  sentences  they  had  pronounced  to  their
superiors,  and  these  to  others,  there  being  several  grades  of
judges,  according  to  the  importance  of  the  cases.  For  in  all
the  offices  of  the  state  there  were  higher  and  lower  grades,
up  to  the  highest,  who  were  the  presidents  or  viceroys  of
the  four  divisions  of  the  empire.  These  reports  were  to
show  that  justice  had  been  rightly  administered,  and  to  pre-
vent the  inferior  judges  from  becoming  careless;  and  if  they
were  so,  they  were  punished  severely.  This  was  a sort  of
secret  inspection,  which  took  place  every  month.  The  way
of  making  these  reports  to  the  Ynca,  or  to  those  of  his
Supreme  Council,  was  by  means  of  knots,  made  on  cords  of
various  colours,  by  which  means  the  signification  was  made
out,  as  by  letters.  The  knots  of  such  and  such  colours
denoted  that  such  and  such  crimes  had  been  punished,  and
small  threads  of  various  colours  attached  to  the  thicker
cords  signified  the  punishment  that  had  been  inflicted,  and
in  this  way  they  supplied  the  want  of  letters.  F urther  on
I shall  devote  a separate  chapter  to  a longer  account  of  this
method  of  counting  by  knots,  which  has  often  caused  wonder
to  the  Spaniards,  who  saw  that  their  own  best  accountants
made  mistakes  in  their  arithmetic,  while  the  Indians  were
so  accurate  in  their  calculations  that  the  most  difficult  were
easy  to  them.  For  those  who  understand  this  method  know
no  other,  and  are  consequently  very  dexterous  in  it.

If  any  dispute  arose  between  two  provinces  respecting

* The  Ynca  is  here,  no  doubt,  thinking  of  Spanish  tribunals,  and
comparing  the  chicanery  and  interminable  law-suits  in  the  country  in
which  he  was  living  with  the  prompt  and  even-handed  justice  ad-
ministered by  his  ancestors.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


151


boundaries  or  rights  of  pasture,  the  Ynca  sent  a judge  of
the  blood  royal,  who,  having  seen  with  his  own  eyes,  and
heard  all  there  was  to  be  said  on  both  sides,  formed  a deci-
sion, which  was  given  as  a sentence,  in  the  name  of  the
Ynca,  and  was  looked  upon  as  an  inviolable  law,  just  as  if
it  had  been  pronounced  by  the  king  himself.  When  the
judge  was  unable  to  decide  the  case,  he  reported  all  that
had  been  said  to  the  Ynca,  and  he  either  pronounced  sen-
tence, or  ordered  that  the  dispute  should  await  final  decision
until  the  first  time  that  he  should  visit  that  district,  in  order
that,  having  seen  everything  with  his  own  eyes,  he  himself
might  give  judgment.  The  vassals  looked  upon  this  as  a
very  great  favour  and  condescension  on  the  part  of  the
Ynca.


CHAPTER  XIV.

THE  DECURIONS  GAVE  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE
BIRTHS  AND  DEATHS.

Returning  to  the  Decurions,  we  have  to  record  that,  in
addition  to  their  two  duties  of  catering  and  acting  as  crown
officers,  they  had  to  report  to  their  superiors  the  number  of
births  and  deaths  of  both  sexes,  in  each  month ; and  at  the
4 end  of  the  year  a report  was  made  to  the  king  of  the  births
and  deaths,  and  of  the  number  of  persons  who  had  gone  to
the  wars  and  been  killed.  The  same  rule  was  observed  in
war  by  the  heads  of  squadrons,  ensigns,  captains,  and  camp
masters,  up  to  the  general.  These  officers  acted  as  accusers
and  protectors  of  their  soldiers;  and  thus  there  was  as  much
order  in  the  heat  of  a battle,  as  in  peace,  and  in  the  midst  of
the  court.  They  never  allowed  the  towns  they  captured  to
be  pillaged,  even  when  they  were  taken  by  force  of  arms.
The  Indians  said  that,  through  their  great  care  in  punish-


152


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


ing  a man’s  first  delinquency,  they  avoided  the  effects  of  his
second  and  third,  and  of  the  host  of  others  that  are  com-
mitted in  every  commonwealth  where  no  diligence  is  observed
to  root  up  the  evil  plant  at  the  commencement.  They  con-
sidered that  it  was  not  a sign  of  good  government,  nor  of  a
desire  to  uproot  evil,  to  wait  for  an  accuser  before  punishing
a malefactor;  for  that  many  injured  persons  dislike  the
office  of  accusers,  and  prefer  revenging  themselves  with
their  own  hands.  Hence  grave  scandals  arise  in  a common-
wealth, which  are  avoided  by  punishing  offenders  without
waiting  for  an  accusation  against  them.

The  officers  had  names  which  referred  to  the  number  of
the  persons  under  them.  The  Decurions  were  called  Chunca-
camayu,  which  means  “ he  who  has  charge  of  ten  men.”
It  is  a word  composed  of  chunca  (ten),  and  camaya  (he  who
has  charge)  :*  and  so  on  with  the  other  officers,  whose  names,
to  avoid  prolixity,  we  will  not  give  in  the  native  language ;
although  it  might  be  agreeable  to  the  curious  to  see  one  or
two  numbers  given,  with  the  word  camayu. f This  word
camayu  also  serves  to  convey  many  other  significations,  in
conjunction  with  another  noun  or  verb  which  would  denote
the  thing  of  which  the  officer  has  charge.  And  this  very
word  chunca-camayu  also  means  an  inveterate  gambler —
one  who  carries  a pack  of  cards  in  the  hood  of  his  cloak,  as
the  saying  is.  For  any  game  is  called  chunca, % because  all
are  counted  by  numbers,  and  all  numbers  run  in  decimals.

* Cama  is  an  adverb,  signifying  “ until.”  Hence  Camay  the  “ turn,”
or  a “task”  in  labour;  also  “duty.”  Camayu  or  Camayoc , “one  in
charge  of  any  duty,”  or  “an  official.”  Camanca,  “worthy.”  Cama


also  means  “ all.”

t Chunca-camayu  -

Officer  over  10.

Pichca-chunca  camayu  -

5?

50.

Pachac-camáyu  -

J5

100.

Pichca-pachac- camayu

5 J

500.

Huaranca-camayu

V

1000.

X Chuncaycuna,  hazard  ; Ckuncay,  bat  and  ball.

ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


J 53


They  therefore  used  the  word  “ten”  for  a game;  and  to  say
“we  play,”  they  used  the  word  chuncasun*  This  word,  in
its  strict  signification,  means  “ we  count  by  tens  or  by
numbers,”  which  is  as  much  as  to  say  “we  play.”  I have
said  this  to  show  in  how  many  different  ways  these  Indians
used  a single  word  ; and  this  is  the  reason  that  it  is  so  diffi-
cult to  attain  a correct  knowledge  of  their  language.

By  means  of  these  decurions,  the  Yncas  and  the  viceroys
or  governors  of  provinces  knew  how  many  vassals  there
were  in  each  village,  so  as  to  be  able  to  apportion,  without
oppression,  the  dues  and  services  for  the  public  works,
which  the  people  had  to  furnish  for  their  provinces,  such  as
bridges,  roads,  royal  edifices,  and  similar  works;  also  to
select  the  people  to  serve  in  war,  both  as  soldiers  and
porters.  If  any  man  returned  from  the  war  without  per-
mission, his  captain  or  ensign  accused  him,  and  the  decurión
of  his  village  apprehended  him.  He  was  punished  with
death,  for  the  treason  of  having  deserted  his  companions  and
his  captain  in  the  war,  as  well  as  having  abandoned  the  ser-
vice of  the  Ynca,  or  the  general  who  represented  him.  For
another  reason,  besides  those  of  fixing  the  contributions  and
selecting  persons  to  serve  in  war,  the  Ynca  ordered  an
annual  report  to  be  furnished  of  the  number  of  vassals  of  all
ages  in  each  province  and  village,  as  well  as  their  populous-
ness ; and  this  was  done  that  a knowledge  might  be  had  of
the  quantity  of  provisions  that  would  be  needed  in  years  of
scarcity  and  bad  harvests,  and  of  the  necessary  supplies  of
cloth  and  cotton  for  clothing  the  people,  as  we  shall  relate
further  on.  All  this  the  Ynca  ordered  to  be  ascertained,
that  there  might  be  no  delay  in  relieving  his  vassals  when  it
became  necessary.  With  reference  to  this  thoughtful  care
of  the  Yncas  for  their  vassals,  Father  Bias  Valera  frequently
says  that  they  ought  in  no  wise  to  be  called  kings,  but

* Chuncasun  would  be  the  first  person  singular  of  the  indicative
future  of  the  verb  chuncani  (I  play).


154


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


rather  very  prudent  and  diligent  tutors  of  children.  And
the  Indians,  to  express  all  in  one  word,  called  them  “ lovers
of  the  poor.”

In  order  that  the  governors  and  judges  might  not  be  care-
less in  discharging  their  duties,  nor  the  other  officers  of  the
Sun  or  the  Ynca,  there  were  overseers  or  examiners  who
secretly  traversed  the  districts,  inquiring  into  the  work  of
the  officers,  and  reporting  their  shortcomings  to  their  supe-
riors, in  order  that  they  might  he  punished.  These  over-
seers were  called  Tucuyricoc,  which  means  £i  He  who  sees
all”.  These  officers,  as  well  as  all  others  who  served  under
the  government,  were  subordinate  one  to  another,  in  higher
or  lower  grades,  that  none  might  be  negligent  of  their  duties.
Any  judge  or  governor  who  had  been  guilty  of  injustice  or
of  any  other  fault,  was  punished  more  severely  than  an  or-
dinary person  who  committed  the  same  offence,  and  this
severity  was  in  proportion  to  the  rank  of  the  offender.  For
they  said  that  it  could  not  be  endured  that  he  who  had  been
selected  to  administer  justice  should  commit  crime;  for  that
this  was  to  offend  the  Sun,  and  the  Ynca  who  had  selected
him  to  be  better  than  the  rest  of  his  subjects.


CHAPTER  XV.

THE  INDIANS  DENY  THAT  AN  YNCA  OF  THE  BLOOD  ROYAL
HAS  EVER  COMMITTED  ANY  CRIME  WHATEVER.

It  does  not  appear  that  any  Ynca  of  the  blood  royal  has
ever  been  punished,  at  least  publicly,  and  the  Indians  deny
that  such  a thing  has  ever  taken  place.  They  say  that  the
Ynca  never  committed  any  fault  that  required  correction;
because  the  teaching  of  their  parents,  and  the  common
opinion  that  they  were  children  of  the  Sun,  born  to  teach
and  to  do  good  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  kept  them  under  such


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


155


control  that  they  were  rather  an  example  than  a scandal  to
the  commonwealth.  The  Indians  also  said  that  the  Yncas
were  free  from  the  temptations  which  usually  lead  to  crime,
such  as  passion  for  women,  envy  and  covetousness,  or  the
thirst  for  vengeance  ; because  if  they  desired  beautiful
women,  it  was  lawful  for  them  to  have  as  many  as  they
liked ; and  any  pretty  girl  they  might  take  a fancy  to,  not
only  was  never  denied  to  them,  but  was  given  up  by  her
father  with  expressions  of  extreme  thankfulness  that  an
Ynca  should  have  condescended  to  take  her  as  his  servant.
The  same  thing  might  be  said  of  their  property;  for,  as  they
never  could  feel  the  want  of  anything,  they  had  no  reason
to  covet  the  goods  of  others ; while  as  governors  they  had
command  over  all  the  property  of  the  Sun  and  of  the
Ynca;  and  those  who  were  in  charge,  were  bound  to  give
them  all  that  they  required,  as  children  of  the  Sun,  and
brethren  of  the  Ynca.  They  likewise  had  no  temptation  to
kill  or  wound  anyone  either  for  revenge,  or  in  passion;  for
no  one  ever  offended  them.  On  the  contrary,  they  received
adoration  only  second  to  that  offered  to  the  royal  person  ;
and  if  anyone,  how  high  soever  his  rank,  had  enraged  any
Ynca,  it  would  have  been  looked  upon  as  sacrilege,  and  very
severely  punished.  But  it  may  be  affirmed  that  an  Indian
was  never  punished  for  offending  against  the  person,  honour,
or  property  of  any  Ynca,  because  no  such  offence  was  ever
committed,  as  they  held  the  Yncas  to  be  like  gods.  On  the
other  hand,  no  Ynca  was  ever  punished  for  committing  a
crime;  and  the  Indians  will  never  confess  either  the  one  or
the  other,  being  much  scandalised  when  the  Spaniards  ask
such  questions.  Hence  must  have  arisen  the  assertion  of
one  of  the  Spanish  historians  that  they  had  a law  that  no
Yn  ca  could  be  put  to  death.  Such  a law  would  be  a scandal
to  the  Indians,  who  would  say  that  it  gave  the  Yncas  licence
to  commit  any  crime  they  liked,  thus  making  one  rule  for
them  and  another  for  the  rest  of  mankind.  Rather  one  who


156


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


thus  disgraced  the  blood  royal  should  be  punished  with
more  severity  and  rigour,  because,  being  an  Ynca,  he  had
become  Auca,  that  is  a tyrant  and  a traitor.

Speaking  of  the  justice  of  the  Yncas,  in  his  forty -fourth
chapter,  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon  writes  as  follows  respecting
their  army : —

u If  there  was  any  rising  in  the  surrounding  districts,  they
were  ready  to  punish  it  with  great  severity ; for  the  YTrcas
were  such  perfect  judges,  that  they  did  not  hesitate  to  punish
even  their  own  sons”.*

And  in  the  sixtieth  chapter,  also  speaking  of  their  justice,
he  says : —

“ If  any  of  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  traverse  the  roads,
entered  the  fields  or  dwellings  of  the  Indians,  although  the
damage  they  did  was  small,  they  were  ordered  to  be  put  to
death.”f

The  author  says  this  without  making  any  distinction
between  Yncas  and  those  who  were  not  Yncas,  for  their
laws  were  applicable  to  all.  The  fact  of  being  children  of
the  Sun  increased  the  obligation  to  do  well,  for  the  Indians
believed  that  both  the  royal  blood  and  goodness  came  by
inheritance.  They  believed  this  so  implicitly  that  when  a
Spaniard  praised  any  things  that  had  been  done  by  an  Ynca,
the  Indians  told  him  not  to  be  surprised  for  that  it  was  an
Ynca’s  work  ; or  if  anything  was  depreciated  as  being  badly
done,  they  said  that  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  any  YTica
could  have  done  it ; and,  if  so,  it  was  not  a true  Ynca,  but
some  bastard  like  Atahualpa,  who  committed  treason  against
Huasca  Ynca,  the  legitimate  heir,  as  we  shall  relate  more
fully  in  its  place.

The  Ynca  had  a council  of  war  for  each  of  the  four  dis-
tricts into  which  the  empire  was  divided,  as  well  as  a council
of  justice  and  of  finance.  These  councils  had  their  subordi-

* See  p.  164  of  my  translation.

+ See  p.  217  of  my  translation.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


157


nate  officials,  each  in  his  proper  rank,  from  the  highest  to
the  lowest,  the  lowest  being  the  commanders  of  ten  men.
These  officials  reported  all  matters  to  their  immediate  supe-
riors, until  the  reports  reached  the  supreme  councils.  There
were  four  viceroys,  one  in  each  of  the  four  districts,  who
were  presidents  of  these  councils,  and  thus  information  was
received  of  all  that  passed  in  the  kingdom,  for  report  to  the
Ynca.  These  viceroys  were  under  the  immediate  control  of
the  Ynca,  and  governed  their  respective  provinces.  They
were  obliged  to  be  legitimate  Yncas  of  the  blood,  expe-
rienced in  affairs,  and  they  alone  formed  the  council  of  state,
and  received  orders  from  the  Ynca  touching  what  was  to  be
done  both  in  peace  and  war,  transmitting  them  to  their  offi-
cials, from  rank  to  rank,  till  they  reached  the  last.

This  will  suffice  for  the  present,  touching  the  laws  and
government  of  the  Yncas  ; and  further  on,  in  narrating  their
their  lives  and  acts,  I shall  treat  of  such  things  as  seem  most
noteworthy.


CHAPTER  XVI.

THE  LIFE  AND  ACTS  OF  SINCHI  ROCA  THE  SECOND  KING
OF  THE  YNCA  DYNASTY.

To  Manco  Ccapac  succeeded  his  son,  Sinchi  Roca.  His
proper  name  was  Roca  (with  the  pronunciation  of  the  R
soft).  This  word  has  no  meaning  in  the  general  language
of  Peru,  but  it  may  have  some  signification  in  the  special
idiom  of  the  Yncas,  although  I am  not  aware  of  it.  Father
Bias  Valera  says  that  roca  means  a prudent  and  wise  prince,
but  he  does  not  tell  us  in  what  language.  He  notices  the
pronunciation  of  the  R soft,  as  we  have  done.  He  recounts
the  excellence  of  the  Yuca  Roca,  as  we  shall  see  presently.
Sinchi  is  an  adjective  signifying  “ valiant,”*  because  they

* Or  strong.


158


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


say  that  he  was  of  a brave  disposition,  and  very  strong,
although  he  did  not  display  these  qualities  in  battle,  as  he
did  not  wage  war  upon  anyone.  He  had  the  advantage  of
all  persons  of  his  time  in  wrestling,  running,  leaping,  throw-
ing a stone  or  lance,  and  in  every  other  feat  of  strength.

This  prince,  having  completed  the  solemn  obsequies  of  his
father,  and  taken  the  crown,  which  was  a red  fringe,  pro-
posed to  extend  his  territory.  For  this  purpose  he  sum-
moned the  principal  curacas  of  his  father’s  court,  and  ad-
dressed them  in  a long  and  solemn  discourse.  Among  other
things,  he  said  that,  in  compliance  with  his  father’s  policy
when  he  returned  to  heaven,  he  desired  the  conversion  of
the  Indians  to  a knowledge  of  the  worship  of  the  Sun.  He,
therefore,  intended  to  convoke  the  neighbouring  nations,  in
order  to  charge  and  order  them  to  consider  that,  as  they
accepted  the  Ynca  as  their  rightful  king,  they  were  under
an  obligation  to  offer  the  same  service  to  the  Sun,  who  was
the  common  father  of  all  men,  and  to  benefit  their  neigh-
bours who  were  in  so  much  need  of  help,  to  enable  them
to  emerge  from  their  .sensual  and  ignorant  mode  of  life.
They  ought,  he  said,  to  display,  in  their  persons,  the  advan-
tages and  superiority  of  their  present  over  their  former  lives,
before  the  arrival  of  the  Ynca  his  father ; and  to  bring  the
savages  to  a sense  of  the  benefits  they  themselves  had  ac-
quired, that  they  might  the  more  easily  be  induced  to
receive  similar  instruction.

The  curacas  answered  that  they  were  bound  to  obey  the
king,  even  if  they  should  enter  the  fire  for  his  service,  and
thus  the  discourse  was  concluded,  and  the  day  for  their
departure  was  arranged.  At  the  appointed  time  the  Ynca
set  out,  well  attended  by  his  followers,  and  entered  Colla-
suyu,  which  is  to  the  south  of  the  city  of  Cuzco.  Here  he
convoked  the  Indians,  and  urged  them,  with  mild  words,  to
submit  to  his  sway,  and  to  adore  the  Sun.  The  Indians  of
the  Fuchina  and  Canchi  nations,*  who  dwell  in  that  region,

* These  Indians  dwelt  in  the  lovely  vale  of  the  Vilcamayu,  south  of


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


15S


are  exceedingly  simple  in  their  natural  condition,  and  very
ready  to  believe  any  new  thing,  as  are  all  the  Indians.  So,
when  they  saw  the  example  of  the  subjects  of  the  Ynca,  for
example  is  what  most  easily  convinces  on  all  occasions,  they
were  easily  persuaded  to  obey  the  Ynca,  and  to  submit  to
his  government.  Thus,  without  fighting,  he  extended  his
frontier  on  this  side,  as  far  as  the  village  called  Chuncara,
or  about  twenty  leagues  beyond  the  limits  of  his  father’s
dominions,  including  many  towns  on  the  right  and  left  of
the  road.  In  all  these  villages  he  followed  the  example  of
his  father,  teaching  the  people  to  cultivate  the  land,  and  to
practise  a moral  and  natural  mode  of  life,  persuading  them
to  put  aside  their  idols  and  their  evil  customs,  and  to  keep
the  laws  and  precepts  ordained  by  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac.
The  Indians  submitted,  and  obeyed  all  the  orders  that  he
gave,  being  well  contented  with  the  new  government  of  the
Ynca  Sinchi  Rocca,  who,  in  imitation  of  his  father,  did  all
in  his  power  to  benefit  them,  with  much  bounty  and  love.

Some  Indians  will  have  it  that  this  Ynca  did  not  extend  his
dominion  beyond  Chuncara,  and  it  would  seem  that  this  view
is  more  in  accordance  with  the  small  power  then  possessed
by  the  Yncas.  But  others  affirm  that  he  passed  far  beyond
that  point,  and  annexed  many  other  villages  and  tribes  on
the  road  of  Umasuyu,  such  as  Cancalla,  Cacha,  Rurucachi,
Asillu,  Asancata,  Huancane,*  and  as  far  as  the  town  called
Pucara  de  Umasuyu,  so  called  to  distinguish  it  from  another
Pucara  in  Urcosuyu.  I name  these  places  in  detail  for  the

Cuzco.  The  Canchis  are  described  by  Cieza  de  Leon  as  intelligent  and
homely  Indians,  without  malice,  skilful  in  working  metals,  and  possess-
ing large  flocks  of  llamas.  A writer  in  the  Mercurio  Peruano  describes
the  Canchis  as  a very  bold,  restless,  and  inconstant  people,  but  as  good
workmen,  industrious,  and  brave.  They  loved  solitude,  and  built  their
huts  in  secluded  ravines.

* The  last  three  of  these  places  are  in  the  province  of  Azangaro,  a
lofty  plateau  north  of  lake  Titicaca.  Iluancane  is  close  to  the  northern
shore  of  the  lake.


1G0


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


use  of  those  in  Peru;  but  it  would  be  an  impertinence  to  do
so  for  those  in  other  countries,  and  I trust  that  the  latter
will  pardon  my  desire  to  he  of  use  to  all.  Pucara  means  a
fortress,  and  it  is  said  that  this  prince  ordered  it  to  be  built
in  order  to  protect  the  frontier  of  his  newly  acquired  terri-
tory. In  the  direction  of  the  country  of  the  Antis  he
annexed  land  as  far  as  the  river  called  Collahuaya*  (where
very  fine  gold  is  found,  said  to  exceed  twenty-four  carats),
and  gained  all  the  villages  between  the  Collahuaya  and  the
royal  road  of  Umasuya,  where  the  above  mentioned  villages
are  situated.  Whether  the  truth  be  with  the  statements  of
the  first  or  of  the  second  of  these  narrators,  it  matters  little
whether  it  was  the  second  or  the  third  Ynca  who  made  these
acquisitions.  What  is  certain  is,  that  they  were  acquired,
and  not  by  force  of  arms,  but  by  persuasion  and  promises,
and  by  the  fulfilment  of  those  promises.  As  they  were  made
without  conquest,  there  is  little  to  say  respecting  their  acqui-
sition, except  that  it  took  many  years  to  achieve ; but  it  is
not  exactly  known  how  many,  nor  how  many  years  the
Ynca  Sinchi  Roca  reigned.  Some  say  his  reign  lasted  for
thirty  years.  He  spent  them  like  a good  gardener  who,
having  planted  a tree,  cultivated  it  with  all  possible  care,
that  it  might  yield  the  desired  fruit.  Thus  lived  this  Ynca,
reigning  with  all  care  and  diligence,  and  he  saw  and  enjoyed,
in  peace  and  quietness,  the  harvest  of  his  labours.  His  vas-
sals were  very  loyal  and  grateful  for  the  benefits  he  conferred
upon  them.  They  obeyed  his  laws  and  ordinances  with  much
love  and  veneration  as  commandments  of  their  god  the  Sun,
for  so  they  were  taught  to  look  upon  them.

Having  lived  for  many  years  in  peace  and  prosperity,  the
Ynca  Sinchi  Roca  died,  saying  that  he  went  to  rest  with  his
father  the  Sun,  desisting  from  his  labours  to  bring  men  to  a
knowledge  of  their  god.  He  left  his  legitimate  son  Lloque


* Caravaya.


KOYAL  COMMENTARIES.


161


Yupanqui  as  his  successor,  whose  mother  was  the  second
Ynca’s  legitimate  wife,  Mama  Cora,  or  Mama  Ocllo  as
others  say.  Besides  his  heir,  the  Ynca  left  other  sons  by
his  wife,  and  by  his  concubines  who  were  his  relations,  and
whose  children  we  look  upon  as  of  the  legitimate  blood
royal.  He  also  left  a great  number  of  natural  sons  by  alien
concubines,  that  the  generation  and  caste  of  the  Sun,  as
they  called  it,  might  multiply.


CHAPTER  XVII.

LLOQUE  YUPANQUI,  THIRD  KING,  AND  THE  MEANING  OF
HIS  NAME.

The  Ynca  Lloque  Yupanqui  was  the  third  of  the  Kings
of  Peru.  His  name  of  Lloque  means  left-handed.  The
neglect  of  his  attendants  in  nursing  him,  which  led  to  his
becoming  left-handed,  was  the  reason  of  his  receiving  this
name.  The  name  of  Yupanqui  was  given  him  for  his
virtuous  actions.  That  the  various  idioms  used  by  the
Indians  in  the  general  language  of  Peru  may  be  understood,
it  must  be  known  that  this  word  Yupanqui  is  the  second
person  singular  of  the  imperfect  future  of  the  indicative
mood  of  a verb,  and  that  it  means  “ You  will  count In
this  one  verb  thus  used  by  itself  is  enclosed  and  denoted  all
that  can  be  said  in  praise  of  a prince.  It  is  as  much  as  to
say — “ You  will  count  your  great  actions,  your  excellent
virtues,  your  clemency,  piety,  gentleness,  etc.”  This  is  an
elegant  phrase  in  a language  which  has  not  many  words,
but  these  words  are  very  expressive;  for  in  applying  a noun
or  verb  to  their  kings,  these  Indians  made  it  comprehend
all  that  could  be  understood  by  such  noun  or  verb.  Thus
the  word  ccapac,  which  means  rich,  does  not  imply  wealth
in  property,  but  in  all  the  virtues  which  a good  king  can

L


162


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


possess.  But  they  did  not  speak  of  any  one  else  in  this  way,
not  even  of  the  greatest  lords,  but  only  of  the  kings,  for
they  would  not  make  common  use  of  words  that  were
applied  to  their  Yncas.  Such  misuse  would  be  considered
as  sacrilege ; and  it  would  seem  that  these  names  were  like
that  of  Augustus,  which  the  Romans  gave  to  Octavius
Cfesar  for  his  virtue  ; but  to  use  such  a term  in  speaking  of
any  one  who  was  not  an  emperor  or  a great  king  would  be
to  make  it  lose  all  its  majesty.

A similar  phrase  was  also  irsed  to  denote  evil  qualities,  for
in  that  language  these  phrases  were  applied  to  both  good  and
bad  significations  ; but  the  same  verb  was  not  used  to  indicate
good  and  bad.  Another  word  of  similar  meaning  was  set
aside  to  denote  the  bad  qualities  of  a prince,  which  was
Huacanqui,  used  in  the  same  mood,  tense,  number,  and
person.  It  signified  “ You  will  mourn”  for  your  cruelties
done  in  public  and  private,  with  poison  or  knife,  for  your
insatiable  avarice,  your  tyranny  without  distinction  of  sacred
or  profane  things,  and  for  all  other  evils  that  can  be  de-
plored of  a wicked  prince.  But  as  they  declare  that  there
never  was  occasion  to  deplore  the  acts  of  their  Yncas,  they
used  the  verb  huacanqui  in  speaking  of  lovers,  the  phrase
signifying  that  they  will  mourn  the  passion  and  torment
that  love  causes  to  those  who  are  enamoured.  These  two
words,  Ccapac  and  Yupanqui,  with  the  meanings  we  have
described,  the  Indians  used  in  speaking  of  their  kings.
Many  persons  of  the  blood  royal  also  took  them,  making
them  into  proper  names  of  Ynca  families,  as  has  been  done
in  Spain  with  the  name  Manuel,  which,  having  been  the
name  of  an  Infante  of  Castille,  has  since  become  the  surname
of  his  descendants.


HOYA  L COM  ¡VI  ENT  A K IES.


163


CHAPTER  XVIII.

TWO  CONQUESTS  MADE  BY  THE  YNCA  1,1, OQUE  YUPANQU1.

Having  taken  possession  of  his  kingdom,  and  visited  it  in
person,  the  Ynca  Lloque  Yupanqui  proposed  to  extend  its
limits,  and  for  this  purpose  he  ordered  6000  or  7000  men  of
war  to  be  assembled,  so  that  he  might  advance  with  more
power  and  authority  than  his  predecessors ; for  more  than
seventy  years  had  passed  since  they  became  kings,  and  it
seemed  to  him  that  all  their  policy  should  not  be  one  of
prayer  and  persuasion,  but  that  arms  and  power  should  form
a part,  at  least  with  those  who  were  stubborn  and  pertina-
cious. He  nominated  two  of  his  uncles  to  be  masters  of  the
camp,  and  others  of  his  relations  as  commanders  and  coun-
cillors. Then,  instead  of  the  road  of  Umasuyu,  which  his
father  had  followed  in  his  expeditions,  he  took  that  of
Urcosuyu.  These  two  roads  diverge  at  Chuncara,  and,  pass-
ing through  the  district  called  Collasuyu,  surround  the  great
lake  of  Titicaca.

As  soon  as  the  Ynca  had  crossed  his  own  frontier,  he
entered  a great  province  called  Cana,  and  sent  messages  to
the  inhabitants,  requiring  them  to  submit  to  and  obey  the
child  of  the  Sun,  abandoning  their  own  vain  and  evil  sacri-
fices, and  bestial  customs.  The  Canas  desired  to  take  their
time  in  informing  themselves  respecting  all  that  the  Ynca
desired  them  to  do,  what  sort  of  laws  they  were  to  obey,  and
what  Gods  to  worship.  As  soon  as  they  understood  these
things,  they  replied  that  they  were  content  to  worship  the
Sun,  to  obey  the  Ynca,  and  to  keep  his  laws  and  customs,
because  they  appeared  better  than  their  own.*  Thus  they

* The  Canas  inhabited  one  side  of  the  valley  of  Vilcamayu,  and  the
Canchis  the  other — the  river  dividing  them.  The  Canas  were  proud,

o>


L


164


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


went  forth  to  receive  the  king,  and  do  him  homage.  The
Ynca,  leaving  officers  as  well  to  instruct  them  in  their  new
religion,  as  to  divide  the  land  and  bring  it  under  cultivation,
marched  onwards  until  he  reached  the  town  and  nation
called  Ayaviri.*  The  natives  of  Ayaviri  were  so  stubborn
and  rebellious  that  neither  promises,  nor  persuasion,  nor  the
examples  of  the  other  subjugated  Indians  were  of  any  avail.
They  all  preferred  to  die  in  defending  their  liberty,  being  a
very  different  reception  from  that  which  the  Yncas  had
hitherto  encountered.  So  they  came  forth  to  fight,  with  no
wish  to  hear  reason,  obliging  the  Yncas  to  arm  their  men
rather  in  self-defence  than  for  attack.  The  fight  continued
for  a long  time,  and  many  were  killed  and  wounded  on  both
sides.  The  men  of  Ayaviri  fortified  their  town  in  the  best
manner  they  could,  and  sallied  forth  every  day  to  fight  the
Ynca’s  followers.  The  Ynca,  following  the  traditional
policy  of  his  fathers,  avoided  injuring  the  enemy  as  much  as
possible,  and,  as  if  he  was  the  besieged  rather  than  the
besieger,  endured  the  insolence  of  the  barbarians,  and
ordered  his  men  to  close  the  blockade  without  coming  to
hand  to  hand  combats.  But  those  of  Ayaviri,  taking  courage
from  the  forbearance  of  the  Ynca,  and  attributing  it  to
cowardice,  became  every  day  more  hard  to  reduce  and  fiercer
in  battle,  until  at  length  they  entered  the  very  tents  of  the
Yncas.  In  these  skirmishes  and  encounters  the  besieged
always  got  the  worst  of  it.

The  Ynca,  in  order  that  the  other  nations  might  not
follow  a bad  example,  and  take  up  arms,  wished  to  punish

cautious,  and  melancholy,  their  clothing  usually  of  a sombre  colour,  and
their  music  plaintive  and  sad.  They  were  constantly  in  a state  of  re-
volt against  the  Yncas,  until  Huayna  Ccapac  gave  one  of  his  daughters
in  marriage  to  their  Curaca.  Mercurio  Peruano.

* Ayaviri  is  near  the  lofty  pass  dividing  the  valley  of  Vilcamayu  from
the  lofty  plateau  of  the  Collas.  Here  two  roads  branch  off  to  the  south-
ward— one  to  Azangaro  and  Umasayu,  the  other  to  Pucara  and  Chucuito;
one  to  the  east,  the  other  to  the  west  side  of  lake  Titicaca.


ROYAL  commentaries.


165


these  audacious  men  ; and  sent  for  reinforcements,  more  to
shew  his  power,  than  for  any  necessity  he  had  for  them.
He  then  pressed  the  enemy  so  closely  on  all  sides,  that  they
could  not  come  forth  for  anything  they  had  need  of;  so  that
they  were  much  straitened  for  want  of  food.  They  one  day
tried  their  fortune  in  a hand  to  hand  combat,  and  fought
most  fiercely,  but  the  troops  of  the  Ynca  resisted  with  great
valour,  and  many  were  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides.
Th  ose  of  Ayaviri  suffered  so  much  in  this  battle,  that  they
never  came  out  to  fight  again.  The  Ynca  did  not  wish  to
destroy  them,  although  he  easily  could  have  done  so,  but  to
press  the  siege  until  they  were  obliged  to  surrender.  When
the  reinforcements  arrived  which  the  Ynca  had  sent  for,
those  of  Ayaviri  thought  it  time  to  submit.  The  Ynca
received  them,  and  after  they  had  listened  to  a severe
admonition  for  having  resisted  the  child  of  the  Sun,  he
pardoned  them,  and  ordered  them  to  be  treated  well,  with-
out reference  to  the  obstinacy  they  had  displayed.*  Leaving-
officers  to  teach  them,  and  to  look  after  the  property  to  be
set  apart  for  the  Sun  and  the  royal  use,  the  Ynca  advanced
to  the  town  now  called  Pucara.  It  is  a fortress  which  was
ordered  to  be  built  as  a defence  of  the  frontier  that  had  been
won ; and  also  the  fortress  was  erected  because  it  was
necessary  to  capture  the  place  by  force  of  arms.  A strong
garrison  was  left  in  it,  and  the  Ynca  returned  to  Cuzco,
where  he  was  received  with  great  rejoicings.

* Cieza  de  Leon  mentions  this  war  between  the  Ynca  Lloque  Yupan-
qui  and  the  people  of  Ayaviri.  He  tells  us  that  the  Indians  consider  the
inhabitants  of  Ayaviri  to  be  of  the  same  descent  and  lineage  as  the
Canas.  He  adds  that,  after  this  war,  few  were  left  alive,  and  the  sur-
vivors wandered  in  the  fields,  calling  on  their  dead,  and  mourning  with
groans  and  great  sorrow  over  the  destruction  that  had  come  upon  their
people.  The  Ynca  caused  a great  palace  to  be  built  at  Ayaviri,  and  a
temple  of  the  Sun,  and  sent  fresh  colonists  to  repeople  it.  See  my  trans-
lation, p.  358.


166


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XIX.

THE  CONQUESTS  OF  HATUN-COLLA,  AND  THE  ORIGIN  OF
THE  COLLAS.

After  a few  years  Lloque  Yupanqui  again  turned  his
attention  to  the  conquest  and  subjugation  of  the  Indians;
for  these  Yucas,  having  from  the  beginning  spread  the
report  that  the  Sun  had  sent  them  upon  earth  to  lead  men
from  their  wild  state,  and  teach  them  civilisation,  sustained
this  belief  by  adopting  for  their  principal  aim  the  reduction
of  the  Indians  under  their  sway,  thus  concealing  their  ambi-
tion with  the  saying  that  their  acts  were  commanded  by  the
Sun.  On  this  occasion  the  Ynca  ordered  eight  or  nine
thousand  men  of  war  to  be  assembled,  and,  having  appointed
councillors  and  officers  for  the  army,  he  set  out  for  the
district  of  Colla-suyu,  by  the  road  leading  to  his  fortress  of

Rucara,  where  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron  was  afterwards

*

defeated  in  the  battle  called  of  Pucara.*  Thence  the  Ynca

* Cieza  de  Leon  mentions  the  siege  of  Pucara  by  the  Ynca,  but  he
makes  the  mistake  of  calling  him  Tupac  Yupanqui  instead  of  Lloque
Yupanqui.  He  adds  that  he  spent  a day  at  Pucara,  and  saw  the  ruins
of  great  edifices,  as  well  as  many  pillars  of  stone  carved  in  the  form  of
men.  See  my  translation,  p.  368..

Pucara  is  in  latitude  15°  2'  S.,  and,  according  to  an  observation  I
made  in  April  1860  with  a boiling-point  thermometer,  about  13,000
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  The  surrounding  country  consists  of
grassy  plains,  with  ridges  of  steep  hills  dotted  over  with  a tree  re-
sembling a yew  at  a distance  ( Polylepis  tomentella ),  called  queiiua  in
Quichua.  The  plains  and  hill  sides  are  covered  with  herds  of  cattle,
tended  by  little  cow-girls  with  their  slings.  The  town  of  Pucara  nestles
under  the  perpendicular  face  of  a magnificent  rock  of  reddish  sandstone,
1800  feet  high,  the  crevices  and  summit  covered  with  long  grass  ( Stipa
Ychu ) and  queñua  trees.  Birds  whirl  in  circles  over  their  eyries,  and
the  rock  is  famous  for  a very  fine  breed  of  falcons.  At  present  there
are  some  small  manufactories  of  glazed  earthenware  at  Pucara.  A deep
river  flows  over  the  plain  to  empty  itself  into  lake  Titicaca,  passing
about  five  hundred  yards  cast  of  the  town.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


167


sent  messengers  to  Paucar-colla  and  Hatun-colla,  places
whence  the  district  took  the  name  of  Colla-suyu.  This
district  is  very  extensive,  containing  many  nations  and
tribes  under  the  general  name  of  Colla.  The  Ynca  de-
manded that  they  should  submit  to  him  as  others  had  done,
and  that  they  should  not  offer  resistance  like  the  men  of
Ayaviri,  who  had  been  punished  by  the  Sun  with  famine
and  death  for  taking  up  arms  against  his  children.  He
warned  them  that  they  would  meet  the  same  fate  if  they  fell
into  a similar  error.  The  Collas  took  counsel,  their  prin-
cipal men  assembling  in  Hatun-colla,  which  means  great
Colla.  Considering  that  those  of  Ayaviri  and  Pucara  had
been  punished  by  heaven  for  resisting,  they  replied  that
they  were  well  satisfied  to  become  vassals  of  the  Ynca  and
to  worship  the  Sun,  adopting  his  laws  and  ordinances,  and
observing  them.  Having  sent  this  answer,  they  came  forth
to  meet  the  Ynca  with  much  solemnity,  rejoicing  with  songs
invented  for  the  occasion,  to  show  their  feelings.

The  Ynca  received  the  Curacas  with  much  kindness,
giving  them  clothes  for  their  persons,  and  other  presents,
which  they  valued  very  highly;  and  henceforward  both  this
Ynca  and  his  descendants  favoured  and  honoured  these  two
places,  especially  Hatun-colla,  for  the  service  they  then
performed  in  receiving  him  with  signs  of  love,  for  the
Yncas  always  shewed  great  favour  and  kindness  to  those
who  acted  thus,  recommending  them  to  their  successors.
Thus  Hatun-colla  was,  from  that  time,  ennobled  by  the
erection  of  large  and  beautiful  edifices,  besides  the  temple
of  the  Sun  and  convent  of  virgins  which  were  founded  there,
a thing  very  highly  esteemed  by  the  Indians.*

* Hatun-colla  and  Paucar-colla  are,  at  present,  two  villages  within
a league  of  each  other,  and  seventy  miles  south  of  Pucara.  Paucar-
colla  is  on  the  high  road  from  Cuzco,  by  Pucara,  to  Puno  and  Bolivia  ;
Hatun-colla  a little  off  the  road.  I found  Paucar-colla  to  be  12,987
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.  in  April  1860.  This  little  village  is  on
an  eminence  surrounded  by  broad  grassy  plams,  which  extend  to  the


16S


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


The  Collas  consist  of  many  different  nations,  and  thus
they  believe  themselves  to  be  descended  from  various  things.
Some  say  that  their  first  fathers  came  out  of  the  great  lake
of  liticaca.  They  looked  upon  this  lake  as  a mother,  and,
before  the  Yncas  subjugated  them,  they  adored  it  among
their  numerous  gods,  and  offered  up  sacrifices  on  its  banks.
Others  thought  they  derived  their  origin  from  a great
fountain,  out  of  which  they  declared  that  their  first  ancestor
had  issued.  Others  said  that  their  ancestors  had  come  out
of  caves  and  recesses  of  great  rocks,  and  they  looked  upon
such  places  as  sacred,  visiting  them  at  certain  seasons  and
offering  up  sacrifices,  in  acknowledgment  of  their  duties  as
children  to  parents.  Others  thought  that  their  first  pro-
genitor had  come  out  of  a river,  and  they  held  it  in  great
reverence  and  veneration  as  a father,  looking  upon  the
killing  of  fish  in  that  river  as  sacrilege ; for  they  said  that
the  fish  were  their  brothers.  They  believed  in  many  other
fables  respecting  their  origin ; and,  from  the  same  cause,
they  had  many  different  gods,  some  for  one  reason  and
others  for  another.*  There  was  only  one  deity  which  all  the
Collas  united  in  worshipping  and  holding  as  their  principal
god.  This  was  a white  sheep,  for  they  were  the  lords  of
innumerable  flocks.  They  said  that  the  first  sheep  in  the
upper  earth  (for  so  they  named  heaven)  had  taken  more
care  of  them  than  of  the  other  Indians,  and  that  it  shewed

shores  of  lake  Titicaca.  It  consists  of  about  a dozen  huts  built  round  a
large  square,  with  a dilapidated  mud  church  forming  one  side.  Hatun-
colla  is  visible  on  the  skirts  of  the  Cordillera  to  the  westward.

The  grand  edifices  at  Hatun-colla,  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  the
ruins  of  which  were  seen  by  Cieza  de  Leon  (p.  369),  have  now  entirely
disappeared.  But  some  most  interesting  ruins,  the  towers  of  Sillustani,
are  still  in  good  preservation,  on  the  banks  of  a lake,  a short  league
from  Hatun-colla.  I have  given  a detailed  account  of  them  elsewhere
{Travels  in  Peru  and  India,  p.  111).  They  are,  however,  of  a date  ante-
rior to  the  conquest  of  this  part  of  Peru  by  the  Yncas.

* Cieza  de  Leon  says — “ No  sense  can  be  got  out  of  the  Collas  con-
cerning their  origin.”  (P.  363.)


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


169


its  love  for  them  by  leaving  a larger  posterity  in  the  land
of  the  Collas  than  in  any  other  land  in  the  whole  world.
These  Indians  said  this  because  there  are  larger  Hocks  of
native  sheep*  bred  in  the  Collas  than  in  all  Peru  besides,
and  for  this  reason  the  Collas  worshipped  a sheep,  and
offered  up  lambs  and  grease  as  sacrifices.  They  valued  the
white  sheep  amongst  their  sheep  much  more  highly  than
any  others,  because  they  said  that  those  which  most  re-
sembled their  first  parent  contained  most  godlike  qualities.
Besides  this  folly,  a very  infamous  practice  prevailed  in
many  provinces  of  the  Collas,  which  was  that,  before
marriage,  the  women  were  allowed  to  act  as  shamefully  as
they  liked  with  their  persons,  and  the  most  dissolute  were
most  sought  after  in  marriage.  The  Kings  Yncas  put  a
stop  to  all  these  things,  but  chiefly  to  the  worship  of  many
gods,  persuading  the  people  that  the  Sun,  for  its  beauty  and
excellence,  and  because  it  created  and  sustained  all  things,
alone  merited  adoration.  The  Yncas  did  not  contradict  the
Indians  in  the  tales  respecting  their  origin  and  descent;  for,
as  they  prided  themselves  on  their  descent  from  the  Sun,
they  encouraged  many  other  fables,  that  their  own  might  be
more  easily  believed.

Having  arranged  the  government  of  these  important  towns,
as  well  with  regard  to  his  vain  religion  as  to  the  revenue  of
the  Sun  and  of  the  crown,  the  Ynca  returned  to  Cuzco,  not
desiring  to  advance  further  in  his  conquests ; for  these
sovereigns  always  deemed  it  to  be  wiser  tó  acquire  territory
little  by  little,  and  to  settle  their  government  amongst  their
new  subjects,  than  to  make  rapid  advances  and  appear  to  be
tyrannical,  ambitious,  and  covetous.


* Llamas.


170


SECOND  HOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XX.

THE  GREAT  PROVINCE  OF  CHUCUITU  IS  REDUCED,  AS
WELL  AS  MANY  OTHER  PROVINCES.

The  Ynca  was  received  in  Cuzco  with  great  joy  and
festivity,  and  he  remained  there  for  some  years,  superin-
tending the  government,  and  watching  over  the  welfare  of
his  vassals.  Afterwards  he  resolved  to  visit  the  whole  of
his  provinces,  because  the  Indians  were  pleased  to  see  the
Ynca  in  their  districts,  and  that  his  officers  might  not
become  careless  in  their  duties,  owing  to  the  absence  of  the
king.  Having  completed  his  inspection,  he  ordered  pre-
parations to  be  made  for  war,  with  a view  to  extending  his
previous  conquests.  He  set  out  with  an  army  of  10,000
men  led  by  chosen  captains,  and  reached  Hatun-colla  and
the  borders  of  Chucuitu,  a famous  and  populous  province  ;
which  was  considered  of  such  importance,  when  the  Spaniards
made  a division  of  this  land,  that  it  was  allotted  to  the
emperor.*  The  Ynca  sent  the  usual  message  to  the  people
of  Chucuitu  that  they  should  adore  the  Sun,  and  receive
him  as  their  god.  These  people,  although  they  were
powerful,  and  their  ancestors  had  subdued  some  neighbour-
ing tribes,  had  no  desire  to  resist  the  Ynca,  and  replied  that
they  would  obey  him  with  all  love  and  willingness,  because
he  was  a child  of  the  Sun.  They  added  that  they  were
aware  of  his  clemency  and  kindness,  and  that  they  desired,
by  becoming  his  vassals,  to  enjoy  his  bounty.

The  Ynca  received  them  with  his  usual  affability,  and
gave  them  thanks  and  presents,  which  were  highly  esteemed
amongst  the  Indians.  Seeing  the  successful  issue  of  this

* The  district  along  the  western  shore  of  lake  Titicaca.  See  Cieza
de  Leon , p.  373.


KOYAL  COMMENTARIES.


171


undertaking,  the  Ynca  then  sent  similar  messages  to  all  the
neighbouring  tribes,  as  far  as  the  Desaguadero * of  the  great
lake  of  Titicaca.  These,  following  the  example  of  Hatun-
colla  and  Chucuitu,  readily  obeyed  the  Ynca.  The  prin-
cipal towns  thus  subjugated  were  Ylave,  Juli,  Pomata,  and
Zepita.f  We  do  not  repeat  the  terms  of  the  messages  to
each  of  these  towns,  and  the  replies,  because  they  were
similar  to  those  already  stated,  and  to  avoid  repetition,  we
have  therefore  given  one  for  all.  They  relate  that  the
Ynca  spent  many  years  in  settling  the  government  of  these
towns.

Having  pacified  this  region,  his  army  departed,  leaving
the  necessary  guard  for  his  person  and  ministers,  and  for  the
instruction  of  the  people.  The  Ynca  desired  to  assist
personally  in  this  work  as  well  to  inspire  zeal,  as  to  shew
favour  to  those  provinces  by  his  presence,  for  they  were
important.  The  Curacas,  and  all  his  vassals,  were  pleased
that  the  Ynca  should  remain  among  them  for  a winter,  for
this  seemed  to  them  the  greatest  favour  he  could  confer,  and
the  Ynca  treated  them  with  much  favour  and  kindness,
every  day  inventing  new  favours,  for  he  knew  by  experience
(without  reckoning  the  policy  of  his  forefathers)  how  effectual
were  kindness  and  gentleness  in  drawing  new  subjects  to
willing  obedience  and  service.  The  Indians  spoke  of  the
excellence  of  their  prince  on  all  sides,  saying  that  he  was  a
true  child  of  the  Sun.  While  the  Ynca  was  in  the  Collas,
he  ordered  10,000  men  of  war  to  assemble  there  in  the
ensuing  summer.  When  the  time  came,  he  appointed  four
masters  of  the  camp,  nominated  a brother  of  his  own,  whose
name  the  Indians  have  not  preserved,  as  general  of  the

* The  river  which  drains  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  flowing  out  of  its
southern  extremity.  Hence  its  name.

t Towns  along  the  western  shore  of  lake  Titicaca,  in  the  province  of
Chucuitu,  during  the  rule  of  Spanish  viceroys,  and  now  in  the  depart-
ment of  Puno.


172


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


array,  and  ordered  him,  in  concert  with  the  other  captains,
to  proceed  with  the  conquest.  All  five  were  strictly  en-
joined on  no  account  to  fight  with  the  Indians,  but,  in
accordance  with  the  tradition  of  his  fathers,  to  induce  them
to  submit  by  kindness  and  persuasion,  showing  themselves
rather  to  be  pious  fathers  than  warlike  captains.  He  directed
them  to  march  to  the  westward,  to  a province  'called  Hurin-
pacasa,  and  to  subdue  the  Indians  who  inhabit  it.  The
general  and  his  captains  obeyed  these  orders,  and  reduced
the  natives  without  difficulty  for  a distance  of  twenty  leagues,
up  to  the  skirts  of  the  snowy  ridge  which  divides  the  coast
from  the  Sierra.  The  Indians  were  easily  subdued,  because
they  lived  like  beasts,  without  order  or  policy,  the  boldest
man  ruling  the  others  with  tyranny  and  insolence.  They
were  a simple  race,  and  obeyed  at  once  when  they  heard  the
marvels  which  were  told  of  the  Ynca  as  a child  of  the  Sun.
This  conquest  occupied  three  years,  because,  the  people
being  brutish,  more  time  was  required  in  instructing  than  in
subduing  them.  When  it  was  completed,  the  general  and
his  four  captains,  leaving  the  necessary  officials  and  garrisons,
returned  to  give  an  account  of  their  proceedings  to  the
Ynca.  Meanwhile,  the  Ynca  had  been  engaged  in  visiting
his  empire,  and  extending  the  area  of  cultivation  by  all
possible  means.  He  ordered  new  irrigation  channels  to  be
dug,  and  other  works  to  be  executed  which  were  necessary
for  the  welfare  of  the  Indians,  such  as  rest  houses,  bridges,
and  roads  to  connect  one  province  with  another.  The
general  and  his  captains  were  very  well  received  by  the
Ynca,  and  rewarded  for  their  services ; and  he  returned
with  them  to  his  capital,  with  the  intention  of  ceasing  the
conquests,  as  his  frontiers  seemed  to  him  to  be  sufficiently
extended.  From  north  to  south  he  had  acquired  more  than
forty  leagues  of  territory,  and  more  than  twenty  from  east  to
west,  to  the  foot  of  the  snowy  range  dividing  the  llanos *

* Llanos  are  the  sandy  deserts  of  the  coast;  and  the  Sierra  comprises
all  the  ridges,  peaks,  lofty  table  lands,  and  valleys  of  the  Andes.


ROYA I,  CO M M ENTA HI F,S.


178


from  the  Sierra.  These  two  names  have  been  given  by  the
Spaniards.

The  Ynca  was  received  with  great  rejoicing  throughout
the  whole  city  of  Cuzco,  for  he  was  loved  exceedingly  for
his  affability,  kindness,  and  liberality.  He  passed  the  rest
of  his  life  in  peace  and  quiet,  conferring  benefits  on  his
people,  and  administering  justice.  He  sent  the  prince  his
heir,  whose  name  was  Mayta  Ccapac,  on  two  occasions  to
visit  the  provinces,  accompanied  by  old  and  experienced
men,  that  he  might  become  known  to  the  vassals,  and
practise  the  art  of  governing.  When  he  felt  that  death  was
approaching,  he  called  his  sons,  and  amongst  them  his  heir,
and,  in  place  of  a will,  he  commended  to  them  the  welfare
of  his  vassals,  the  duty  of  observing  the  laws  and  ordinances
left  by  their  forefathers  by  command  of  their  father  the  Sun,
and  of  always  behaving  like  children  of  the  Sun.  To  the
Ynca  captains,  and  the  rest  of  the  Curacas  who  were  lords  of
vassals,  he  entrusted  the  care  of  the  poor,  charging  them  to
be  obedient  to  the  king.  Finally,  he  informed  them  that  his
father  the  Sun  had  called  him  to  rest  from  his  labours.
Having  said  these  and  other  similar  things,  the  Ynca  Lloque
Yupanqui  died,  leaving  many  sons  and  daughters  by  his
concubines,  although,  by  his  legitimate  wife,  named  Mama
Cava,  he  had  no  other  son  than  the  heir  Mayta  Ccapac,  but
two  or  three  daughters.  Lloque  Yupanqui  was  mourned
for  with  great  sorrow  throughout  the  empire,  for  he  was
much  loved  for  his  virtues.  He  was  placed  in  the  number
of  gods,  children  of  the  Sun,  and  was  worshipped  as  one  of
them.  In  order  that  the  history  may  not  become  tedious,
from  constantly  dwelling  on  the  same  subject,  it  will  be  well  to
intersperse  the  narrative  of  the  lives  of  the  King  Yncas  with  an
account  of  some  customs  which  will  be  more  pleasant  to  read
about  than  the  wars  and  conquest,  almost  all  carried  on  in
the  same  way.  We  will,  therefore,  now  say  something  of
the  knowledge  of  the  sciences  which  the  Yncas  had  reached.


174


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XXI.

THE  SCIENCES  WHICH  THE  YNCAS  HAD  ACQUIRED  : AND
FIRST  OF  THEIR  KNOWLEDGE  OF  ASTRONOMY.

The  Yncas  had  attained  very  little  knowledge  in  astronomy
and  natural  philosophy,  for,  not  being  acquainted  with
letters,  although  there  were  men  of  considerable  talent
among  them,  whom  they  called  Amautas , who  conceived
philosophical  subtleties  such  as  were  taught  among  that
people,  yet,  being  unable  to  write  and  thus  hand  down  their
learning  to  their  successors,  their  discoveries  perished  with
them,  and  thus  they  made  little  progress  in  all  sciences,  and
were  without  any  knowledge  in  some,  only  possessing  general
principles  drawn  from  the  light  of  nature,  and  even  these
were  denoted  by  gross  and  unpolished  symbols,  that  the
people  might  see  and  take  note  of  them.  We  will  give  an
account  of  what  they  knew  on  each  subject.  Moral  philo-
sophy was  well  understood,  and  it  was  left  written  in  their
laws,  mode  of  life,  and  customs,  as  we  shall  see  in  the  course
of  this  history.  They  were  aided  in  their  knowledge  by  the
natural  law  which  they  desired  to  observe,  and  by  the
experience  they  acquired  in  the  practice  of  good  customs,
which  were  cultivated  from  day  to  day  in  their  common-
wealth.

But  they  knew  little  or  nothing  of  natural  philosophy ;
for,  leading  a simple  and  natural  life,  they  had  no  need  for
making  researches,  or  for  snatching  the  secrets  from  nature.
They  passed  them  by  without  examination  or  knowledge,
and  thus  had  no  necessity  for  investigating  them,  nor  for
studying  the  qualities  of  the  elements.  When  they  said  that
the  earth  was  cold  and  dry,  and  the  fire  hot,  it  was  from
experience  that  the  fire  warmed  and  burnt,  and  not  from  an


ROYA  I,  COM  M ENTA  R t KS


175


investigation  of  philosophical  science.  But  they  had  a
knowledge  of  the  medicinal  virtues  of  certain  herbs  and
plants,  with  which  they  cured  their  infirmities,  as  we  shall
relate  when  we  treat  of  their  medicines.  They  however
acquired  this  knowledge  more  by  experience  (being  taught
by  necessity)  than  by  natural  philosophy,  for  they  did  not
speculate  much  on  things  which  they  could  not  touch  with
their  hands.

They  had  somewhat  more  knowledge  of  astronomy  than  of
natural  philosophy,  for  they  had  more  incentives  to  awaken
speculation  touching  the  sun  and  moon  and  the  movements  of
the  planet  Venus,  which  they  saw  at  one  time  in  front  of  the
sun,  and  at  others  behind  it.  They  also  beheld  the  moon
increase  and  wane ; now  full,  and  again  lost  to  sight  in  its
conjunction.  They  called  this  the  death  of  the  moon,
because  they  did  not  see  it  for  three  days.*  The  sun  also
was  an  object  of  wonder,  because  at  one  season  it  approached,
and  at  another  it  was  more  distant  from  them : some  days
were  longer  than  the  nights,  others  shorter,  others  the  same
length.  These  things  gave  rise  to  astonishment,  as  they
could  actually  watch  them  without  their  passing  out  of
sight.

They  beheld  the  effects,  but  did  not  seek  out  the  causes ;
and  thus  they  did  not  speculate  whether  there  were  many
heavens,  or  only  one,  nor  did  they  imagine  that  there  were
more  than  one.  They  knew  not  what  caused  the  increase
and  wane  of  the  moon,  nor  the  movements  of  the  planets  ;
nor  did  they  take  account  of  more  than  three  planets,  and
those  owing  to  their  size,  splendour,  and  beauty.  They  did
not  know  of  the  other  four  planets.  They  had  no  idea  of
the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  much  less  of  their  influences.  They

* Thus  they  called  the  waning  moon  Huañuc  quilla  (“dying  moon”),
the  new  moon  Mosoc  quilla  (“round  moon”),  the  increasing  moon  ruca
quilla  (“red  moon”),  and  the  moon  in  conjunction  Quilla  huahuy
(“  dead  moon”).


176


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


called  the  sun  Ynti,  the  moon  Quilla,  and  the  planet  Venus
Chasca,  which  means  curly,  from  its  numerous  bright  rays.*
They  also  observed  the  seven  little  goats, f from  being  so
close  together,  and  from  the  difference  they  saw  between
them  and  the  other  stars,  which  excited  their  wonder.  They
did  not  watch  the  other  stars  because,  having  no  necessity
for  doing  so,  they  knew  of  no  object  to  be  gained  by
examining  them,  nor  had  they  more  special  names  for  the
stars  than  the  two  already  given.  They  called  them  all
Coyllur,  which  means  a star.*

* There  is  further  mention  of  Chasca,  or  the  morning  star,  in  chapter
xxi  of  book  iii,  where  the  Ynca  says  that  the  meaning  of  the  word  is
“ of  the  long  and  curly  hair.”  The  literal  meaning  of  the  word  is
“dishevelled.”  Torres  Rubio  and  Mossi  spell  it  Chhasca.  Ckasca-uma
means  an  uncombed  or  dishevelled  head.  The  planet  Venus  was  called
Chasca-coyllvr,  or  “ the  star  with  dishevelled  locks,”  and  also  Manchu-
coyllur,  “ the  ancient  star.”  Chasca-chuqui  is  a lance  with  a fringe
hanging  from  it,  used  by  the  Cañaris  Indians.  See  Torres  Rubio,
Vocabulario , p.  80  (ed.  1754);  Von  Tschudi,  Kechua  Sprache,  ii,  p.  219;
Mossi,  Lengua  General  del  Peru,  No.  85.

t The  Pleiades.  Acosta  tells  us  that  they  were  called  Cólica  in
Quichua.  Rivero  says  these  were  called  Onccoy -coyllur  (“  sick  stars”),
and  the  Hyades  Ahuaracaqui  (“jaw  of  the  tapir”).  Antigüedades
Peruanas,  p.  126.

J Acosta  gives  the  names  of  some  other  stars.  He  says — “ They
attributed  different  offices  to  different  stars,  and  those  who  needed  their
assistance  worshipped  them.  Thus  the  shepherds  adored  and  offered
sacrifices  to  a star  which  they  called  Urcu-chillay,  which  they  say  is  a
sheep  of  many  colours,  presiding  over  the  welfare  of  the  flocks.
It  is  understood  to  be  the  same  which  the  astronomers  call  a Lyras.
They  also  worship  two  other  stars  near  the  star  a Lyras,  which  they  call
Catu-chillay , saying  that  it  is  a sheep  with  a lamb.  Others  adore  a
star  called  Machacuay,  who  presides  over  the  snakes  and  serpents,  and
prevents  them  from  doing  harm  ; and  another  called  Chuqui-chinchay ,
said  to  be  a tiger,  presiding  over  tigers,  bears,  and  lions.  And  generally
they  believed  that  every  beast  and  bird  on  earth  had  its  type  in  the
heavens,  presiding  over  its  increase  and  welfare  ; and  this  they  believed
of  the  stars  called  Chacana,  Topatorca,  Mamana,  Mirco,  Miquiquira.y,
and  others,  a belief  which  in  some  sort  resembles  the  dogma  of  the
Ideas  of  Plato.”  Hist.  Moral  de  Indias,  lib.  v,  cap.  4.


KOYAI,  COMMENTARIES.


177


CHAPTER  XXII.

THEY  UNDERSTOOD  THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  THE  YEAR,  AND
THE  SOLSTICES  AND  EQUINOXES.

With  all  their  rusticity,  the  Yncas  understood  that  the
course  of  the  sun’s  movement  was  completed  in  a year,  which
they  called  /mala.  This  word  means  a year  ; and  the  same
word,  without  any  change  in  the  pronunciation  or  accent,  is
a verb  meaning  to  seize.*  The  common  people  counted  the
year  by  the  harvests.  The  Yncas  also  had  a knowledge  of
the  summer  and  winter  solstices,  which  were  marked  by  large
and  conspicuous  signs,  consisting  of  eight  towers  on  the
east,  and  other  eight  on  the  west  side  of  the  city  of  Cuzco,
placed  in  double  rows,  four  and  four,  two  small  ones  of
three  estados, f a little  more  or  less,  in  height,  between  two
other  high  ones.  The  small  towers  were  eighteen  or  twenty
feet  apart,  and  the  larger  ones  were  at  an  equal  distance  on
the  sides.  The  latter  were  much  higher  than  those  which
in  Spain  serve  as  watch  towers.  The  high  towers  were
used  as  observatories,  whence  the  smaller  ones  could  be
more  conveniently  watched ; and  the  space  between  the
small  towers,  by  which  the  sun  passed  in  rising  and  setting,
was  the  point  of  the  solstices.  The  towers  in  the  east  corre-
sponded with  those  of  the  west,  according  as  it  was  the
summer  or  winter  solstice. +

To  ascertain  the  time  of  the  solstice,  an  Ynca  was  stationed
at  a certain  point,  when  the  sun  rose  and  set,  who  watched
whether  it  threw  its  shadow  between  the  two  small  towers,

* Huata,  a year.  Huatani,  I seize.

t The  height  of  a man.

J “ The  towers  served  them  for  taking  azimuths,  and  by  measuring
their  shadows  they  ascertained  the  exact  time  of  the  solstices.”  Prescott,

h P-116.

M


178


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


which  were  on  the  east  and  west  sides  of  Cuzco.  And  in
this  way  they  were  apprised  of  the  astronomical  time  of  the
solstices.  Pedro  de  Cieza  (chap,  xcii)  mentions  these  towers.*
Father  Acosta  also  refers  to  them  in  the  third  chapter  of
book  vi,f  although  he  does  not  mention  their  position.  They
marked  the  solstices  so  roughly  because  they  knew  not  how
to  fix  the  days  of  the  month  on  which  they  fell,  counting
the  months  by  moons,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  and  not  by
days.  Although  they  assigned  twelve  moons  to  each  year,
yet,  as  the  solar  exceeds  the  common  lunar  year  by  eleven
days,  they  knew  how  to  adjust  one  to  the  other,  by  observ-
ing the  movement  of  the  sun  by  the  solstices,  and  not
the  moons.  Thus  they  divided  one  year  from  another,
regulating  their  season  for  sowing  by  the  solar  and  not  by

* “Another  division  of  Cuzco  was  called  Carmenca,  where  there  were
certain  small  towers  for  observing  the  movements  of  the  sun,  which  the
people  venerated.”  See  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  p.  325.

The  division  of  Cuzco  now  called  Carmenca  was  known  in  the  time  of
the  Yncas  as  Huaca-puncu  (the  holy  gate).

f Acosta  gives  the  following  account  of  the  solstitial  pillars The
Peruvians  counted  their  year,  giving  it  the  same  number  of  days  as  our
own,  and  they  divided  it  into  twelve  months  or  moons,  accounting  for
the  eleven  days  which  are  wanting  in  the  lunar  year  by  dividing  them
over  the  several  months.  In  order  to  make  their  calculation  of  the
year  certain  and  complete,  they  adopted  the  following  method.  On  the
hills  around  the  city  of  Cuzco  (which  was  the  court  of  the  Kings  Yncas,
and  likewise  the  chief  place  in  the  kingdom,  or,  as  we  may  say,  another
Rome)  twelve  pillars  were  placed  in  order,  at  such  distances,  and  in
such  positions  as  that,  on  each  month,  each  one  should  shew  where  the
sun  rose  and  where  it  set.  They  called  these  Sicccanga,  and  from  them
the  festivals  were  announced,  as  well  as  the  seasons  for  sowing  and
reaping.  Certain  sacrifices  were  offered  up  to  these  pillars  of  the  sun.”
Book  vi,  chap.  3.

The  correct  word  for  the  solstitial  towers  or  pillars  is  Sucanca,  but  I
am  not  quite  clear  as  to  its  derivation.  Sueca  means  saltpetre,  and
Suca,  according  to  Torres  Rubio  and  Mossi,  is  a ridge  or  furrow.  Sucani
would  be  the  verb  (“  I make  furrows”)  ; and  Sucanca  the  future  passive
participle  (“that  which  is  about  to  be  furrowed”).  May  not  this  name
have  reference  to  the  alternate  light  and  shade  caused  by  the  sunlight
between  the  towers,  making  the  ground  appear  in  ridges  or  furrows  ?


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


179


the  lunar  year.  Although  some  have  asserted  that  they
adjusted  the  solar  by  the  lunar  year,  these  authors  were  in
error ; for  if  they  had  known  how  to  do  this  they  would
have  fixed  the  solstices  on  the  proper  days  of  the  month,
and  it  would  not  have  been  necessary  to  build  towers  to
serve  as  marks  ( mojoneras ) by  which  to  observe  the  time
with  so  much  care  and  trouble,  watching  the  rising  and
setting  of  the  sun  each  day  by  the  towers.*

I left  these  towers  standing  in  the  year  1560,  and,  if  they
have  not  been  pulled  down  since,  the  place  might  be  verified
by  them,  whence  the  Yncas  observed  the  solstices;  whether
it  was  from  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  or  from  some  other  place
which  I do  not  here  specify,  not  being  quite  certain  about  it.

The  Yncas  were  also  acquainted  with  the  equinoxes,  and
observed  them  with  great  solemnity.  During  the  equinox
of  March  they  reaped  the  maize  crops  of  Cuzco  with  much
festivity  and  rejoicing,  especially  on  the  Anden  of  the
Collcampata,f  which  w7as  regarded  as  a garden  of  the  Sun.
In  the  equinox  of  September  they  celebrated  one  of  the
four  principal  festivals  of  the  Sun,  called  Sitúa  Raymi  (r
soft),  which  means  the  “ principal  feast. It  was  celebrated
in  the  way  which  we  shall  describe  further  on.  To  ascer-
tain the  time  of  the  equinox  they  had  a stone  column,  very
richly  carved,  erected  in  the  open  spaces  in  front  of  the
temples  of  the  Sun.  When  the  priests  thought  that  the
equinox  was  approaching,  they  carefully  watched  the  shadow

* The  Yncas  called  the  period  from  the  end  of  the  lunar  year  to  the
completion  of  the  solar  year  Puchuc  quilla  (“  finished  moon”),  and
devoted  it  to  rest.  Antig.  Per.,  p.  127.

t The  glorious  terrace  to  the  north  of  Cuzco,  just  under  the  fortress
rock,  and  commanding  an  unequalled  view  of  the  city  and  distant
mountains.  Here  stand  the  ruins  of  the  palace  of  Manco  Ccapac,
within  which  are  these  very  terraced  maize  fields.  The  Collcampata  is
the  most  lovely,  but  the  saddest  spot  in  Peru.

X Sitúa  Raymi,  the  month  of  the  autumnal  equinox,  or  September.
Rivero  gives  Umu-Raymi  as  the  name  for  September.  But  there  will
be  more  on  this  subject  further  on.


180


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


thrown  by  the  pillars  every  day.  The  pillar  was  erected  in
the  centre  of  a large  circle,  occupying  the  whole  width  of
the  courtyard.  Across  the  circle  a line  was  drawn  from
east  to  west,  and  long  experience  had  shewn  them  where
the  two  points  should  be  placed  on  the  circumference.
They  saw,  by  the  shadow  thrown  by  the  column  in  the
direction  of  the  line,  that  the  time  of  the  equinox  was
approaching ; and  when  the  shadow  was  exactly  on  the  line
from  sunrise  to  sunset,  and  the  light  of  the  sun  bathed  the
whole  circumference  of  the  column  at  noon,  without  any
shadow  being  thrown  at  all,  they  knew  that  the  equinox  had
arrived.  Then  they  adorned  the  pillar  with  all  the  flowers
and  sweet  herbs  that  could  be  gathered,  and  placed  the  chair
of  the  Sun  upon  it,  saying  that  on  that  day  the  Sun  with  all
its  light  was  seated  upon  the  pillar.  Hence  they  specially
worshipped  the  Sun  on  that  day  with  more  festivity  than  on
any  other,  and  offered  up  great  presents  of  gold,  silver,
precious  stones,  and  other  valuable  things.  It  is  worthy  of
note  that  the  Kings  Yncas  and  their  Amautas,  who  were
philosophers,  as  they  extended  their  conquests,  observed
that,  the  nearer  they  approached  the  equinoctial  line,  the
smaller  was  the  shadow  thrown  by  the  columns  at  noon.
The  columns  were  therefore  more  and  more  venerated  as
they  were  erected  nearer  to  the  city  of  Quitu ; and  above
all  others  they  venerated  those  which  were  set  up  in  that
city  itself,  and  in  its  vicinity  as  far  as  the  seacoast,  because
the  Sun  being  d plornb  (perpendicular)  as  the  bricklayers
say,  the  pillars  then  shewed  no  appearance  of  a shadow  at
all  at  noon.  For  this  reason  they  were  held  in  the  highest
veneration,  for  the  Indians  said  that  these  must  be  the  seats
which  were  most  agreeable  to  the  Sun,  seeing  that  he  sat
square  upon  them,  while  on  others  he  sat  sideways.  These
people  gave  a place  for  such  follies  in  their  astronomy,
because  their  imaginations  did  not  take  them  beyond  what
they  could  see  with  their  eyes.  The  pillars  of  Quitu,  and


HOYA  I,  COM  Al  ENT  A HIT'S.


181


of  all  that  region,  were  very  properly  destroyed  by  the
Governor  Sebastian  de  Belalcazar,  and  broken  into  pieces,
because  the  Indians  worshipped  them  as  idols.  All  the
others,  throughout  the  empire,  were  destroyed  by  the  rest
of  the  Spanish  captains,  as  they  were  found.


CHAPTER  XXIII.

THEY  OBSERVED  THE  ECLIl'SES  OF  TI1E  SUN,  AND  WHAT
THEY  DID  WHEN  THOSE  OF  THE  MOON  OCCURRED.

They  reckoned  the  months  by  the  moons,  from  one  new
moon  to  another,  and  they  therefore  called  a month  Quilla,
as  well  as  the  moon.  They  gave  a special  name  to  the
months,  reckoning  half  months  by  the  increasing  and  waning
of  the  moon,  and  the  weeks  bv  its  quarters,  but  they  did
not  have  names  for  the  days  of  the  month.  They  observed
the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  of  the  moon,  but  they  did  not
understand  their  cause.  Of  a solar  eclipse  they  said  that
the  Sun  was  enraged  at  some  offence  that  had  been  com-
mitted against  Him,  for  that  His  face  was  disturbed  like
that  of  an  angry  man,  and  they  prophesied  (like  the  astro-
logers) that  some  heavy  chastisement  was  approaching.
When  a lunar  eclipse  took  place,  seeing  the  moon  become
dark,  they  thought  that  she  was  ill ; but  if  it  disappeared
altogether,  they  said  she  was  dead,  and  would  fall  from  the
sky,  and  kill  every  one  beneath,  and  that  the  end  of  the
world  would  come.  In  great  terror,  when  an  eclipse  of  the
moon  began,  they  sounded  trumpets,  horns,  and  drums,  and
all  other  instruments  they  possessed,  so  as  to  make  a great
noise.  They  tied  up  all  the  dogs,  both  large  and  small,  and
gave  them  many  blows,  to  make  them  call  and  yell  to  the
moon;  for,  according  to  a certain  fable  they  recount,  the
moon  was  fond  of  dogs,  owing  to  a service  they  had  done


182


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


her,  and  they  hoped  that,  when  she  heard  them  cry,  she
would  be  sorry  for  them,  and  awake  from  the  sleep  which
had  been  caused  by  her  sickness.*  * * *

They  told  the  children  to  cry  aloud,  calling  upon  Mama
Quilla,  which  means  “ Mother  Moon,”  and  beseeching  her
not  to  die,  and  so  cause  them  all  to  perish.  The  men  and
women  did  the  same.  The  row  and  confusion  that  was
caused  by  all  this  was  so  great  that  it  is  impossible  to
imagine  it.

According  to  the  completeness  of  the  eclipse  was  supposed
to  be  the  severity  of  the  moon’s  illness ; and,  if  it  was  total,
there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  believe  that  the  moon  was
dead,  and  every  moment  they  expected  it  to  fall  and  kill
them.  Then  was  the  lamentation  and  grief  most  sincere,
for  they  were  as  people  with  death  and  the  world’s  end
before  their  eyes.  When  they  beheld  the  moon  appearing
again,  little  by  little,  they  said  that  she  was  recovering  from
her  sickness;  because  Pachacamac,  who  was  the  sustainer  of
the  universe,  had  restored  her  to  health,  and  commanded
that  she  should  not  die,  in  order  that  the  world  might  not
perish.  Finally,  when  the  light  of  the  moon  was  quite
restored,  they  offered  her  congratulations,  and  many  thanks
for  not  having  fallen.  All  this  respecting  the  moon  I saw
with  my  own  eyes.  They  called  the  day  punchan,  the
night  hita,  and  the  morning  paccari.  They  also  had  words
to  express  the  dawn,  and  other  parts  of  the  day  and  night,
such  as  noon  and  midnight.

They  noticed  the  lightning,  thunder,  and  thunderbolt,
and  all  three  together  were  called  yllapa.  They  did  not
worship  them  as  gods,  but  honoured  and  revered  them  as
servants  of  the  Sun.f  They  believed  that  these  resided  in

* This  is  disgusting.

t Acosta  declares  that  they  did  worship  these  phenomena,  and  that
they  were  the  third  huaca  or  object  of  adoration,  the  first  being  Vira-
cocha or  the  Supreme  Being,  and  the  second  being  the  Sun.  They


ROYAL  COMM  KNTAR  IKS.


18-3


the  air,  and  not  in  heaven.  In  the  same  way  they  looked
upon  the  rainbow  as  sacred,  for  the  beauty  of  its  colours,
and  because  they  understood  that  this  beauty  was  derived
from  the  Sun;  and  the  Kings  Yncas  adopted  it  for  their
arms,  and  as  their  device.  In  the  house  of  the  Sun  each  of
these  things  was  given  a place,  as  we  shall  relate  presently.
In  the  milky  way  of  astronomers,  upon  some  dark  spots
which  spread  over  part  of  it,  they  fancied  there  was  the
shape  of  a sheep  with  the  body  complete,  and  giving  suck
to  a lamb.  They  wanted  to  point  this  out  to  me,  saying —
“ Do  you  see  the  head  of  the  sheep  ?”  “Can’t  you  make  out
the  lamb’s  head,  sucking?”  “See  you  not  the  body  and  legs
of  both  ?”  But  I could  not  see  anything  but  the  spots,  and
this  was,  doubtless,  from  a want  of  imagination.

But  they  made  use  of  these  figures  for  their  astrology,
merely  desiring  to  picture  them  in  their  fancies.  They  did
not  make  ordinary  prognostications  from  signs  in  the  sun,
moon,  or  comets ; but  only  prophecies  of  very  rare  import,
such  as  the  death  of  kings  and  the  fall  of  empires.  Further
on,  if  we  get  so  far,  we  shall  recount  the  appearance  of  some
comets.  For  ordinary  omens  they  made  use  of  dreams  and
the  appearance  of  sacrifices,  but  not  the  signs  of  the  stars  nor
of  the  air.  It  is  a fearful  thing  to  hear  what  they  prognos-
ticated from  dreams;  but,  in  order  to  avoid  scandal,  I shall
not  relate  what  I could  say  upon  this  subject.  Touching
the  planet  Yen  us,  which  at  one  time  they  beheld  setting,
and  at  another  rising,  they  said  that  the  sun,  as  lord  over  all
the  stars,  ordered  that  this,  which  was  more  beautiful  than
the  others,  should  travel  near  him,  sometimes  in  front,  and
at  others  behind.

called  the  phenomena  of  thunder  by  three  names — Chuqui-ylla,  Catu-
ylla,  and  Ynti-yllapa.  Their  belief  was  that  there  was  a man  in  the
sky  with  a sling  and  a stick,  and  that  in  his  power  were  the  rain,  the
hail,  the  thunder,  and  all  else  that  appertains  to  the  regions  of  the  air,
where  clouds  are  formed.  Book  v,  chap.  iv.


184


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


When  the  sun  set,  seeing  it  sink  into  the  sea  (for  Peru,
for  its  entire  length,  has  the  ocean  to  the  westward),  they
said  that  on  entering,  by  its  fire  and  heat,  it  dried  up  a great
portion  of  the  water  of  the  sea,  and,  like  a swimmer,  made  a
great  dive  under  the  earth,  to  rise  next  day  in  the  east,  thus
making  it  to  be  understood  that  the  earth  was  above  the
water.  But  they  said  nothiug  touching  the  setting  either  of
the  moon  or  of  the  stars.  The  Yncas  had  all  these  follies  in
their  astronomy,  from  which  it  may  be  judged  how  slight
was  the  knowledge  they  had  attained  ; and  this  will  suffice
respecting  their  astronomy.  We  will  now  give  an  account
of  the  medicines  they  used  to  cure  their  infirmities.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

THE  MEDICINES  THEY  USED,  AND  THEIR  MANNER  OF
EFFECTING  CURES.

They  had  certainly  attained  to  the  knowledge  that  evacua-
tion by  bleeding  and  purging  was  a beneficial  thing  ; and  they
bled  from  the  arms  and  legs,  but  without  understanding  the
use  of  leeches  nor  the  position  of  veins  for  each  disease.
They  opened  the  vein  which  was  nearest  to  the  position  of
the  pain.  When  they  felt  a bad  pain  in  the  head,  they  bled
between  the  eye-brows,  just  above  the  nose.  The  lancet  was
a pointed  stone  fixed  into  a cleft  stick,  to  which  it  was
fastened,  so  that  it  might  not  fall.  They  placed  the  point
over  a vein,  and  gave  the  end  of  the  handle  a fillip,  and  in
this  way  they  opened  the  vein  with  less  pain  than  by  the  use
of  a common  lancet.  In  the  application  of  purgatives  they
knew  nothing  of  the  mode  of  examining  the  humours  by  the
urine,  nor  did  they  look  at  it,  nor  did  they  know  anything  of
heat,  phlegm,  or  melancholy.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


185


They  usually  purged  when  they  felt  overloaded  and  were
in  good  health,  but  not  when  they  were  ill  They  used  (be-
sides other  roots  which  act  as  purgatives)  certain  white  roots.
They  are  like  small  rape  seeds.  They  say  that  of  these  roots
there  are  male  and  female,  and  they  take  as  much  of  one  as  of
the  other,  about  two  ounces  of  each,  pounded.  The  powder
is  put  in  water,  or  in  their  drink,  and  taken,  after  which  they
sit  in  the  sun,  that  its  warmth  may  assist  the  medicine  to  ope-
rate. After  about  an  hour  they  feel  so  giddy  that  they  cannot
stand.  Their  feelings  are  like  those  of  sea  sickness  with  persons
who  first  go  to  sea.  The  head  is  attacked  with  giddiness,  and
there  is  a feeling,  as  if  ants  were  crawling  up  the  arms  and
legs,  in  the  veins  and  arteries,  and  all  over  the  body  ; and
the  evacuations  are  almost  always  by  both  ways.  While  this
goes  ou  the  patient  is  quite  faint  and  giddy,  so  that  he  who
has  not  had  experience  of  the  effects  of  this  root  would  think
he  was  going  to  die.  There  is  no  desire  to  eat  or  drink,  and
the  patient  disgorges  all  the  worms  in  his  body.  But  when
the  medicine  has  finished  working,  the  patient  is  left  in  such
health,  and  with  such  an  appetite,  that  he  will  eat  anything
that  is  given  to  him.  They  treated  me  with  this  medicine
on  two  occasions,  for  pain  in  the  stomach,  and  each  time  I
experienced  all  that  has  been  described  above.*

* This  root,  according  to  Rivero,  is  called  in  Quichua  huachancana,
and  belongs  to  a Euphorbiaeeous  plant.  He  says  that  when  the  Indians
had  a white  tongue,  they  at  once  supposed  that  they  had  some  bowel
complaint,  and  recurred  to  this  root,  which  is  one  of  their  universal
remedies.  Its  drastic  and  emetic  effects  are  very  similar  to  that  of
tartar  emetic.  Antig.  Per.,  p.  122.

Mr.  Bollaert  purchased  the  wallet  of  a Chirihuano  or  itinerant
native  doctor  in  Southern  Peru,  and,  amongst  other  drugs,  of  which  he
made  a list,  was  a root  called  huachanca,  said  by  him  to  be  a convolvulus,
used  as  a purgative.  (Paper  read  at  the  Medico -Botanical  Society  of
London,  183^.)

As  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  so  at  the  present  day,  the  wallet  of  an
itinerant  Peruvian  doctor  ( Chirihuano ) contained  the  following  drugs,
in  addition  to  the  huachancana  root : —

1.  Chacasoconche  bark.


SKCOND  BOOK  OF  THE


180

These  purges  and  bleedings  were  prescribed  by  those
most  experienced,  who  were  generally  old  women  (as  mid-
wives are  here),  and  great  herbalists.  The  herbalists  were
very  famous  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas.  They  knew  the  uses
of  many  herbs,  and  taught  their  knowledge  to  their  children.
These  physicians  were  not  employed  to  cure  any  one,  but
only  the  king,  the  royal  family,  the  Curacas,  and  their  rela-
tions. The  common  people  had  to  cure  each  other  from
what  they  had  heard  concerning  the  remedies.  When  suck-
ing infants  were  taken  ill,  especially  if  their  ailment  was  of
a feverish  nature,  they  washed  them  in  urine  in  the  mornings,
and,  when  they  could  get  some  of  the  urine  of  the  child,  they
gave  it  a drink.  When  they  cut  the  navel  string,  at  the  birth
of  the  child,  they  left  the  cord  as  long  as  a finger,  and  when
it  fell  off  they  preserved  it  with  the  greatest  care,  and  gave
it  to  the  child  to  suck  whenever  it  felt  ill.  To  judge  of  an
illness  they  looked  at  the  tongue,  and  if  it  was  white  they
said  that  the  patient  was  ill.  Then  they  gave  him  the  um-
bilical cord  to  chew,  and  it  must  be  his  own,  for  that  of
another  person  was  not  considered  efficacious.

2.  Chenchelcoma  (Salvia  oppositiflora,  R.  P.)

3.  Cínica  (Baccharis  scandens).  For  rheumatism.

4.  Chinapaya.

5.  Chucumpa  (Justitia  sericea,  R.  P.)

6.  Iluacra-huacra  (a  horn  1)

7 Iluarituru  (Valeriana  coarctata).  For  broken  bones.

8.  Llamap-ñaui  (Negretia  inflexa).

9.  llataña  (Krameria  triandria).  An  astringent.

10.  Masca.

11.  Matecllu,  a water  plant.  Leaves  used  for  sore  eyes.

12.  Moho-moho  (seed1?  of  some  plant).

13.  Mulli  (Schinus  Molle).  For  wounds.

14.  Parhataquia  (Molina  prostrata).

15.  Panqui  (Gunnera  scabra,  R.  P.)  *

16.  Tanta  (Stereoxylon  patens,  R.  P.).  The  buds  are  used  for  wounds.
Nearly  the  whole  of  these  are  perfectly  harmless.  For  an  account  of
the  itinerant  Indian  doctors  of  Peru,  called  Chirihuanos  and  Colla-
huayas,  see  my  work  Travels  in  Peru  and  India , p.  247.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


1ST


The  natural  secrets  of  these  things  were  not  told  me,  nor
did  I make  any  inquiries,  but  I saw  these  practices  in  opera-
tion. They  knew  nothing  of  feeling  the  pulse,  and  less  about
looking  at  the  urine.  They  recognised  a fever  by  the
heightened  colour  of  the  body  ; and  their  purges  and  bleed-
ings were  more  as  preventives  than  as  helps  to  recovery.
When  they  had  recognised  that  the  disease  was  actually  in
full  force,  they  gave  no  medicine  whatever,  they  left  nature
to  work  its  own  cure,  and  merely  regulated  the  diet.  They
did  not  understand  the  use  of  clysters,  nor  the  application  of
plasters,  nor  ointments,  except  very  few,  and  composed  of
very  common  things.  The  poor  people  treated  diseases  in  a
way  differing  little  from  the  conduct  of  beasts.  The  shiver-
ings  of  a fever  and  ague  they  called  Chucchu,  which  means
“ to  shake,”  and  a remittent  fever  was  Russci  ( r soft)  which
signifies  “to  burn.”  They  feared  these  infirmities  very  much,
because  of  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold.


CHAPTER  XXV.

OF  THE  MEDICINAL  HERRS  THEY  USED.

They  understood  the  healing  qualities  of  the  juice  and
resin  of  a tree  called  Mullí,  and  by  the  Spaniards  Molle.  It
is  a thing  worthy  of  attention  that  this  extract  has  so  won-
derful an  effect  on  fresh  wounds,  that  it  seems  to  be  almost
supernatural.*  The  herb  or  bush  called  Chillca,-\  heated  in
a clay  vessel,  has  a marvellously  healing  effect  on  the  joints,
when  the  cold  has  got  into  them,  and  on  horses  with  sprained
legs.  A root,  like  the  root  of  a brake  fern,  only  much  thicker

* Schinus  molle,  Lin.,  the  commonest  tree  in  some  parts  of  the  Andes,
especially  round  Cuzco  and  Guamanga.  Acosta  says  that  this  tree
possesses  rare  virtues  (lib.  iv,  cap.  30).  The  Ynca  gives  a fuller  account
of  it  further  on,  in  book  viii.

t Baccliaris  scandens,  common  in  the  loftier  valleys  of  the  Andes.


183


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


and  with  smaller  knots,  the  name  of  which  I cannot  recollect,
served  to  strengthen  and  clean  the  teeth.*  They  roasted  it
to  a cinder,  and  when  it  was  very  hot  they  pressed  it  on  the
teeth,  putting  one  part  on  one  side  of  the  gums,  and  the  other
on  the  other,  and  left  it  there  until  it  was  cool.  And  so  the
patient  went  with  his  gums  covered,  and  in  great  pain,  for  it
burnt  his  month.  The  patient  himself  prepared  and  applied
the  remedy.  They  put  it  on  at  night,  and  in  the  morning
they  got  up  with  the  gums  white  like  burnt  meat.  For
three  or  four  days  afterwards  the  patient  cannot  eat  any-
thing that  requires  chewing,  but  is  confined  to  feeding
on  slops  with  a spoon.  At  the  end  of  that  time  the  burnt
flesh  falls  off  from  the  gums,  and  underneath  the  new  flesh
appears  very  red  and  healthy.  I have  very  often  seen  the
gums  renewed  in  this  manner.  I once  tried  it  myself,  with-
out necessity,  but  dropped  it  because  I could  not  endure  the
burning  heat  of  the  roots.

The  Indians  made  great  use  of  the  herb  of  plants  which
they  call  Sayri,  and  the  Spaniards  tobacco.  They  applied
the  powder  to  their  noses  to  clear  the  head.  There  has  been
much  experience  of  the  virtues  of  this  plant  in  Spain,  and  it
has  been  called  the  sacred  herb.  They  knew  of  another  plant
which  was  most  valuable  for  the  eyes.  It  was  called
Matecllu,  and  was  found  in  small  streams.  It  is  a foot  long,
and  there  is  one  round  leaf  at  the  end,  like  the  plant  called
in  Spain  Abbot's  ear, f which  grows  on  roofs  in  the  winter.
The  Indians  eat  it  raw,  and  it  has  a pleasant  taste.  When
it  is  mashed,  and  the  juice  placed  on  weak  eyes  in  the  night,
and  the  same  plant  mashed  and  put  as  a poultice  on  the  eye-
lids with  a bandage  on  the  top  to  prevent  it  from  falling  off,
it  has  the  effect  of  removing  dimness,  and  easing  any  pain
that  may  be  felt.

* Ractania  in  Quichua.  The  plant  is  a geranium,  growing  on  the
lofty  plains  of  the  Collas.  I found  it  near  Lampa.

t Penny  wort  ? A ITydrocotyle.


ROYAL  COM  M E N LA  KIES.


189


I once  applied  it  to  a boy,  whose  eye  was  so  bloodshot  and
inflamed  that  the  white  could  not  be  distinguished  from  the
pupil,  and  the  whole  was  starting  out.  On  the  first  night  of
the  application  the  eye  was  restored  to  its  proper  place,  and
on  the  second  it  was  quite  cured.  Afterwards  I saw  the
lad  in  Spain,  and  he  told  me  he  could  see  better  out  of  that
eye  than  out  of  the  other.  A Spaniard  told  me  that  he  was
quite  blind  from  cataracts,  and  that  in  two  nights  he  re-
covered his  sight  by  using  this  herb.  Hence,  when  he  sawr
the  herb,  he  desired  to  embrace  and  kiss  it,  and  to  place  it
over  his  eyes  and  on  his  head  with  signs  of  affection,  for  the
blessing  he  had  received  through  it  in  recovering  his  sight.
My  relations  used  many  other  herbs  which  I cannot  now
remember.

This  was  the  medicinal  treatment  usually  practised  by  the
Indians-Yncas  of  Peru,  using  simple  herbs,  and  not  com-
pound medicines.  Thus  in  so  important  a subject  as  health
they  understood  very  little;  and  in  matters  which  concerned
them  less,  such  as  natural  philosophy  and  astronomy,  they
knew  less,  and  in  theology  still  less.  For  they  knew  not
how  to  raise  their  minds  to  invisible  things.  All  the  theology
of  the  Yncas  was  included  in  the  word  Pachacamac.  Since
the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  they  have  tried  many  experi-
ments in  medicinal  products,  especially  with  maize,  called
by  the  Indians  Sara.  These  experiments  arose  partly  from
information  given  by  the  Indians,  and  partly  from  the  philo-
sophical researches  of  the  Spaniards  themselves.  They  have
thus  ascertained  that  this  corn,  besides  being  a substantial
source  of  food,  is  very  useful  in  diseases  of  the  kidneys  and
liver,  in  stone  and  stoppage  of  the  bladder.  Few  of  the
Indians  ever  suffer  from  these  diseases,  and  their  exemption
is  attributed  to  the  use  of  the  liquor  made  from  maize,  so  the
Spaniards,  who  suffer  from  these  infirmities,  drink  it  also.
The  Indians  likewise  apply  it  as  a plaster  for  many  other
diseases.


100


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XXVI.

OF  THEIR  KNOWLEDGE  TOUCHING  GEOMETRY,  ARITHMETIC,

AND  MUSIC.

They  had  a good  deal  of  knowledge  of  geometry,  because
it  was  necessary  for  them  in  measuring  their  lands,  and  for
adjusting  and  settling  the  boundaries.  But  this  was  not
done  by  measuring  arcs  in  degrees,  nor  by  any  speculative
method,  but  by  their  cords  and  small  stones,  with  which,  they
marked  boundaries.  I will  not  relate  what  I knew  con-
cerning them,  because  I did  not  fully  understand  their  prac-
tices. With  respect  to  geography,  they  understood  very  well
how  to  paint  and  make  models  of  each  kingdom,  and  I have
seen  these  models,  with  the  towns  and  provinces  depicted  on
them.  I saw  a model  of  Cuzco,  with  part  of  its  province,
and  the  four  principal  roads,  made  of  clay  and  small  stones
and  sticks.  The  model  was  according  to  scale,  and  showed
the  large  and  small  squares,  the  streets,  whether  broad  or
narrow,  the  wards  down  to  the  most  obscure  houses,  and  the
three  streams  which  flow  through  the  city.  It  was,  indeed,
a piece  of  work  well  worthy  of  admiration ; as  well  as  the
model  of  the  surrounding  country,  with  its  hills  and  valleys,
ravines,  and  plateaux,  rivers  and  streams  with  their  windings,
so  well  delineated  that  the  best  cosmographer  in  the  world
could  not  have  done  it  better.  They  made  this  model  that  it
might  be  seen  by  a person  named  Damian  de  la  Bandera,
who  had  a commission  from  the  Royal  Chancellery,  to  ascer-
tain how  many  towns  and  Indians  there  were  in  the  district
of  Cuzco.  Other  inspectors  were  sent  to  the  other  parts  of
the  kingdom  for  the  same  purpose.  The  model  which  I saw
was  made  at  Muvna,  a village  called  Molina  by  the  Spaniards,


HOYA],  COMMENTARIES.


191


five  leagues  south  of  the  city  of  Cuzco.  I was  there  because,
in  that  inspection,  they  visited  a portion  of  the  villages  and
Indians  in  the  repartimiento  of  my  lord  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega.

They  knew  a great  deal  of  arithmetic,  and  had  an  ad-
mirable method  by  knots  made  on  strings  of  different  colours,
of  keeping  an  account  of  all  the  tributes  in  the  kingdom  ot
the  Yncas,  both  paid  and  still  due.  They  added  up,  and
multiplied  by  these  knots,  and  to  know  what  portions  re-
ferred to  each  village,  they  divided  the  strings  by  grains  of
maize  or  small  stones,  so  that  their  calculation  might  be  with-
out confusion.  As  every  subject,  whether  relating  to  peace
or  war,  to  vassals,  tributes,  flocks,  laws,  ceremonies,  or  any
other  department,  had  special  accountants  who  studied  their
special  branch  of  administration,  the  counting  was  performed
with  facility.  For  each  item  of  an  account  was  represented
by  knots  or  hanks,  like  loose  leaves  of  a book  ; and,  although
an  Indian  (as  chief  accountant)  may  have  had  charge  over
two  or  three  or  more  branches,  the  counting  of  each  one  was
a department  by  itself.  Further  on  we  shall  give  a more
detailed  account  of  the  manner  of  counting,  and  how  they
kept  records  by  these  strings  and  knots.*

In  music  they  had  acquired  a knowledge  of  some  tunes,
which  the  Indians  of  the  Collas  district  played  on  instru-
ments made  of  hollow  reeds,  four  or  five  being  tied  in  a
row,  each  one  having  the  point  higher  than  its  neighbour,
like  an  organ. f These  canes  were  fastened  in  fours,  differ-
ent one  from  another.  One  of  them  ran  in  high  notes,  and
the  ethers  each  higher  in  the  scale  ; so  that  the  four  natural
voices,  treble,  tenor,  contralto,  and  counter-bass  were  re-

* The  Yuca  enters  more  fully  on  the  subject  of  the  quipus  in  book  vi.

t Called  in  their  language  Huayra-puhura.  It  was  generally  made
of  reeds,  but  sometimes  of  stone.  The  holes  were  cylindrical,  regularly
bored,  and  three-tenths  of  an  inch  in  diameter  to  the  bottom  of  the
bore.  Rivero.


193


SECOND  BOOK  OK  THE


presented  by  the  four  sets  of  reeds.*  When  an  Indian
played  on  one  of  these  pipes,  another  answered  on  a fifth  or
any  other  note  ; then  another  played  on  another  note,  some-
times rising  to  the  high  notes,  and  at  others  going  down,
but  always  in  tune.  They  did  not  understand  accompani-
ments on  different  keys,  but  always  played  in  one  compass.
The  players  were  Indians  instructed  for  the  amusement  of
the  king,  and  for  the  lords  his  vassals,  and  although  their
music  was  so  simple,  it  was  not  generally  practised,  but  was
learnt  and  attained  to  by  study.  They  had  la  flutes  with
four  or  five  notes,  like  those  of  shepherds  ; but  they  were
not  made  on  a scale,  each  one  being  of  only  one  note.f
Their  songs  were  composed  in  measured  verses,  and  were
for  the  most  part  written  to  celebrate  amorous  passions
expressive  now  of  joy  now  of  sorrow,  now  of  the  kindness
now  of  the  cruelty  of  the  fair.

Each  song  had  its  appropriate  tune,  and  they  could  not
put  two  different  songs  to  the  same  tune.  Thus  the  en-
amoured swain,  playing  his  flute  at  night,  with  the  tune
that  belonged  to  it,  apprised  the  lady  and  the  whole  world

* The  lengths  of  the  eight  canes  were —


No.  1

. 4’90  inches.

2

>>  u

. 4-50

jj  3

. 4-12

•»

„ 4

. 3-50

5?

>,  5

. 2-45

V

» 6

. 2-25

?>

„ 7

2 •

» 8

. 158

?)

The  canes  Nos.  2,  4,  6,  and  7 contained  small  lateral  holes,  forming  a
diapason  divided  into  distinct  tetrachords,  and  producing  a melodious
sound.

+ Called  in  Quichua  pincullu.  They  also  had  chhilchiles  and  chafares
(timbrels  and  bells),  huancar  (a  drum),  tinya  (a  guitar  of  five  or  six
chords),  queppa  (a  trumpet),  ccuyvi  (a  whistle),  huayllaca  (a  flageolet),
and  chayna  (another  kind  of  coarse  flute).  The  chayna  emitted  very
lugubrious  sounds,  filling  the  heart  with  indescribable  sadness,  and
bringing  involuntary  tears  into  the  eyes.  Rivero.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


193


of  the  state  of  his  feelings,  arising  from  the  smiles  or  frowns
of  the  object  of  his  love.  But  if  two  tunes  were  used  for
the  same  song,  it  could  not  be  known  what  sentiment  the
lover  wished  to  express;  for  it  may  be  said  that  he  talked
with  his  flute.  One  night  a Spaniard  met  an  Indian  girl  of
his  acquaintance,  and  asked  her  to  go  with  him  to  his
lodging.  The  girl  said — “ Sir!  let  me  go  whither  I desire;
for  know  you  not  that  that  flute  is  calling  me  with  much
love  and  tenderness,  so  that  it  obliges  me  to  go  towards  it.
Leave  me,  then.  I cannot  help  going,  for  love  drags  me  to
where  the  flute-player  will  be  my  husband,  and  I his  wife.”

They  did  not  play  the  songs  composed  to  celebrate  their
warlike  deeds,  because  they  were  not  fit  to  play  before
ladies,  nor  to  express  on  their  flutes.  But  they  were  sung
at  the  principal  festivals,  in  memory  of  their  victories.
When  I departed  from  Peru  in  the  year  1560,  I left  five
Indians  in  Cuzco  who  played  the  flute  very  well,  from  any
music  book  for  the  organ  that  was  placed  before  them.
They  belonged  to  Juan  Rodriguez  de  Villalobos,  formerly  a
citizen  of  that  town.*  At  present,  being  the  year  1602,  they
tell  me  that  there  are  so  many  Indians  expert  in  playing  on
instruments,  that  they  may  be  met  with  in  all  directions.  In
my  time  the  Indians  did  not  use  their  voices,  because,  no
doubt,  they  were  not  sufficiently  good,  and  because  they
did  not  understand  singing  ; but,  on  the  other  hand,  many
mestizos  had  very  good  voices.

* Villalobos  was  a rich  citizen  of  Cuzco  who  owned  the  site  of  the
present  monastery  of  San  Francisco,  which  he  handed  over  to  the  monks
of  that  order.  He  married  a sister  of  the  wife  of  that  famous  rebel
Giron.

Here  there  is  an  example  of  the  ridiculous  blunders  made  by  old
Rycaut,  in  attempting  a translation  of  Garcilasso.  He  translates  “Eran
de  Juan  Rodriguez  de  Villalobos , ricino  que  fue  de  aquella  ciudad ” into
“They  belonged  to  one  Juan  Rodriguez,  who  lived  at  a village  called
Labos,  not  far  from  the  city”!!!


N


194


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XXVII.

THE  POETRY  OF  THE  YN CAS  AMAUTAS,  WHO  ARE
PHILOSOPHERS,  AND  HARAV1CUS  OR  POETS.

The  Amantas,  who  were  philosophers,  were  not  wanting
in  ability  to  compose  comedies  and  tragedies,  which  were
represented  before  their  kings  on  solemn  festivals,  and
before  the  lords  of  their  court.  The  actors  were  not  common
people,  but  Yncas  and  noblemen,  sons  of  Curacas,  or  the
Curacas  themselves,  down  to  masters  of  the  camp.  For  the
subject  matter  of  the  tragedy  should,  it  was  considered,
be  properly  represented,  as  it  always  related  to  military
deeds,  triumphs,  and  victories,  or  to  the  grandeur  of  former
kings  and  of  other  heroic  men.  The  arguments  of  the
comedies  were  on  agriculture  and  familiar  household  sub-
jects. As  soon  as  the  play  was  over,  the  actors  seated  them-
selves in  their  places  according  to  their  rank.  They  did  not
allow  improper  or  vile  farces ; but  all  the  plays  were  on
decorous  and  important  subjects,  the  sentences  being  such
as  befitted  the  occasion.  Valuable  presents  were  given  to
those  persons  who  were  deemed  worthy  of  taking  parts.

They  had  made  some  further  advance  in  poetry,  for  they
understood  the  composition  of  long  and  short  verses,  with
the  right  number  of  syllables  in  each.  Their  love  songs
were  composed  in  this  way,  with  different  tunes.  They
also  recorded  the  deeds  of  their  kings  in  verse,  and  those  of
other  famous  Yncas  and  Curacas,  which  they  taught  to  their
children,  and  they  were  thus  handed  down  by  tradition,
that  the  good  deeds  of  their  ancestors  might  be  had  in
memory  and  imitated.  The  verses  were  few,  that  they
might  the  more  easily  be  committed  to  memory ; but,  when
preserved  in  cipher,  they  were  compendious.  They  did  not


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


195


use  rhymes  in  the  verses,  but  all  were  blank.  Most  of  them
resembled  the  Spanish  compositions  called  redondillas.  I have
preserved  in  my  memory  a love  song  in  four  lines,  by  which
the  mode  of  composition  may  be  seen,  as  well  as  the  con-
cise yet  full  meaning  of  what,  in  their  simplicity,  they
desired  to  say.  The  love  verses  were  short,  that  the  tunes
might  easily  be  played  on  the  flute.  I might  also  have
given  the  tune,  in  notes  set  to  organ  music,  that  both  might
be  seen,  but  the  folly  of  it  will  excuse  me  from  taking  the
trouble.

The  song  is  as  follows,  with  the  translation  : —

Caylla  lapi  ']  f To  this  my  song

Puñunqui.  I I You  will  sleep.

. y which  means  -(

Chaupi  tuta  \ j In

Hamusac.  j [ I will  come.*

Or  more  properly  without  the  pronoun  I,  for  the  Indians  do

not  name  the  pronoun,  but  include  it  in  the  verb.  The

Ynca  poets  had  many  other  metres  for  the  verses,  especially

the  Harauecs,  the  proper  meaning  of  whose  name  is  “an

inventor. ”f  In  the  papers  of  Bias  Valera  I found  other

verses,  which  he  calls  spondaics,  all  of  which  are  in  four

syllables,  and  differing  in  this  respect  from  the  above,  which

is  in  four  and  three.  He  wrote  them  in  Indian  and  Latin.

They  are  on  the  subject  of  astrology,  and  the  Ynca  poets

treated  of  the  secondary  causes  with  which  God  acts  in  the

region  of  the  air,  to  cause  lightning  and  thunder,  hail,  snow,

and  rain,  all  of  which  are  referred  to  in  the  verses.  They

* Cay  (this),  l lapi  (a  song).  Puñunqui  (second  person  sin  guiar,
future  indicative  of  Puñuni,  “I  sleep”)-  Chaupi  (middle),  tuta  (night).
Hamusac  (first  person  future  indicative  of  Hamuni,  “ I come”).

t This  meaning  is  now  lost.  Harahuini  is  simply  “I  sing;”  Harahuec,
a singer  or  poet;  and  Harahui  or  Yaravy,  a song  or  elegy.

Mr.  Prescott,  with  reference  to  the  Ynca’s  statement  that  Harahuec
signified  an  inventor,  observes  : — “ In  his  title,  as  well  as  in  his  functions,
the  Peruvian  minstrel  poet  may  remind  us  of  the  Norman  trouvereP
i,  p.  114  (note).

N 2


dead  of  night


196


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


wrote  them  in  accordance  with  a fable,  which  was  as  follows:
They  say  that  the  Creator  placed  a maiden,  the  daughter  of
a king,  in  the  sky,  who  holds  a vase  full  of  water,  to  pour
out  when  the  earth  requires  it.  Occasionally  her  brother  is
supposed  to  break  it,  and  the  blew  causes  thunder,  lightning,
and  thunderbolts.  They  say  that  these  are  caused  by  a man,
because  they  are  the  deeds  of  a ferocious  man,  and  not  of  a
tender  woman.  But  the  maiden  causes  the  snow,  hail  and
rain  to  fall,  because  they  are  more  kind  and  gentle  acts,  and
produce  great  benefits.  It  was  said  that  an  Ynca  poet  and
astrologer  composed  and  recited  the  verses,  praising  the
virtue  and  excellence  of  the  lady,  and  shewing  how  God
had  given  her  these  qualities,  that  she  might  do  good  to  the
creatures  of  this  earth.  Father  Bias  Valera  says  that  the
fable  and  verses  were  found  by  him  in  knots  recording
certain  ancient  annals,  and  that  they  were  of  different
colours.  He  received  the  meaning  from  the  Indian  account-
ants who  had  charge  of  the  historical  records  in  knots ; and,
being  astonished  that  the  Amautas  should  have  attained  to
such  proficiency  in  their  records,  he  wrote  down  the  verses,
and  also  committed  them  to  memory.  I remember  having
heard  this  fable  in  my  childhood,  with  many  others  that
were  recounted  by  my  relations,  but,  being  then  a boy,  I
did  not  seek  for  an  explanation  of  them,  nor  did  they  give
me  one.  For  the  use  of  those  who  understand  neither  the
Indian  language  nor  Latin,  I have  ventured  to  translate
them  into  Spanish.  I have  made  the  translation  from  the
language  I sucked  in  with  my  mother’s  milk,  and  not  from  the
Latin;  because  the  little  I know  of  that  language  was  learnt
amidst  the  fires  of  my  country’s  wars, amongst  arms  andhorses,
powder  and  guns,  of  which  I knew  more  than  of  letters.
The  Father  Bias  Valera,  in  his  Latin,  has  imitated  the  four
syllables  of  the  Indian  language  in  each  verse,  and  he  has
done  it  very  well.  I have  not  done  so,  because  this  rule
cannot  be  preserved  in  Spanish.  As  it  is  necessary  to  give


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


197


the  complete  meaning  of  the  Indian  words  in  Spanish,  some
necessarily  have  more  syllables,  and  some  less.  Nusta
means  a maiden  of  the  blood  royal,  and  no  baser  signification
can  be  given  to  the  word,  for  an  ordinary  maiden  is  Tazqui.
A servant  girl  is  called  China.* * * §  Yllapantac  is  a verb  com-
prehending in  its  meaning  the  three  verbs  “to  thunder,”  “to
lighten,”  “to  cause  bolts  to  fall.”  And  so  it  has  been
expressed  by  the  Father  Bias  Valera  in  two  verses.  The
preceding  verse  is  Cunununun , which  means  “ to  make  a
noise,”  and  this  was  not  used  by  the  author  to  express  the
three  meanings  of  the  verb  Yllapantac.  TJnu  is  “ water,”
para  is  “ to  rain,”  chichi  “ to  hail,”  riti  “ to  snow.”  Pacha
Camac  means  “ He  who  does  with  the  universe  what  the
body  does  with  the  soul.”  Viracocha  is  the  name  of  a modern
gocl  they  worshipped,  whose  history  will  be  given  further
on.  Chura  is  “ to  put,”  cama  “to  give  a soul  life,  being,
sustenance.”  The  verses  are  as  follows,  in  the  three  lan-


guages :
Sumacf  ñusta
Tur  allay  quij
Puyñuyquita§
Paquin  cayan||
Hina  mantara^!
Cunuñunan**
Yllapantacf  f
Camri  ñustaJí


Pulchra  nyrnpha
Frater  tuus
Urnam  tuam
Nunc  infingit
Cujus  ictus
Tonat  fulget
F ulminatque
Sed  tu  nympha


Beautiful  maiden
Thy  brother
Thine  urn
Is  now  breaking.

And  for  this  cause
It  thunders  and  lightens
Thunderbolts  also  fall.
But  thou,  royal  maiden


* China  is  the  female,  and  Urco  the  male,  for  quadrupeds,

t Sumac,  an  adjective,  beautiful.

I Tura  is  the  brother  of  a sister  ; lla,  a term  of  affection  ; yqui,  a
final  possessive  pronoun — “ thy.”

§ Puyñu , a small  cup  ; yquita,  accusative  of  the  final  possessive  pro-
noun.

||  Paquin,  third  person  singular  present  indicative  of  Paquini  (I
break).  Cayan , probably  a misprint  for  Cunan  (now).

IT  Bina,  so ; mantara,  for  this.

**  Cunuñunan,  defective  verb,  “ it  thunders.”
ft  Yllapantac,  defective  verb,  “ it  thunders  and  lightens.”

+Í  Cam,  you;  ri,  but.


198


SECOND  BOOK  OE  THE


Unuyquita* * * §  Tuam  limpham
Paramunquicf  Fundens  pluis
May  ñimpirij  Interdumque
Chichimunquic§  Grandinem,seu


With  thy  clear  waters
Dropping  rain
And  sometimes  also
Will  give  us  hail


Will  give  us  snow


The  creator  of  the  world

Pachacamac

Viracocha

For  this  duty

Has  appointed  you

Has  created  you.


Ritimunquic||  Nivem  mittis
Pacha  rurac^j  Mundi  factor
Pacha  camac  Pachacamac

Viracocha  Viracocha

Cay  hinapac**  Ad  hoc  munus
Churasunquiff  Te  sufficit

Camasunqui  Ac  praefecit

I have  inserted  these  verses  to  enrich  my  poor  history,
for,  without  flattery,  it  may  truly  he  said  that  all  that  Father
Bias  Valera  has  written  consists  of  pearls  and  precious
stones,  such  as  my  country  has  not  deserved  to  be  adorned
with.

They  tell  me  that  in  these  days  the  Mestizos  are  very
fond  of  composing  songs  in  the  Indian  language,  as  well
sacred  as  profane.  May  God  give  them  grace,  that  he  may
be  served  in  all  that  is  done.

Such  was  the  knowledge  that  the  Yncas  of  Peru  had


acquired  in  the  above  sciences;  and  slight  and  superficial  as
it  is,  they  would,  if  they  had  had  fetters,  have  gone  on  add-
ing to  it  little  by  little,  as  did  the  ancient  philosophers.  But
in  moral  philosophy  they  had  attained  to  a high  standard,  as
well  in  their  laws  and  customs  touching  the  dealings  of
their  vassals  between  man  and  man  in  conformity  with


* Unit,  water ; yquita,  see  note  §.

t Para,  rain  ; munquic,  present  participle  of  Hnnquini  (I  drop).

Í May , where ; ñimpiri,  sometimes.

§ and  ||  see  note  J.

TF  Rurac,  present  participle  of  Rurani  (I  make) ; Pacha,  earth.

**  Cay,  this ; hinapac,  to  duty,  a dative  case.

ft  Churasunqui,  the  second  transition  of  Churani  (I  put).  It  is  the
transition  of  the  third  person  to  the  second  ( svnqiti ).  Sunqui  is  the
second  transitive  particle.  See  my  Quichua  Grammar,  p.  50.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


199


natural  law,  as  in  the  duties  of  obedience  and  service  to  the
king,  and  in  those  of  the  king  to  do  good  to  the  vassals  and
others  his  inferiors.  In  their  practice  of  this  science  they
made  such  progress  that  scarcely  any  improvement  could  be
suggested  in  it.  Their  experience  in  administration  was
handed  down  to  their  descendants,  and  was  thus  pro-
gressively increased  ; but  in  the  other  sciences  they  were
without  this  experience.  For  they  could  not  treat  them  so
practically  as  the  moral  sciences,  nor  could  they  devote  so
much  speculation  to  their  study  as  was  necessary.  They
were  contented  with  the  natural  life  and  law,  beinsr  a
people  more  inclined  to  do  no  ill,  than  to  learn  what  is  right.
Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon  treats  of  this  subject  in  his  thirty-
eighth  chapter.  Speaking  of  the  government  of  the  Yncas
he  says: — “They  performed  such  great  deeds,  and  ruled
with  such  wisdom,  that  few  in  the  world  ever  excelled
them.”*  And  the  Father  Acosta  (book  vi,  cap.  1)  says
what  follows  in  praise  of  the  Yncas  and  of  the  Mexicans.

“ Having  treated  of  the  religion  of  the  Indians,  I propose
in  this  book  to  write  an  account  of  their  customs,  policy,  and
government,  for  two  reasons.  One  is  to  refute  the  false
opinion  usually  entertained  of  them,  that  they  were  those  of
a savage  and  brutish  people  without  understanding,  and
scarcely  worthy  of  the  name  of  policy  and  government.  This
error  has  led  to  the  Indians  being  treated  with  great  and
notable  oppression,  as  if  they  were  little  better  than  animals,
and  to  their  being  deprived  of  all  respect  and  consideration.
It  is  a vulgar  and  pernicious  error,  as  is  known  to  those  who
have  inquired  into  the  condition  of  the  Indians  with  some
care  and  attention,  and,  by  associating  with  them,  have  seen
and  become  acquainted  with  their  secrets  and  their  know-
ledge ; and  who  have  also  seen  the  small  account  which
those  who  think  they  know  much  about  them  (such  men


* Sec  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  p.  136.


200


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


being  usually  those  who  know  least)  make  of  the  Indians.  I
see  no  better  way  of  dispelling  this  most  pernicious  opinion
than  by  giving  an  account  of  the  order  and  government  of
the  Indians  when  they  lived  under  their  own  laws.  Although
they  practised  many  barbarous  and  absurd  things,  they  also
had  other  customs  which  are  worthy  of  admiration,  and
which  show  that  they  had  a natural  capacity  for  instruction.
Indeed,  many  of  their  customs  have  the  advantage  of  those
of  the  nations  of  the  old  world.  Nor  is  it  wonderful  that
they  should  have  mingled  grave  errors  with  those  good  cus-
toms, for  such  are  found  in  the  works  of  the  greatest  philo-
sophers and  legislators,  even  including  those  of  Lycurgus
and  Plato.  In  the  wisest  republics,  such  as  those  of  Rome
and  Athens,  we  find  instances  of  ignorance  which  are  worthy
of  laughter,  and  assuredly  if  the  governments  of  the  Mexicans
and  of  the  Yncas  are  compared  with  those  of  the  Romans
and  Grecians,  they  would  still  be  admired.  But,  without
knowing  anything  of  this,  we  enter  with  the  sword,  and
neither  listen  to  nor  understand  the  condition  of  the  people.
The  affairs  of  the  Indians  do  not  appear  to  us  to  merit  at-
tention, but  we  rather  treat  them  like  wild  beasts  of  the
chase,  to  be  caught  for  our  use  and  service.  Those  curious
and  learned  men  who  have  invesugated  the  secrets  of  the
Indians,  and  their  ancient  mode  of  government,  judge  of
them  in  a very  different  way,  and  are  astonished  at  the  ad-
vances they  had  made  in  civilisation.”  So  far  is  from  Father
José  de  Acosta,  whose  authority  stands  so  high  that  it  will
serve  to  confirm  all  that  we  have  said  and  shall  hereafter  say
of  the  laws,  government,  and  understanding  of  the  Yncas;
and  that  one  of  their  practices  was  to  compose  brief  fables,
as  well  in  prose  as  in  verse,  conveying  moral  doctrines,  or
preserving  some  tradition  of  their  idolatry  or  of  the  famous
deeds  of  their  kings  and  of  other  great  men.  Many  of  the
Spaniards  contend  that  these  are  not  fables  but  true  histories,
because  they  have  some  resemblance  to  the  truth.  Others


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


¡¿01


declare  them  to  be  badly  conceived  falsehoods,  because  they
cannot  understand  the  allegories  conveyed  in  them  ; although
it  is  true  that  many  were  most  absurd.  In  the  course  of  the
history  we  shall  insert  some  of  the  best  of  these  traditions.


CHAPTER  XXVIII.

OF  THE  FEW  INSTRUMENTS  WHICH  THE  INDIANS  USED  FOR
VARIOUS  PURPOSES.

Now  that  we  have  given  an  account  of  the  advances  that
the  philosophers  and  poets  of  that  heathen  time  had  made
in  the  sciences,  it  will  be  well  to  show  how  unskilful  their
mechanics  were  in  their  crafts,  that  it  may  be  seen  how  much
inconvenience  and  misery  these  people  had  to  endure.  To
begin  with  the  workers  in  metals  : although  they  were  so
numerous,  and  so  constantly  exercising  their  calling,  they
knew  not  how  to  make  an  anvil,  either  of  iron  or  of  anything
else,  and  they  could  not  extract  iron,  though  there  were
mines  of  that  metal  in  their  land.  In  their  language  they
call  iron  quillay.  They  used  certain  very  hard  stones,  of  a
colour  between  green  and'  yellow,  instead  of  anvils.  They
flattened  and  smoothed  one  against  the  other,  and  held  them
in  great  estimation  because  they  were  very  rare.  Nor  could
they  make  hammers  with  wooden  handles.  But  they  worked
with  certain  instruments  made  of  copper  and  brass  mixed
together.  These  tools  were  of  the  shape  of  dice  with  the
corners  rounded  off.  Some  are  large,  so  that  the  hand  can
just  clasp  them,  others  middling  sized,  others  small,  and
others  lengthened  out  to  hammer  on  a concave.  They  hold
these  hammers  in  their  hands  to  strike  with,  as  if  they  were
pebbles.*  They  had  no  files  nor  graving  tools,  nor  had  they
invented  the  art  of  making  bellows  for  blast  furnaces.  They

* The  Quichua  for  a hammer  is  tacana.


202


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


blasted  by  means  of  tubes  of  copper,  the  length  of  half-a-
cubit,  more  or  less,  according  as  the  furnace  was  large  or
small.  The  tubes  were  closed  at  one  end,  leaving  one  small
hole  through  which  the  air  could  rush  with  more  force.  As
many  as  eight,  ten,  or  twelve  of  these  were  put  together,  ac-
cording to  the  requirements  of  the  furnace;  and  they  went
round  the  fire  blowing  with  the  tubes.  They  still  use  the
same  method,  not  being  willing  to  change  their  customs.
They  had  no  tongs  for  drawing  the  metal  out  of  the  fire,  but
did  this  with  poles  of  wood  or  copper,  and  threw  the  heated
metal  on  small  heaps  of  damp  earth  which  they  had  ready,
to  cool  it.  They  drew  it  from  one  heap  to  another,  until  it
was  cool  enough  to  hold  in  their  hands.  Notwithstanding
these  inconvenient  contrivances,  they  executed  marvellous
works,  chiefly  in  hollowing  things  out,  and  doing  other  ad-
mirable things,  as  we  shall  see  presently.*  They  also  found
out,  in  spite  of  their  simplicity,  that  the  smoke  of  certain
metals  was  injurious  to  the  health,  and  they  consequently
made  their  foundries  in  the  open  air,  in  their  yards  and
courts,  and  never  under  a roof.  Their  carpenters  had  no
more  ingenuity  than  their  smiths,  for  of  all  the  tools  used  by
our  artificers  they  had  only  invented  the  axe  and  the  adze,
and  even  these  were  of  copper.  They  knew  not  how  to
make  a saw,  a gimlet, *(*  nor  a plane,  nor,  indeed,  any  other
carpenter’s  tools  ; and  they  could  not  make  arches,  nor  cut
and  plane  wood  for  buildings.  The  axes,  adzes,  and  a few
bill-hooks  served  them  in  place  of  all  other  tools,  and  these
were  made  of  copper  and  bronze.  They  had  no. nails,  and
all  the  wood  they  used  in  their  houses  was  fastened  with
thongs  of  reed,  and  not  nailed  together.  Their  quarrymen
used  black  pebbles,  called  hihuanas ,%  for  working  the  stones,

^ -*  They  could  melt  metals,  cast  them  in  moulds,  inlay  them,  solder

them,  and  hammer.

'\  t They  had  gimlets  and  chisels  of  bronze.  Their  word  for  a gimlet
hulccu.  Mossi,  No.  133.

'2  Or  hihuayas.  The  n is  probably  a misprint.  Hihuaya  means  a
heavy  stone.  Hihuaya  soncco  is  “ disobedient.”


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


203


rubbing  instead  of  cutting  them.  They  had  no  machinery
for  raising  and  lowering  blocks  of  stone,  but  all  was  done  by
main  force.  Nevertheless,  they  completed  works  of  such
ingenuity  and  grandeur  as  to  be  almost  incredible,  as  the
Spanish  historians  declare  at  large,  and  as  may  be  seen  by
the  numerous  ruins  that  still  remain.  They  had  not  invented
scissors  nor  metal  needles,  but  used  long  thorns,  and  conse-
quently they  did  not  sew  much.  Their  needle-work  was
rather  patching  than  sewing,  as  we  shall  relate  further  on.
They  made  combs  of  the  same  thorns,  fastening  them  into
two  reeds,  which  formed  the  back  of  the  comb.  The  mirrors
in  which  the  ladies  of  the  blood  royal  looked  at  themselves
were  of  polished  silver,  and  the  more  common  ones  of  bronze,
for  ordinary  women  were  not  allowed  to  use  silver,  as  will
be  seen  presently.  Men  never  looked  into  a mirror,  as  it
was  considered  a shameful  and  effeminate  proceeding.  They
also  wanted  many  other  things  necessary  for  civilised  life,
for  they  were  not  at  all  inventive,  although  they  were  apt  at
imitation,  as  has  been  seen  in  the  way  they  have  learnt,  and
taken  advantage  of  many  things  taught  them  by  the
Spaniards.  They  show  the  same  readiness  in  learning  the
sciences  if  they  are  instructed,  as  has  Jjeen  seen  in  the
comedies  which  have  been  acted  in  various  parts.  Certain
ingenious  monks  of  different  habits,  principally  of  the  com-
pany of  Jesus,  to  make  the  Indians  familiar  with  the  mysteries
of  our  religion,  have  composed  comedies  for  the  Indians  to
act,  because  they  knew  that  this  was  the  custom  in  the  time
of  the  Yncas,  and  because  they  saw  that  the  Indians  were  so
ready  to  receive  instruction.  Thus  a father  of  the  company
of  Jesus  composed  a play  in  honour  of  our  lady  the  Virgin
Mary.  It  was  written  in  the  Aymara  language,  which  is

The  blocks  of  stone,  after  having  been  shaped  by  the  hihuaya,  re-
ceived a last  polish  with  herbs  which  contain  flint,  Hippuris  hyemalis.
The  native  names  for  the  plants  used  by  the  quarry  men,  in  putting  a
final  polish  on  the  stones,  were  Aracchama  and  Ynca-cuca.


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


ÍÜ04


different  from  the  general  language  of  Peru.  The  subject
had  reference  to  these  words  in  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis
— “I  will  place  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  etc.,
and  she  shall  break  thy  head.”  The  actors  were  Indian  lads,
and  the  ceremony  took  place  in  a village  called  Sulli.  At
Potosi  a dialogue  of  the  faith  was  enacted,  at  which  more
than  twelve  thousand  Indians  were  present.  In  Cuzco
another  play  was  acted  touching  the  infancy  of  Jesus,  which
was  witnessed  by  all  the  nobility  of  the  city.  Another  was
acted  in  the  City  of  the  Kings,  before  the  Chancellery,  the
nobility,  and  a vast  crowd  of  Indians.  The  subject  was  the
most  holy  sacrament,  composed  in  pieces,  in  two  languages
— Spanish  and  the  general  language  of  Peru.  The  Indian
lads  repeated  the  dialogues  with  so  much  grace,  feeling,  and
correct  action  that  they  gave  universal  satisfaction  and
pleasure ; and  with  so  much  plaintive  softness  in  the  songs,
that  many  Spaniards  shed  tears  of  joy  at  seeing  the  ability
and  skill  of  the  little  Indians.  From  that  time  the  Spaniards
disabused  themselves  of  the  opinion  which  they  had  held
until  then,  that  the  Indians  were  dull,  barbarous,  and
stupid.

The  Indian  boys,  to  commit  their  parts  to  memory,  which
are  written  down,  go  to  the  Spaniards,  either  layaren  or
priests,  and  beg  them  to  read  the  first  line  to  them  four  or
five  times  over,  until  they  remember  it ; and  that  they  may
not  forget  it,  although  their  memories  are  tenacious,  they
repeat  each  word  many  times,  marking  it  with  a sign,  for
which  purpose  they  use  little  pebbles,  or  a grain  of  the  seeds
of  different  colours,  the  size  of  beans,  called  chuij.  By  means
of  these  signs  they  remember  the  words,  and  in  this  way  they
easily  learn  what  they  have  to  say  by  heart,  through  the  great
diligence  and  care  they  devote  to  the  task.  The  Spaniards
whom  the  little  Indians  ask  to  read  to  them  do  not  disdain
the  work,  but  rather  take  a pleasure  in  it,  how  great  so  ever
they  may  be,  knowing  for  what  purpose  it  is.  Thus  the


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


205


Indians  of  Peru,  though  not  apt  at  inventing,  are  very  quick
in  imitating,  and  learning  what  they  are  taught.  The
Licentiate  Juan  de  Cuellar,  a native  of  Medina  del  Campo,
who  was  Canon  of  the  holy  church  of  Cuzco,  experienced  this
fully.  He  read  grammar  with  the  mestizos,  sons  of  wealthy
and  noble  citizens  of  that  town.  He  undertook  this  work
out  of  charity,  and,  at  the  request  of  the  students  themselves,
because  five  preceptors,  whom  they  had  learnt  from  before,
had  forsaken  them  after  a few  months  of  study,  thinking  to
make  more  money  in  other  ways  ; although  it  is  true  that
each  student  paid  them  ten  dollars  a month,  equal  to  twelve
ducats.  But  there  were  few'  students,  not  more  than  eighteen
at  the  most.  Among  these  I knew  an  Indian  Ynca,  named
Felipe  Ynca.  He  was  taught  by  a rich  and  worthy  priest,
named  Pedro  Sanchez,  who,  seeing  the  quickness  of  the
Indian  in  learning  to  read  and  write,  gave  him  instruction  ;
and  he  acquired  as  good  a knowledge  of  grammar  as  the  best
student  amongst  the  mestizos.  When  the  preceptor  forsook
them,  they  continued  to  go  to  school  until  another  came  who
taught  them  on  a different  principle,  and  if  they  retained
anything  of  what  they  had  learnt  before,  he  told  them  to
forget  it,  as  it  was  worth  nothing.  Thus  were  the  students
passed  from  one  teacher  to  another,  in  my  time,  without  re-
ceiving any  benefit,  until  the  good  Canon  took  them  under
his  cloak,  and  read  Latin  with  them  for  nearly  two  years,
amidst  arms  and  horses,  blood  and  the  flames  of  a war  which
then  raged  against  the  insurgents  Don  Sebastian  de  Cas-
tilla and  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron.  One  of  these  fires
was  scarcely  put  out,  before  the  second  burnt  up,  which  was
worse,  and  took  longer  to  extinguish.  During  that  time  the
Canon  Cuellar  saw  how  much  aptitude  his  scholars  displayed
in  learning  grammar  and  the  sciences.  Lamenting  that  he
should  lose  such  good  disciples,  he  often  said, — O Sons !
W'hat  a pity  it  is  that  a dozen  of  you  should  not  be  in  the
university  of  Salamanca.”  I have  related  all  this  to  show  the


20(3


SECOND  BOOK  OF  THE


ability  of  the  Indians  in  acquiring  learning,  in  which  the
mestizos,  as  their  relations,  participated.  The  Canon  Juan
de  Cuellar  did  not  leave  his  scholars  perfect  in  Latin,  for  he
could  not  go  through  the  labour  of  reading  four  lessons  every
day,  besides  assisting  at  the  services  of  the  choir,  and  thus
they  remained  imperfectly  instructed  in  the  Latin  language.
Those  who  are  now  living  ought  to  give  thanks  to  God  for
having  sent  the  company  of  Jesus,  among  whom  there  is  such
an  abundant  knowledge  of  the  sciences,  and  of  the  teaching
of  them,  which  the  Indians  now  possess  and  enjoy.

With  this  it  will  be  well  that  we  should
return  to  the  narrative  of  the
succession  of  the  king’s
Yncas  and  of  their
conquests.


END  OF  THE  SECOND  BOOK.


THIRD  BOOK


OF  THE


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES  OF  THE  YNCAS.

IT  CONTAINS  THE  LIFE  AND  ACTS  OF  MAYTA  CCAPAC,  FOURTH  KING;
THE  FIRST  OSIER  BRIDGE  THAT  WAS  MADE  IN  PERU;  AND  -THE
ADMIRATION  IT  CAUSED;  THE  LIFE  AND  CONQUESTS  OF  THE
FIFTH  KING,  CALLED  CCAPAC  YUPANQUI ; THE  FAMOUS  BRIDGE
OF  RUSHES  AND  STRAW  THAT  HE  ORDERED  TO  BE  PLACED
OVER  THE  DESAGUADERO;  A DESCRIPTION  OF  THE
HOUSE  AND  TEMPLE  OF  THE  SUN,  AND  OF  ITS
GREAT  RICHES.


THE  BOOK  CONTAINS  TWENTY-FIVE  CHAPTERS


THE  THIRD  BOOK.


CHAPTER  I.

MAYTA  CCAPAC,  THE  FOURTH  YNCA,  ANNEXES  TIAHUANACU.

OF  THE  EDIFICES  THAT  WERE  FOUND  THERE.

The  Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac  (whose  name  cannot  be  inter-
preted, for  the  word  Mayta  is  a proper  name,  and  has  no
meaning  whatever  in  the  general  language,  and  the  signifi-
cation of  Ccapac  has  already  been  explained)  having  com-
pleted the  obsequies  of  his  father,  and  solemnly  taken  pos-
session of  the  kingdom,  commenced  a journey  through  it  as
its  absolute  king.  For,  although  he  had  visited  its  provinces
on  two  occasions  during  the  lifetime  of  his  father,  yet  he  had
then  been  under  pupilage,  and  was  unable  to  hear  complaints
or  decide  upon  them,  nor  to  grant  favours  without  the  pre-
sence and  consent  of  those  of  his  Council,  who  prompted  the
replies  to  petitions,  and  the  sentences  and  judgments  that  the
prince  had  to  pronounce,  although  he  was  the  heir  ; for  this
was  the  law  of  the  kingdom.  But  when  he  found  himself
free  of  masters  and  tutors,  he  desired  to  visit  his  vassals  in
the  provinces  again.  For,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,
this  was  one  of  the  things  which  were  done  by  these  princes,
as  most  pleasing  to  their  subjects.  In  order  to  display  the
liberality,  magnanimity,  gentleness,  and  love  which  animated
his  mind,  he  made  this  journey,  and  granted  very  great
favours,  as  well  to  the  Curacas  as  to  the  common  people.

Having  completed  his  inspection,  he  turned  his  mind  to
the  principal  object  of  the  policy  of  these  ATicas,  which  was
to  draw  barbarous  tribes  from  vain  and  idolatrous  practices,
thus  gratifying  their  ambition  and  enriching  their  kingdom.


o


210


TÉtlRD  BOOK  OF  THE


For  one  or  the  other  object,  or  for  both,  for  the  powerful  are
influenced  by  both,  he  ordered  an  army  to  be  collected,  and,
on  the  approach  of  spring,  he  set  out  with  twelve  thousand
men  of  war,  four  masters  of  the  camp,  and  the  other  officers
and  ministers.  He  marched  to  the  desaguadero  (drain)  of
the  great  lake  of  Titicaca,  because,  as  the  whole  land  of  the
Collao  is  a plain,  it  appeared  to  be  more  easy  to  conquer
than  any  other  land  whatever.  The  natives  also  seemed  to
be  more  simple  and  tractable.

On  reaching  the  Desaguadero  he  ordered  great  balsas  to
be  made,  on  which  his  army  passed  over,  and  he  sent  the
usual  demand,  which  need  not  be  repeated  again,  to  the  first
villages  he  came  to.  The  Indians  readily  obeyed,  by  reason
of  the  wonderful  things  they  had  heard  of  the  Yncas,  and
amongst  other  places  that  submitted,  was  one  called
Tiahuanacu,  concerning  the  grand  and  wonderful  edifices  of
which  it  will  be  well  that  we  should  say  something.  Among
other  marvellous  things  at  this  place  there  is  a hill,  made  artifi-
cially, and  so  high  that  the  fact  of  its  having  been  made  by
man  causes  astonishment;  and  that  it  might  not  be  loosened,  it
was  built  upon  great  foundations  of  stone.  It  is  not  known
why  this  edifice  was  made.  In  another  part,  away  from  the
hill,  there  were  two  figures  of  giants  carved  in  stone,  with
long  robes  down  to  the  ground,  and  caps  on  their  heads ; all
well  worn  by  the  hand  of  time,  which  proves  their  great  an-
tiquity. There  was  also  an  enormous  wall  of  stones,  so  large
that  the  greatest  wonder  is  caused  to  imagine  how  human
force  could  have  raised  them  to  the  place  where  they  now
are.  For  there  are  no  rocks  nor  quarries  within  a great
distance,  from  whence  they  could  have  been  brought.  In
other  parts  there  are  grand  edifices,  and  what  causes  most
astonishment  are  the  great  doorways  of  masonry,  some  of
them  made  out  of  one  single  stone.  The  marvel  is  increased
by  their  wonderful  size,  for  some  of  them  were  found  to
measure  thirty  feet  in  length,  fifteen  in  breadth,  and  six  in


211


./


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.

depth.  And  these  stones,  with  their  doorways,  are  all  of
one  single  piece,  so  that  it  cannot  be  understood  with  what
instruments  or  tools  they  can  have  been  worked.

The  natives  say  that  all  these  edifices  were  built  before  the
time  of  the  Yncas,  and  that  the  Yucas  built  the  fortress  of
Cuzco  in  imitation  of  them.  They  know  not  who  erected
them,  but  have  heard  their  forefathers  say  that  all  these
wonderful  works  were  completed  in  a single  night.  The
ruins  appear  never  to  have  been  finished,  but  to  have  been
merely  the  commencement  of  what  the  founders  intended  to
have  built.  All  the  above  is  from  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon,
in  his  one  hundred  and  fifth  chapter  ; to  which  I propose  to
add  some  further  particulars,  obtained  from  a schoolfellow  of
mine,  a priest  named  Diego  de  Alcobasa  (whom  I may  call  my
brother,  for  we  were  born  in  the  same  house,  and  his  father
brought  me  up).  Amongst  other  accounts,  which  he  and
others  have  sent  me  from  my  native  land, he  says  the  following
respecting  these  great  edifices  of  Tiahuanacu : — “ In  Tiahuan-
acu,  in  the  province  of  Collao,  amongst  other  things,  there  are
some  ancient  ruins  worthy  of  immortal  memory.  They  are
near  the  lake  called  by  the  Spaniards  Chucuito,  the  proper
name  of  which  is  Chuquivitu.  Here  there  are  some  very
grand  edifices,  and  amongst  them  there  is  a square  court,
fifteen  brazas  each  way,  with  walls  two  stories  high.  On  one
side  of  this  court  there  is  a hall  forty-five  feet  long  by  twenty-
two  broad,  apparently  once  covered,  in  the  same  way  as  those
buildings  you  have  seen  in  the  house  of  the  sun  at  Cuzco,
with  a roof  of  straw.  The  walls,  roofs,  floor,  and  doorways
are  all  of  one  single  piece,  carved  out  of  a rock,  and  the  walls
of  the  court  and  of  the  hall  are  three-quarters  of  a yard  in
breadth.  The  roof  of  the  hall,  though  it  appears  to  be
thatch,  is  really  of  stone.  For  as  the  Indians  cover  their
houses  with  thatch,  in  order  that  this  might  appear  like  the
rest,  they  have  ombed  and  carved  the  stone  so  that  it  re-
sembles a roof  of  thatch.  The  waters  of  the  lake  wash  the


o


2


2\2


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


walls  of  the  court.  The  natives  say  that  this  and  the  other
buildings  were  dedicated  to  the  Creator  of  the  universe.
There  are  also  many  other  stones  carved  into  the  shape  of
men  and  women  so  naturally  that  they  appear  to  be  alive,
some  drinking  with  cups  in  their  hands,  others  sitting,  others
standing,  and  others  walking  in  the  stream  which  flows  by
the  walls.  There  are  also  statues  of  women  with  their  in-
fants in  their  laps,  others  with  them  on  their  backs,  and  in  a
thousand  other  postures.  The  Indians  say  that  for  the  great
sins  of  the  people  of  those  times,  and  because  they  stoned  a
man  who  was  passing  through  the  province,  they  were  all
converted  into  these  statues.”

Thus  far  are  the  words  of  Diego  de  Alcobasa,  who  has
been  a vicar  and  preacher  to  the  Indians  in  many  provinces
of  this  kingdom,  having  been  sent  by  his  superiors  from  one
part  to  another:  for,  being  a mestizo  and  native  of  Cuzco,
he  knows  the  language  of  the  Indians  better  than  others
who  are  born  in  the  country,  and  his  labours  bear  more
fruit*


CHAPTER  II.

HATUNPACASA  IS  REDUCED,  AND  THEY  CONQUER  CAC-YAVIRI.

Returning  to  the  proceedings  of  Mayta  Ccapac,  it  must  be
known  that,  almost  without  resistance,  he  conquered  the
greater  part  of  the  province  of  ITatunpacasa,  which  is  the
country  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Desaguadero. f Whether

* See  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  chapter  cv,  page  374 ; Anti-
güedades Peruanas , p.  295 ; Acosta,  vi,  p.  419,  and  other  authorities
quoted  in  my  notes  to  the  hundred  and  fifth  chapter  of  Cieza  de  Leon.

See  also  Mr.  Fergusson’s  remarks  on  the  ruins  at  Tiahuanaco,  in  his
History  of  Architecture,  ii,  p.  775.

t As  the  Desaguadero  flows  out  of  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  the  left  bank
is  on  the  eastern  side.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


213


this  was  done  in  one  campaign  or  in  several  is  a moot  point
amongst  the  Indians,  but  most  of  them  will  have  it  that  the
Yncas  extended  their  sway  by  little  and  little,  instructing
their  vassals  as  they  proceeded.  Others  say  that  this  policy
was  only  adopted  at  first,  when  they  were  not  powerful ; but
that  afterwards  they  conquered  all  the  countries  they  could
reach.  It  matters  little  which  of  these  be  the  correct  view.
It  will  be  better  to  avoid  the  prolixity  caused  by  repeating
the  same  things  many  times ; and  we  shall,  therefore,  state
at  once  the  territories  acquired  by  each  king,  without  be-
coming tedious  by  describing  the  different  campaigns.  Ad-
vancing in  his  conquests,  then,  the  Ynca  came  to  a place
called  Cac-yaviri,*  where  there  were  many  groups  of  houses
scattered  over  the  country,  without  being  collected  into
towns ; and  in  each  one  there  was  a petty  chief  who  ruled
over  the  rest  of  the  people.  All  these  chiefs,  on  hearing  that
the  Ynca  was  coming  to  conquer  them,  assembled  their
people,  and  retired  to  a hill  in  that  district,  which  was  high,
and  round  like  a sugar  loaf,  all  the  surrounding  country
being  flat.  The  Indians  looked  upon  this  hill  as  sacred,
from  its  beauty,  and  because  it  stood  alone,  and  they  wor-
shipped it  and  offered  up  sacrifices  to  it.  They  took  refuge
upon  it  in  the  hope  that,  being  their  god,  it  would  protect
them  from  their  enemies.  They  built  a stone  fort  upon  it
with  clods  of  earth  instead  of  mortar,  and  it  is  related  that
the  women  had  to  place  all  the  clods  while  the  men  brought
up  the  stones.  The  Indians  then  entered  the  fort  in  great
numbers,  with  their  wives  and  children,  and  all  the  provi-
sions they  could  collect.

The  Ynca  sent  them  the  usual  summons,  adding  particu-
larly that  he  had  not  come  to  take  away  their  lives  or  pro-
perty, but  to  confer  upon  them  the  benefits  which  the  Sun
had  ordered  him  to  offer  to  the  Indians,  and  that  they  should

* This  is  the  country  to  the  south  of  lake  Titicaca,  between  the  river
Desaguadero  and  the  modern  city  of  La  Paz.


214


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


not  resist  his  children,  who  were  invincible.  He  added  that
the  Sun  had  assisted  him  in  all  his  conquests  and  battles,  and
that  they  should  receive  the  Sun  as  their  god.  The  Ynca
sent  this  message  to  the  Indians  many  times,  who  always
resisted  his  appeals,  saying  that  they  already  had  a good  way
of  living,  and  did  not  wish  to  improve  it ; that  they  had  their
own  gods,  one  of  whom  was  that  mountain  which  they  had
fortified,  and  which  would  protect  them  ; that  the  Ynca
should  go  in  peace,  and  teach  those  who  desired  it,  for  that
they  did  not  wish  to  learn.  The  YTica,  who  had  no  wish  to
give  them  battle,  but  rather  to  reduce  them  by  hunger,  if  he
could  do  so  in  no  other  way,  divided  his  army  into  four
parts,  and  surrounded  the  hill.

The  Collas  continued  for  many  days  in  their  determination
to  resist,  and,  seeing  that  the  Yncas  did  not  wish  to  fight,
they  attributed  it  to  cowardice.  This  increased  their
audacity,  and  from  day  to  day  they  came  out  of  the  fort  to
fight ; the  besiegers,  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the  Ynca,
not  doing  more  than  deffend  themselves,  although  many  were
killed  on  both  sides.  It  was  a common  report  amongst  the
Indians  of  the  Collao,  which  was  afterwards  spread  by  the
Yncas  over  the  whole  empire,  that,  one  day,  when  the  be-
sieged Indians  came  out  to  fight  the  soldiers  of  the  Ynca,
their  stones,  arrows,  and  other  missiles,  which  they  shot
against  their  enemies,  came  back  and  struck  those  who  had
shot  them  off,  and  that  thus  many  Collaos  were  killed  with
their  own  arms.  Further  on  we  shall  explain  this  fable,
which  is  among  those  which  they  venerate  most.  Owing  to
the  great  slaughter  on  that  day  the  besieged  Indians  sur-
rendered, and  the  Curacas,  repenting  of  their  obstinacy,  col-
lected all  their  people  and  came  out  to  pray  for  mercy.  The
children  were  made  to  march  first,  then  their  mothers,  and
then  the  old  people.  Next  came  the  soldiers,  and  last  came
the  chiefs  and  Curacas  with  their  hands  tied,  and  ropes  round
their  necks,  in  token  of  having  deserved  death  for  fighting


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


215


against  the  child  of  the  Sun.  They  were  barefooted,  for  this
was  a sign  of  humility  amongst  the  Indians  of  Peru  ; and  it
was  intended  to  show  that  there  was  great  majesty  and
divinity  in  him  whom  they  desired  to  reverence.


CHAPTER  III.

THE  INDIANS  WHO  SURRENDERED  ARE  PARDONED.

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  FABLE.

Being  brought  before  the  Ynca,  they  threw  themselves  on
the  ground  and  adored  him,  with  great  acclamations,  as  a
child  of  the  Sun.  The  common  people  having  done  this,  the
Curacas  arrived,  and  with  the  veneration  that  they  are  ac-
customed to  show,  addressed  the  Ynca  thus — “We  entreat
your  majesty  to  pardon  these  people,  and  if  it  is  desirable
that  more  should  die,  we  shall  consider  our  own  deaths  to
be  fortunate  if  these  soldiers  can  be  spared,  for  we  gave  them
a bad  example  in  resisting  the  Ynca.”  They  also  prayed
for  pardon  for  the  women,  old  men,  and  children,  who  had
committed  no  crime.  The  chiefs  said  that  they  alone  were
criminal,  and  that,  therefore,  they  should  atone  for  all.

The  Ynca  received  them,  seated  on  his  chair,  and  sur-
rounded by  his  warriors ; and  having  heard  the  address  of
the  Curacas,  he  ordered  that  their  hands  should  be  untied,
and  the  ropes  removed  from  their  necks,  in  token  of  the
pardon  that  he  had  granted  them.  He  then,  with  kind  words,
told  them  that  he  had  not  come  to  take  their  lives  and  pro-
perty, but  to  do  them  good,  to  teach  them  to  lead  reasonable
lives  according  to  the  law  of  nature,  and,  abandoning  idols,  to
worship  the  Sun  as  god,  to  whom  they  were  indebted  for
this  forgiveness.  He  then  granted  their  lands  and  vassals
to  them  afresh,  without  other  condition  than  that  they  should
rule  beneficently.  They  were  then  ordered  to  return  to  their


216


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


houses  and  obey  the  commands  they  might  receive  ; and  that
they  might  be  more  fully  assured  of  their  pardon,  and  of  the
kindness  of  the  Ynca,  he  directed  that  the  Curacas,  in  the
name  of  all  the  people,  should  touch  his  right  knee,  as  a sign
that  they  were  his  people,  seeing  that  he  had  permitted  them
to  touch  his  person.  This  favour  was  highly  esteemed,  for
it  was  a sacrilege  for  any  one  to  touch  the  Ynca,  who  was
one  of  their  gods,  except  those  of  the  blood  royal,  or  those
who  received  permission  to  do  so.  Seeing  the  pious  disposi-
tion of  the  Ynca,  the  conquered  people  felt  no  fear  that  they
would  receive  the  punishment  they  had  expected ; and  the
Curacas,  again  throwing  themselves  on  the  ground,  declared
that  they  would  be  faithful  vassals  to  merit  so  many  favours,
and  that,  both  in  words  and  deeds  his  majesty  had  proved
himself  to  be  a child  of  the  Sun,  having  shown  unheard  of
mercy  to  a people  who  deserved  death.

With  regard  to  the  fable,  the  Yncas  say  that  its  history  is
as  follows.  When  the  officers  of  the  Ynca’s  army  saw  the
audacity  of  the  Collas,  which  increased  every  day,  they
secretly  ordered  their  soldiers  to  be  prepared  to  fight  with
them  by  fire  and  sword,  and  with  all  the  rigour  of  war,  it
being  impossible  to  suffer  so  much  insolence  towards  the
Ynca.  The  Collas  came  out,  as  was  their  wont,  to  make
their  attack,  careless  of  the  anger  of  their  enemies,  and  were
received  with  such  fury  that  most  of  them  were  killed.
Then,  as  hitherto  the  Yncas  had  not  fought  with  a view  to
killing,  but  only  to  defend  themselves,  the  Collas  thought
that  the  same  thing  had  happened  on  this  occasion,  hut  that
the  Sun,  unable  to  endure  these  insults  to  his  child,  had
commanded  that  their  own  arms  should  turn  against  them
and  punish  them,  the  Yncas  not  wishing  to  do  so.  The
Indians,  being  so  simple,  believed  this  to  be  the  case  because
the  Yncas,  who  were  held  to  be  children  of  the  Sun,  affirmed
it.  The  Amantas , who  were  the  philosophers,  allegorised
this  fable,  saying  that,  as  the  Collas  would  not  lay  down  their


ROYAL  COM  ME  NT  A RIES.


217


arms  and  obey  the  Yuca  when  they  received  his  summons,
their  own  arms  had  turned  against  them,  for  their  arms  were
the  cause  of  their  deaths.


CHAPTER  IY.

THEY  REDUCE  THREE  PROVINCES  AND  CONQUER  OTHERS.

THEY  FORM  COLONIES.  — THOSE  WHO  USE  POISON
ARE  PUNISHED.

This  fable,  and  the  act  of  piety  and  clemency  on  the  part
of  the  Prince,  were  noised  abroad  amongst  the  nations  bor-
dering on  Hatun-pacasa,  where  the  act  was  performed  ; and
caused  so  much  wonder  and  admiration  that  many  tribes
voluntarily  came  under  the  dominion  of  the  Ynca  Mayta
Ccapac,  and  reverenced  him  as  a child  of  the  Sun.  Amongst
other  nations  that  promised  obedience,  were  three  great  pro-
vinces, very  rich  in  flocks  and  inhabited  by  a warlike  race,
called  Cauquicura,  Malloma,  and  Huarina,*  where  the  bloody
battle  was  afterwards  fought  between  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and
Diego  Centeno. f The  Ynca,  having  granted  favours,  as  well
to  the  conquered  tribes  as  to  those  who  submitted  of  their
own  accord,  crossed  the  Desaguadero,  and  returned  towards
Cuzco.  From  Hatun-colla  he  sent  an  army,  with  the  four
masters  of  the  camp,  towards  the  west,  with  orders  to  cross
the  uninhabited  country  called  Hatun-punaJ  (to  the  verge
of  which  the  army  of  the  Ynca  Lloque  Yupanqui  had  ad-
vanced), and  to  reduce  to  his  service  the  nations  that  might
be  found  on  the  other  side,  as  far  as  the  shores  of  the  South
Sea.  The  Ynca  gave  orders  that,  under  no  circumstances,

* These  places  are  all  near  the  southern  shore  of  lake  Titicaca.

t On  the  26th  of  October,  1547.  The  Ynca  gives  a full  account  of
this  battle  in  the  second  part  of  his  Commentaries.  See  also  Prescott,
ii,  p.  349.

% Hatun,  great;  and  puna , a lofty  uninhabited  tract.


218


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


should  his  officers  offer  battle,  and  that,  if  they  met  with
people  so  stubborn  and  obstinate  as  not  to  desire  to  submit,
except  by  force  of  arms,  they  were  to  leave  them,  for  that
such  barbarians  would  lose  more  than  the  Ynca  would  gain.
With  these  orders,  and  a large  supply  of  provisions,  the
captains  commenced  their  march,  and  crossed  the  snowy
Cordillera  with  some  difficulty,  by  reason  of  the  absence  of
a road,  and  because  there  are  thirty  leagues  of  uninhabited
country  in  that  direction.  They  reached  a province  called
Cuchuna,*  with  a scattered  though  numerons  population.
The  natives,  on  hearing  of  the  approach  of  the  army,  built
a fort,  and  took  refuge  in  it,  with  their  wives  and  children.
The  Yncas  surrounded  it,  and,  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of
the  King,  they  did  not  wish  to  attack  it,  but  offered  the
garrison  peace  and  friendship,  which  were  refused.

The  two  forces  remained,  facing  each  other,  for  more  than
fifty  days,  during  which  time  there  were  many  occasions  on
which  the  Yncas  might  have  done  much  injury  to  their  op-
ponents, but,  following  out  their  ancient  policy,  and  in
obedience  to  the  express  orders  of  the  King,  they  desired
rather  to  straiten  them  by  the  blockade,  than  to  fight
them.  On  the  other  hand,  the  besieged  were  pressed  by
hunger,  for  they  had  not  had  time  to  collect  a sufficient  supply
of  provisions,  owing  to  the  sudden  approach  of  the  Yncas,
and  they  had  not  anticipated  so  long  a siege.  The  elder
people,  men  and  women,  bore  the  hunger  with  courage,  but
the  boys  and  children  could  not  endure  it,  and  went  out
into  the  fields  to  seek  for  herbs.  Many  went  over  to  the
enemy,  and  their  parents  consented,  because  they  could  not
hear  to  see  them  die  before  their  eyes.  The  Yncas  received
them  and  gave  them  food,  and  a small  quantity  to  take  to
their  parents,  together  with  the  usual  offer  of  peace  and

* I cannot  identify  this  place,  but  it  is  probably  in  the  mountains
above  Moquegua.  Further  on  it  is  said  to  be  fifteen  miles  from
Moquegua.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


219


amity.  On  seeing  all  this,  the  besieged,  having  no  hope  of
succour,  agreed  to  surrender  unconditionally,  as  it  seemed
to  them  that  those  who  had  been  so  merciful  and  kind  to
rebels,  would  be  much  more  so  to  humble  penitents.  Thus
they  submitted  to  the  will  of  the  Yncas,  who  received  them
with  affability  and  without  any  show  of  anger.  They  offered
them  friendship,  gave  them  food,  and  undeceived  them,  ex-
plaining that  the  Ynca,  as  a child  of  the  Sun,  did  not  desire
to  acquire  land  for  the  purpose  of  tyrannizing,  but  to  do
good  to  the  inhabitants,  according  to  the  commands  of  his
father  the  Sun.  That  they  might  know  this  by  experience,
the  Yncas  gave  clothes  and  other  gifts  to  the  chiefs,  and  food
to  the  people,  so  that  all  returned  to  their  homes  well
satisfied.

The  Ynca  captains  reported  all  that  had  taken  place  in
this  conquest,  and  applied  for  colonists  to  people  two  towns
in  that  province,  for  the  land  appeared  to  be  fertile,  and
capable  of  supporting  many  more  inhabitants  than  it  then
contained.  It  was  also  proposed  to  leave  a garrison  there
to  retain  what  had  been  acquired,  and  to  be  ready  for  any
event  that  might  happen  hereafter.  The  Ynca  sent  the  re-
quired men,  with  their  wives  and  children,  to  people  two
towns,  one  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  where  the  natives
had  built  a fort;  this  place  was  called  Cuchuna,  which  was
the  name  of  the  mountain.  The  other  town  was  called
Moquehua.*  One  was  five  leagues  from  the  other,  and  now
the  two  provinces  take  the  names  of  these  towns,  and  are
within  the  jurisdiction  of  Colla-suyu.  While  the  captains
were  engaged  in  establishing  an  orderly  government,  they
learnt  that,  amongst  these  Indians,  there  were  some  who  used

* Moquegua,  capital  of  the  province  of  the  same  name,  is  about
forty-five  miles  from  the  sea  coast  at  Ylo.  The  province  is  now  famous
for  its  vineyards,  producing  large  quantities  of  wine  and  spirits,  which
are  exported  into  the  Sierra.  In  the  Andes,  overhanging  the  province
to  the  eastward,  is  a volcano  called  Huayna-putina,  which  threw  out  a
fearful  eruption  in  1600,  and  others  called  Ubinas  and  Tutupaca.


220


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


poison  against  their  enemies,  not  so  much  to  kill  them  as
to  make  them  ugly  and  cause  pain  in  their  bodies  and  faces.
It  was  a gentle  poison,  from  which  only  those  died  who  were
of  weak  constitutions.  Those  who  were  strong,  continued
to  live,  hut  with  great  suffering,  for  their  limbs  became
feeble,  their  intellects  weak,  and  their  faces  and  bodies  ugly.
They  became  most  frightful,  and  spotted  black  and  white,
and  were  quite  ruined  both  in  mind  and  body,  so  that  all
their  relations  grieved  to  see  them  in  such  a plight,  and  were
more  sorry  to  behold  them  thus,  than  if  they  had  been
killed  at  once.  The  captains,  having  become  acquainted  with
this  evil  practice,  reported  it  to  the  Ynca,  who  ordered  all
who  had  been  guilty  of  such  cruelty  to  be  burnt  alive,  so
that  no  memory  might  remain  of  them.  This  order  of  the
King  was  so  agreeable  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  province
that  they  themselves  executed  the  sentence,  burnt  the  de-
linquents alive,  with  all  they  had  in  their  houses,  destroyed
the  houses,  and  strewed  their  sites  with  stones  as  accursed
places.  They  also  destroyed  their  flocks,  and  even  pulled
up  the  trees  they  had  planted.  It  was  ordered  that  their
land  should  never  be  given  to  any  one,  but  that  it  should
remain  desolate,  that  no  man  might  inherit,  with  it,  the  evil
deeds  of  its  former  owners.  The  severity  of  this  punishment
caused  so  much  fear  amongst  the  natives  that,  as  they  them-
selves declare,  they  never  again  practised  this  crime  in  the
days  of  King  Yncas,  down  to  the  time  when  the  Spaniards
conquered  the  country.  Having  settled  the  government,
inflicted  this  chastisement,  and  established  the  colonists  in
their  new  homes,  the  captains  returned  to  Cuzco,  to  report
their  proceedings,  where  they  were  well  received,  and  re-
warded by  the  King.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


<90  1

<Viv  I


CHAPTER  V.

THE  YNCA  ACQUIRES  THREE  NEW  PROVINCES,  ANI)  CONQUERS
IN  A VERY  HARD  FOUGHT  BATTLE.

After  some  years,  the  Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac  determined  to  set
out  and  reduce  new  provinces  to  submission,  for,  from  day  to
day,  the  desire  to  extend  their  dominion  increased  in  these
Yncas.  Having  collected  all  the  men  of  war  he  was  able,
and  supplied  them  with  provisions,  he  marched  to  Pucara  of
Umasuyu,  which  was  the  last  town  in  that  direction  acquired
by  his  grandfather,  or  according  to  others  by  his  father,  as
we  have  stated  in  its  place.  From  Pucara  he  marched  east-
wards to  a province  called  Llaricasa,*  and  reduced  its  in-
habitants without  meeting  any  resistance,  for  they  rejoiced
to  receive  him  as  their  Lord.  Thence  he  passed  on  to  the
province  of  Sancava,f  and  conquered  it  in  the  same  way,
for  as  the  fame  of  the  deeds  of  the  father  and  grandfather
of  this  Prince  had  spread,  the  natives  rejoiced  to  become
vassals  of  the  Yncas.  These  two  provinces  are  more  than
fifty  leagues  long  and  thirty  leagues  broad  in  one  part,
twenty  in  another.  They  are  very  populous  and  rich  in
flocks.  The  Yncas,  having  issued  the  usual  orders  respecting
religion  and  revenue,  marched  on  to  the  province  called
Pacassa,  and  proceeded  to  reduce  the  natives  to  subjection,
without  meeting  with  open  resistance.  They  all  obeyed  and
venerated  the  Ynca  as  a child  of  the  Sun.

This  province  is  part  of  that  which  we  said  that  the  Ynca
Lloque  Yupanqui  had  conquered.  It  is  very  large,  and
contains  many  towns,  and  thus  its  conquest  was  effected  by

* Larecaja,  a province  to  the  eastward  of  the  lofty  cordillera  of
Sorata.

f This  may  he  the  place  afterwards  known  as  San  (Javan,  in  the
forests  of  Caravaya.


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


OG)C)

both  these  Yncas,  father  and  son.  Having  completed  these
conquests,  the  Ynca  reached  the  high  road  of  Uma-suyu,
near  a village  which  is  now  called  Huaychu.  Here  he
became  aware  that  a large  body  of  men  had  come  to  oppose
him.  The  Ynca  continued  his  march  in  search  of  the  enemies,
who  assembled  to  oppose  the  passage  of  a river,  called  the
river  of  Huaychu.*  There  were  thirteen  or  fourteen  thou-
sand armed  Indians  of  different  tribes,  although  they  were
all  included  under  the  general  name  of  Collas.  The  Ynca,
wishing  to  avoid  a battle,  and  to  continue  his  conquests
without  fighting,  sent  many  messages,  offering  them  peace
and  amity;  but  they  always  refused  to  receive  them,  and
became  more  insolent  every  day,  for  they  thought  that  the
offers  of  the  Ynca,  which  they  rejected,  were  made  through
fear.  They  crossed  the  river  in  small  parties,  at  many  places,
and  attacked  the  Ykica’s  camp  with  much  insolence.  In
order  to  avoid  the  loss  of  life  on  both  sides  as  much  as  pos-
sible, the  Ynca  endured  the  insults  with  such  patience  that
even  his  own  soldiers  disliked  it,  and  said  that  it  was  not
decent  for  a child  of  the  Sun  to  endure  so  much  insolence
from  barbarians,  and  that  such  endurance  would  lead  to
future  contempt,  and  the  loss  of  the  reputation  already  ac-
quired.

The  Ynca  calmed  the  anger  of  his  people  by  saying  that,
to  imitate  his  ancestors  and  to  comply  with  the  mandates  of
his  father  the  Sun,  he  wished  to  spare  those  armed  men,  and
to  wait  and  see  whether  his  desire  not  to  give  them  battle,
nor  to  do  them  harm,  would  awaken  some  perception  of  the
good  he  was  anxious  to  do  them.  With  these  and  similar
words  the  Ynca  entertained  his  captains  for  many  days,
without  giving  them  leave  to  close  with  the  enemy.  At
length  he  was  overcome  by  the  importunity  of  his  own  people,

* This  I take  to  be  the  river  Viaeha  in  Bolivia,  which  enters  the
lake  of  Titicaca  at  the  south  end.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


223


and  the  insupportable  insolence  of  the  enemy,  and  ordered
a battle  to  be  fought.

The  Yncas,  who  were  exceedingly  eager  to  fight,  sallied
forth  with  promptitude.  The  enemy,  seeing  the  battle  which
they  had  so  long  sought  was  about  to  commence,  came  out
also  with  much  eagerness.  They  both  fought  with  great
ferocity  and  valour,  those  on  one  side  to  maintain  their
liberty,  and  their  determination  not  to  serve  the  Ynca,
although  he  might  be  a child  of  the  Sun  ; and  those  on  the
other  to  punish  the  insolence  with  which  their  King  had  been
treated.  They  fought  with  great  obstinacy,  especially  the
Collas,  who  threw  themselves  wildly  on  the  arms  of  the
Yncas,  and,  as  barbarians  obstinate  in  their  rebellion,  fought
with  great  desperation,  and  without  order  or  concert.  The
loss  of  life  was  consequently  very  great,  and  the  battle  lasted
the  Avhole  day  without  ceasing.  The  Ynca  Avas  to  be  found
in  every  part  of  the  field,  now  encouraging  the  men  and
acting  the  part  of  a captain,  now  fighting  with  the  enemy,
so  as  not  to  lose  the  reputation  of  being  a good  soldier.


CHAPTER  Vi.

THOSE  OF  HUAYCHU  SUBMIT,  AND  ARE  MERCIFULLY
PARDONED.

On  the  side  of  the  Collas,  according  to  the  account  given
by  their  descendants,  more  than  six  thousand  wrere  killed,
owing  to  their  want  of  discipline  in  fighting ; while  of  the
Yncas,  owing  to  their  order  and  regularity,  not  more  than
five  hundred  fell.  Both  sides  retired  to  their  camps  under
cover  of  night ; but  the  Collas,  feeling  their  wounds  and
seeing  the  number  of  their  dead,  lost  heart,  and  kneiv  not
what  to  do,  nor  Avhat  course  to  adopt.  For  they  had  not  the
power  to  free  themselves  by  fighting,  and  they  knew  not  Iioav


234


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


or  where  to  escape  by  flight,  their  enemies  having  surrounded
them,  and  occupied  the  passes  : nor  did  they  hope  for  any
mercy,  after  having  rejected  and  contemned  the  generous
offers  of  the  Ynca.

In  this  state  of  uncertainty  they  took  the  safest  course,
which  was  the  advice  of  their  old  men.  They  proposed  that
the  defeated  Collas  should  seek  the  clemency  of  the  prince,
who,  although  they  had  offended  him,  would  follow  the
example  of  his  ancestors,  and  show  mercy  to  rebels.  So,  as
soon  as  dawn  appeared,  they  put  on  the  vilest  habiliments,
and,  without  shoes  or  any  clothing  but  their  smocks,  and  with
their  hands  tied  behind  them,  their  chiefs  presented  them-
selves at  the  entrance  of  the  Ynca’s  lodging.  That  prince
received  them  kindly,  and  the  Collas,  falling  on  their  knees,
said  that  they  had  not  come  to  ask  for  mercy,  because  they
knew  well  they  had  not  deserved  it,  but  that  the  Ynca  would
treat  them  as  their  obstinacy  and  ingratitude  merited.  They
only  asked  that  their  fighting  men  might  be  put  to  death  as
an  example  to  warn  others  against  disobedience  to  the  child
of  the  Sun.

The  Ynca  ordered  one  of  his  captains  to  tell  them  that
his  father  the  Sun  had  not  sent  him  to  the  earth  to  kill
Indians,  but  to  do  them  good,  drawing  them  from  a bestial
life,  and  teaching  them  the  knowledge  of  the  Sun  their  God,
and  giving  them  laws  and  government  that  they  might  live
as  men  and  not  as  brutes.  With  this  purpose  it  was  that  the
Ynca  marched  from  province  to  province  drawing  Indians,
of  whose  services  he  himself  had  no  need,  to  the  worship  of
the  Sun.  He,  therefore,  pardoned  them,  although  they  did
not  deserve  it,  and  ordered  that  they  should  continue  to  live,
and  that,  as  they  had  been  turned  from  their  rebellion  by
the  severe  chastisement  inflicted  upon  them  by  their  father
the  Sun ; so  henceforward  they  should  be  obedient  to  his
orders,  and  thus  lead  a happy  and  peaceful  life.  Having
caused  this  reply  to  be  made  to  them,  the  Ynca  ordered  them


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


225


to  be  clothed,  cured  of  their  wounds,  and  treated  with  all
possible  kindness.  The  Indians  returned  to  their  houses,
convinced  of  the  evil  which  their  rebellion  had  caused  them,
and  that  they  lived  through  the  clemency  of  the  Ynca.


CHAPTER  VII.

THEY  REDUCE  MANY  TOWNS.  THE  YNCA  ORDERS  A BRIDGE
OF  OSIERS  TO  BE  MADE.

The  news  of  the  slaughter  caused  by  this  battle  spread
far  and  wide,  and  it  was  known  how  the  Sun  had  punished
those  Indians  who  had  refused  obedience  to  his  children  the
Yncas.  Then,  many  towns  which  had  hitherto  been  in  arms
and  forming  camps  to  resist  the  Ynca,  when  they  heard  of
his  clemency  and  piety,  sent  to  ask  for  pardon  and  to  be  re-
ceived as  his  vassals.  The  Ynca  received  them  with  much
kindness,  and  ordered  them  to  be  given  clothes  and  other
presents,  so  that  they  were  well  satisfied,  declaring  on  all
sides  that  the  Yncas  were  true  children  of  the  Sun.

The  towns  which  then  submitted  to  the  Ynca,  were  those
lying  between  Huaychu  and  Callamarca  to  the  south  of  the
road  to  Charcas.  The  Ynca  advanced  beyond  Callamarca
for  twenty-four  leagues  along  the  Charcas  road,  as  far  as
Caracollo,*  reducing  all  the  towns  on  either  side  of  the  road
as  far  as  the  lake  of  Paria.fi  Then  he  turned  to  the  east
towards  the  Antis,  and  reached  the  valley  which  is  now
called  Chuquiapu.  The  meaning  of  this  word  in  the  general
language,  is  a “ chief  lance,”  or  “ principal  lance, ”fi  which  is
the  same  thing.  In  that  district  the  Ynca  ordered  many

* Caracollo  is  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  S.E.  of  lake  Titicaca.

+ This  is  the  lake  or  swamp  of  Paria  or  Aullagas,  into  which  all  the
drainage  of  the  great  lake  of  Titicaca  flows.  It  is  about  sixty  miles
long.  The  lake  Titicaca  is  12,850,  and  that  of  Aullagas  12,280  feet
above  the  sea,  according  to  Pentland.

J Chuqui,  a lance ; and  apu,  chief.

3’


226


THIRD  BOOK  OR  THE


settlements  of  Indian  colonists  to  be  formed,  because  he  saw
that  this  valley  was  more  suitable  for  the  cultivation  of  maize
than  any  other  province  amongst  those  which  are  included
under  the  name  of  Colla.  From  the  valley  of  Caracatu,*  he
marched  eastwards  to  the  foot  of  the  great  snowy  range  of
the  Andes,  which  is  thirty  leagues  distant  from  the  royal
road  of  Uma-suyu.

After  passing  three  years  in  these  expeditions,  forming
settlements,  and  establishing  law  and  order,  the  Ynca  re-
turned to  Cuzco,  where  he  was  received  with  great  festivities
and  rejoicings.  Having  rested  for  another  three  years,  he
ordered  provisions  and  troops  to  be  collected  for  new  con-
quests, because  he  could  not  suffer  himself  to  remain  idle,
and  because  he  wished  to  march  to  the  westward  of  Cuzco,
where  is  the  region  of  Cunti-suyu,  containing  many  large
provinces.  As  it  was  necessary  to  cross  the  river  Apurimac,
he  ordered  a bridge  to  be  made  for  the  passage  of  the  army.
He  gave  the  directions  for  constructing  the  bridge,  after  con-
sulting some  Indians  of  intelligence  ; and  as  writers  on  Peru,
although  they  mention  the  reed  bridges,  do  not  say  in  what
manner  they  are  made;  it  seems  desirable  that  I should
describe  these  bridges  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  have
never  seen  them,  and  also  because  this  was  the  first  bridge
of  osiers  that  was  made  in  Peru,  by  order  of  the  Yncas.

To  make  a bridge  of  this  description,  they  collect  an
immense  quantity  of  osiers,  which,  although  different  from
those  of  Spain,  are  but  another  species,  with  fine  and  supple
branches.  They  then  lay  up  very  long  strands  of  the  single
osiers,  the  length  of  the  bridge.  With  three  of  these  strands
they  lay  up  a rope  formed  of  nine  osiers,  and  of  three  of
these  they  make  another  composed  of  twenty-seven  osiers;  and
of  three  of  these  they  make  another  still  larger.  In  this  way
they  go  on  multiplying  the  strands  and  increasing  the  thick-
ness of  the  rope,  until  it  is  as  large  or  larger  than  a man’s  body.

* About  forty  miles  S.S.E.  of  La  Paz.


ROYAL  commentaries.


227


They  make  five  of  these  very  thick  ropes.  The  Indians
pass  them  from  one  side  of  the  river  to  the  other,  either  by
swimming  or  in  balsas.  They  take  with  them  a slight  line,
to  which  they  fasten  a rope  the  size  of  a man’s  arm,  made  of
the  fibre  called  by  the  Indians  chahuar .*  To  this  rope  they
secure  one  of  the  great  cables,  and  a number  of  Indians  haul
away  until  the  end  is  across  the  river.  As  soon  as  all  the
five  cables  are  across,  they  are  placed  over  high  buttresses
cut  out  of  a solid  rock,  when  there  is  one  conveniently
placed ; and  when  this  is  not  the  case,  they  erect  masonry
buttresses,  as  strong  as  rocks.  The  bridge  of  Apurimac,
which  is  on  the  high  road  from  Cuzco  to  the  City  of  the
Kings,  has  one  buttress  of  solid  rock,  and  another  of  masonry.
These  buttresses  are  hollow  near  the  ground,  and  are
strengthened  with  wing  walls.  In  the  hollow  part,  five  or
six  beams,  as  thick  as  bullocks,  are  placed,  extending  from
one  buttress  to  the  other,  and  fixed  in  order,  one  above
the  other.  The  cables  are  passed,  with  one  round  turn,
over  each  of  the  beams,  that  the  bridge  may  be  drawn  tight,
and  not  be  made  slack  by  its  own  weight,  which  is  very
considerable.  But,  although  it  is  well  stretched,  there  is
always  a bight  forming  a curve,  so  that  one  descends  to  the
middle,  and  ascends  the  last  half.

Three  of  the  great  cables  are  placed  as  a floor  for  the
bridge,  and  the  other  two  are  used  for  a parapet  on  either
side.  Small  laths  are  placed  across  those  used  as  a floor,
like  hurdles,  for  the  whole  width  of  the  bridge,  which  is
about  two  varas  broad.  These  battens  are  placed  to  pre-
serve the  strands  of  the  ropes,  that  they  may  last  longer,  and
they  are  fastened  very  securely  to  these  ropes.  A number
of  boughs  are  placed  over  the  hurdles  in  rows,  and  this  is
done  that  the  beasts  may  have  a firm  footing.  Between  the
cables  forming  the  floors  and  those  used  as  a balustrade  they
interlace  many  boughs  and  small  wands  fastened  tightly

* Aloe.


P


2


228


THIRD  ROOK  OF  THE


together,  forming  a wall  for  the  whole  length  of  the  bridge,
which  is  thus  made  secure  for  the  passage  of  men  and
beasts.  The  bridge  of  the  Apurimac,  which  is  the  longest
of  all,  is  about  two  hundred  paces  across.  I did  not  measure
it  myself,  but  in  conversing  in  Spain  with  many  who  had
crossed  it,  they  gave  this  length,  more  or  less.  I have  seen
many  Spaniards  who  did  not  get  off  to  cross  it,  and  some
went  over  it  on  horseback  at  a gallop,  to  show  how  little
they  were  afraid,  but  they  could  not  but  have  experienced
some  feeling  of  apprehension.  This  great  work  was  com-
menced with  only  three  osiers,  and  it  was  completed  in  the
way  I have  attempted  to  describe.  It  is  certainly  a wonder-
ful work,  and  almost  incredible  except  to  those  who  have
seen  it,  as  I have  done.  Necessity  has  preserved  it  from
being  destroyed  by  time,*  as  has  been  the  fate  of  many  large
bridges  which  the  Spaniards  found  on  their  arrival  in  this
country.  In  the  time  of  the  Yncas  these  bridges  were  re-
newed every  year  by  the  people  of  the  neighbouring  pro-
vinces, among  whom  the  supply  of  material  was  divided
according  to  their  proximity  to  the  work  and  their  means.
The  same  system  is  followed  at  the  present  day.


CHAPTER  VIII.

MANY  NATIONS  ARE  REDUCED  TO  SUBMISSION  BY  THE
FAME  OF  THE  BRIDGE.

As  soon  as  he  knew  that  the  bridge  was  completed,  the
Ynca  commenced  his  march  with  12,000  armed  men  and
experienced  officers,  and  advanced  as  far  as  the  bridge,
where  there  was  a strong  guard  stationed,  in  case  an  enemy
should  attempt  to  destroy  it.  But  the  people  were  so
astonished  at  this  new  work,  that  they  desired  to  receive
the  prince  who  had  ordered  it  to  be  erected  as  their  lord.

* That  is,  as  the  bridge  is  on  the  high  road  from  Cuzco  to  Lima,  it
was  a necessity  to  the  Spaniards  that  it  should  be  kept  in  repair.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


229


For  the  Indians  of  Peru,  in  those  times,  and  even  until  the
arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  were  so  simple,  that  any  one  who  in-
vented a new  thing  was  readily  recognised  by  them  as  a child
of  the  Sun.  Thus  it  was  that,  when  they  saw  the  Spaniards
fighting  on  the  backs  of  animals  so  ferocious  as  horses
appeared  to  them  to  be,  and  when  they  beheld  them  killing
people  at  a distance  of  two  or  three  hundred  paces,  they
looked  upon  such  men  as  gods.  Owing  mainly  to  these  two
things,  but  also  to  other  novel  things  that  they  beheld,  the
Indians  held  the  Spaniards  to  be  children  of  the  Sun,  and
they  submitted  to  them  with  little  opposition ; and  they
show  the  same  wonder  and  awe  whenever  the  Spaniards  in-
troduce a new  thing  which  they  have  never  seen  before,
such  as  mills  grinding  wheat,  ploughing  with  oxen,  or  making
masonry  arches  for  the  bridges.  They  say  that,  by  reason
of  all  these  things,  it  is  fitting  that  they  should  serve  the
Spaniards.  In  the  time  of  the  Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac  their
simplicity  was  even  greater.  They  were  so  much  awed  by
the  construction  of  the  bridge,  that  this  alone  was  sufficient
to  make  several  surrounding  provinces  submit  to  the  Ynca.
One  of  these  provinces  was  called  Chumpi-uillca,*  in  the
Cunti-suyu  division,  which  is  twenty  leagues  long  and  more
than  ten  wide.  The  inhabitants  readily  received  the  Ynca,
partly  from  the  fame  of  his  being  a child  of  the  Sun,  and
partly  from  admiration  at  the  new  work,  for  they  thought
that  such  things  could  only  be  done  by1  men  come  down
from  heaven.  The  only  place  where  there  was  any  resistance
was  at  a village  called  Villilli.f  The  inhabitants  retired

* Chumpi,  dark  brown  colour;  and  uilea,  sacred.  This  is  the  modern
province  of  Chumbivilicas,  in  the  department  of  Cuzco,  the  capital  of
which  is  a town  called  San  Tomas.  It  is  bounded  on  the  north-east  and
east  by  the  provinces  of  Paruro,  Q.uispicanchi,  Canchis  and  Canas ; on
the  south  and  west  by  the  department  of  Arequipa,  and  on  the  north
and  north-west  by  the  province  of  Cotabambas.

t Velille  is  a village  on  rather  a large  river  of  the  same  name,  a
tributary  of  the  Apurimac.  There  is  a vast  natural  cave  at  Livitaca,
near  Velille,  with  stalact^rs.


230


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


into  a fort,  and  the  Ynca  ordered  it  to  be  surrounded  on  all
sides,  so  that  none  might  come  forth,  at  the  same  time  send-
ing his  pious  and  merciful  invitations.

After  a few  days,  not  exceeding  ten  or  twelve,  the  be-
sieged surrendered,  and  the  Ynca  pardoned  them ; and,
having  pacified  that  province,  he  marched  across  the  un-
inhabited part  of  Cunti-suyu,  a distance  of  sixteen  leagues,
and  encountered  a formidable  swamp  three  leagues  broad,
which  checked  the  progress  of  the  army.

The  Ynca  ordered  a causeway  to  be  made  of  large  and
small  stones,  between  which  clods  of  earth  were  placed,  in-
stead of  mortar.  The  Ynca  himself  worked  at  this  cause-
way, as  well  to  give  an  example  of  industry  as  to  assist  in
raising  the  large  stones  which  were  necessary  for  the  work.
Encouraged  by  his  example,  the  people  worked  so  hard  that
it  was  finished  in  a few  days,  being  six  varas  wide  and  two
high.  The  Indians  held  and  still  hold  this  causeway  in
great  veneration,  as  well  because  the  Ynca  himself  worked
at  it,  as  because  of  its  great  convenience.  It  enables  them
to  avoid  the  long  round  that  they  had  to  take  before,  to  get
clear  of  the  swamp,  on  one  side  or  the  other.  They  there-
fore take  very  great  care  to  keep  the  causeway  in  repair,  and
scarcely  a single  stone  is  allowed  to  fall  out  without  being
immediately  replaced.  The  duty  of  repairing  this  work  is
divided  amongst  different  districts,  each  one  undertaking  a
certain  portion.  The  same  system  was  established  for  the
repair  of  other  works,  the  portions  being  divided  amongst
families  if  the  works  were  small,  amongst  districts  if  they
were  large,  and  amongst  provinces  if  they  were  of  great
magnitude,  such  as  bridges,  royal  houses,  and  other  similar
structures.  The  clods  of  turf  are  very  useful  on  the  cause-
ways, because  the  roots  interlace  one  with  another  between
the  stones,  binding  them  together,  and  strengthening  the
work  mightily.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


231


CHAPTER  IX.

THE  YNCA  ACQUIRES  MANY  OTHER  GREAT  PROVINCES,  AND
DIES  IN  PEACE.

The  causeway  being  made,  the  Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac  passed
over  it,  and  entered  a province  called  Allca,  where  many
armed  Indians  came  from  all  parts  to  defend  the  passage  of
some  very  rugged  mountains  and  difficult  passes  on  the  road,
which,  even  in  peaceful  times,  are  such  as  to  excite  terror
and  apprehension.  How  much  more  so  when  they  have  to
be  crossed  in  the  face  of  an  opposing  enemy!  The  Ynca  led
his  army  into  the  passes  with  so  much  prudence,  fore-
thought, and  military  skill,  that  although  the  enemy  de-
fended them,  and  people  were  killed  on  either  side,  he  con-
tinued to  gain  ground  on  his  opponents.  When  the  enemy
saw  that  they  could  not  hold  their  own  in  such  a position  as
they  had  chosen,  but  were  being  forced  back  day  by  day,
they  said  that  the  Yncas  must  indeed  be  children  of  the
Sun,  for  that  they  seemed  to  be  invincible.  In  this  vain
belief  (although  they  had  resisted  for  more  than  two  months)
the  whole  province,  with  one  accord,  received  the  king  as
lord  over  them,  promising  him  the  fidelity  of  loyal  vassals.

The  Ynca  entered  the  principal  town,  called  Allca,  in
great  triumph,  and  passed  onward  to  other  great  provinces
called  Taurisma,  Cota-huasi,*  Puma-tampu,  and  Parihuana-
ccocha,f  which  means  the  lake  of  the  flamingos.  For  in  an
uninhabited  part  of  that  province  there  is  a great  lake,  called

* Cotahuasi  is  in  the  modern  province  of  La  Union,  in  the  depart-
ment of  Arequipa.  Near  it  are  two  very  lofty  peaks,  covered  with
perpetual  snow,  called  Coro-Puna  and  Solimana.

f A province  in  the  modern  department  of  Ayacucho,  forty-five  leagues
long  by  twenty.  The  lake  of  Parinacochas,  which  gives  its  name  to  the
province,  is  ten  miles  long  from  east  to  west,  and  sis  miles  across  in  the
widest  part.  The  province  is  to  the  westward  of  the  watershed  of  the


232


THIRD  BOOK  OR  THE


ccocha  in  the  Ynca  language,  and  parihuana  is  the  name
for  those  birds  which  in  Spain  are  called  flamingos.  Of  these
two  words  they  formed  one,  saying  Parihuana-ccocha,  which
name  they  gave  to  that  great,  fertile,  and  beautiful  province,
containing  much  gold.  The.  Spaniards,  making  a syncope,
say  Parinacocha.  Puma-tampu  means  a deposit  of  lions,
composed  of  the  words  puma , a lion,  and  tampu,  a depot.
The  name  probably  originated  from  a lion’s  den,  which  at
some  time  or  other  was  found  there,  or  because  there  were
more  lions  there  than  in  any  other  place.

From  Parihuana-ccocha  the  Ynca  continued  his  advance,
and  crossed  the  uninhabited  region  of  Coropuna,*  where
there  is  a very  lofty  and  most  beautiful  snowy  peak,  which
the  Indians,  with  much  reverence,  call  huaca.  This  word,
amongst  many  other  significations,  here  means  wonderful,
and  the  peak  certainly  is  so.  In  their  ancient  simplicity  the
Indians  worshipped  their  mountains  for  their  height  and
beauty,  which  are  truly  most  admirable.  Having  crossed
the  uninhabited  country,  the  Ynca  entered  a province
called  Aruni,  when  he  advanced  to  another  called  Colla-
hua,  which  extends  as  far  as  Arequipa.  According  to
Bias  Valera  the  name  of  Arequipa  signifies  a sounding
trumpet,  f

The  Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac  reduced  all  these  provinces  to
obedience,  and  the  people  submitted  very  readily ; for

Andes,  but  in  the  midst  of  lofty  mountains.  The  lake  is  about  sixty
miles  from  the  sea.

* Coro-puna  and  Solimana  are  two  lofty  peaks  in  the  western  or  mari-
time cordillera  of  the  Andes,  in  about  latitude  15°  20'  S.  Coropuna  is  to
the  south  of  Solimana,  and  both  are  covered  with  perpetual  snow.  Coro-
puna is  a perfect  cone,  and  from  its  sides  the  sea  may  be  seen,  glitter-
ing under  a setting  sun,  at  a distance  of  sixty-five  miles.

t Ariñi , “I  affirm”  or  “declare,”  the  root  of  which  is  ari,  and  quepa ,
a trumpet.  (See  also  Mossi.)  Others  derive  the  name  from  Ari  (yes)
and  quepay  (remain),  the  order  supposed  to  have  been  given  to  the
colonists  whom  the  Ynca  caused  to  be  transported  to  the  valley  of  Are-
quipa.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


233


having  heard  of  the  deeds  done  by  the  Yncas  in  the  diffi-
cult passes  of  the  mountains  of  Allca,  they  believed  them  to
be  invincible  children  of  the  Sun,  and  desired  to  become
their  vassals.  The  Ynca  remained  in  each  province  as  long
as  was  necessary  to  establish  the  new  government.  He
found  the  valley  of  Arequipa  to  be  uninhabited,  and  con-
sidering the  fertility  of  the  soil  and  the  pleasant  climate,  he  or-
dered many  of  the  conquered  Indians  to  people  that  valley,  ex-
plaining to  them  the  excellence  of  the  situation,  and  the  ad-
vantages they  would  enjoy  by  colonising  it.  He  sent  more
than  3000  families  there,  with  which  he  founded  three  or
four  towns.  One  of  them  was  called  Chimpa,  another  Suca-
huaya,*  and  the  Ynca  left  governors  and  other  officers  in
them.  He  then  returned  to  Cuzco,  having  spent  three  years
on  this  second  expedition,  during  which  time  he  subdued
provinces  nearly  ninety  leagues  long,  and  from  twelve  to
fifteen  wide,  in  the  region  of  Cunti-suyu.  All  this  land  was
conterminous  with  that  which  had  already  been  brought
under  his  dominion.

The  Ynca  was  received  in  Cuzco  with  very  great  solem-
nity, and  his  return  was  celebrated  by  rejoicings,  dances,
and  songs  composed  to  commemorate  his  deeds.  Having
rewarded  his  officers,  the  Ynca  dismissed  the  army,  and
considering  that  the  conquests  he  had  made  were  sufficient,
he  resolved  to  rest  from  his  past  labours,  and  to  occupy  him-
self with  the  good  government  of  his  dominions,  taking
special  care  of  the  interests  of  the  poor,  the  widows,  and  the
orphans.  In  this  way  he  passed  the  remainder  of  his  life.
They  give  to  him,  as  to  his  ancestors,  thirty  years  for  his
reign,  a little  more  or  less,  but  neither  the  length  of  his
reign  nor  of  his  life  are  certainly  known,  nor  could  I ascer-
tain more  than  the  nature  of  his  acts.  He  died  full  of
honour,  gained  both  in  peace  and  in  war,  and  was  mourned

* The  pretty  little  modern  village  of  Socabaya,  six  miles  south  of
Arequipa.


234


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


for  during  the  space  of  a year,  according  to  the  custom  of
the  Indians,  for  he  was  much  loved  by  his  vassals.  He
left,  as  his  heir,  his  eldest  son,  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  by  his
sister  and  wife  Mama  Cuca.  Besides  the  prince  he  had
other  sons  and  daughters,  as  well  legitimate  as  illegitimate.


CHAPTER  X.

CCAPAC  YUPANQUI,  THE  FIFTH  KING,  GAINS  MANY
PROVINCES  IN  CUNTI-SUYU.

The  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  whose  names,  having  been
used  by  his  ancestors,  have  already  been  interpreted,  took
the  emblem  of  power,  the  crimson  fringe,  on  the  death  of
his  father,  and  having  celebrated  the  obsequies,  he  set  out
to  visit  all  his  dominions,  travelling  through  the  provinces,
and  inquiring  into  the  conduct  of  the  governors.  He  was
occupied  for  two  years  in  this  inspection,  and  then  returned
to  Cuzco,  where  he  ordered  provisions  to  be  collected,  and
an  army  to  be  assembled,  intending  to  extend  his  conquests
to  the  westward  of  Cuzco,  in  the  Cunti-suyu  region,  in  the
ensuing  year,  for  he  heard  that  there  were  still  many  large
and  populous  provinces  still  unsubdued  in  that  direction.
He  ordered  another  bridge  to  be  made  across  the  great
river  Apurimac  at  a place  called  Huaca-chaca,  lower  down
than  that  of  Aecha,  which  was  completed  with  all  diligence,
and  was  broader  than  the  older  bridge,  the  width  of  the
river  being  greater.

The  Ynca  departed  from  Cuzco  with  nearly  20,000  armed
men,  and  reached  the  bridge,  which  is  eight  leagues  from
that  city,  by  a very  rugged  and  difficult  road.  The  descent
to  the  river  alone  is  three  leagues  long,  and  nearly  perpen-
dicular, the  actual  height  being  half  a league ; and  the
ascent  on  the  opposite  side  is  another  three  leagues.  After


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


235


passing  the  bridge,  the  Ynca  entered  a beautiful  province
called  Yana-huara,*  which  now  contains  more  than  thirty
towns,  though  it  is  not  known  how  many  it  then  had.  The
first  town,  on  the  side  by  which  the  Ynca  came,  was  called
Piti.f  All  the  people  came  out,  young  and  old,  men,
women,  and  children,  singing  and  shouting,  and  joyfully  re-
ceived the  Ynca  as  their  lord.  He  treated  them  with  much
kindness,  giving  them  clothes  and  other  presents.  The
people  of  Piti  sent  messengers  to  the  other  towns  in  their
district,  whose  inhabitants  belong  to  the  same  nation  of
Yanahuara;  announcing  the  arrival  of  the  Ynca,  and  that
they  had  received  him  as  their  king  and  lord.  Following
their  example,  the  other  Curacas  came  and  did  the  same  as
those  of  Piti.

The  Ynca  received  them  as  he  had  done  the  first,  and
gave  them  presents,  and  as  a still  greater  favour  he  ex-
pressed his  desire  to  visit  their  towns,  which  are  scattered
over  an  extent  of  country  twenty  leagues  long  by  fifteen
broad.  From  the  province  of  Yana-huara  the  Ynca  ad-
vanced to  another  called  Aymara,*  over  an  uninhabited  re-
gion fifteen  leagues  wide ; on  the  other  side  of  which,  on  a
great  hill  called  Mucansa,  he  found  a large  body  of  men
assembled  to  oppose  him  at  the  frontier  of  their  country,
which  is  thirty  leagues  long,  and  more  than  fifteen  wide.
It  is  rich  in  mines  of  gold,  silver,  and  lead,  and  has  abun-
dance of  flocks.  It  is  also  well  peopled,  and,  before  the
conquest,  contained  more  than  eighty  towns.

* I take  this  to  be  the  modern  province  of  Cotabambas,  which  is
bounded  on  the  north-east  by  the  provinces  of  Anta  and  Paruro,  on  the
east  and  south  by  that  of  Chumbivilcas,  on  the  west  by  those  of  Aymaraes
and  Abancay,  and  on  the  south-west  by  Parinacochas.  The  chief  town
of  the  province  is  called  Tambobamba.

t Piti  or  Pitic  is  a village  in  the  province  of  Cotabambas.

J The  modern  province  of  Aymaraes,  bounded  on  the  north-east  and
east  by  the  provinces  of  Abancay  and  Cotabambas,  and  on  the  south,  west,
and  north-west  by  the  department  of  Ayacucho.  The  chief  town  of  the
province  is  Challhuanca.


236


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


The  Ynca  ordered  his  army  to  be  posted  at  the  foot  of  the
hill,  to  prevent  the  retreat  of  the  enemy;  for,  being  a bar-
barous people  without  discipline,  they  had  deserted  their
towns  and  assembled  on  that  hill  as  the  strongest  place,
without  considering  that  they  might  be  surrounded  as  in  a
yard.  The  Ynca  was  many  days  without  giving  them  battle,
nor  consenting  that  they  should  be  injured,  merely  forbid-
ding provisions  to  be  furnished  to  them,  that  they  might
surrender  through  hunger,  and  he  sent  messages  of  peace  to
them.

This  state  of  things  lasted  for  more  than  a month,  when
the  rebels,  forced  by  hunger,  sent  a messenger  to  the  Ynca
to  say  that  they  would  receive  him  as  their  king,  and  as  a child
of  the  Sun,  on  condition  that  he,  as  such  child  of  the  Sun,
would  give  his  faith  and  word  to  conquer  and  reduce  (as
soon  as  they  had  submitted)  the  adjoining  province  of  Uma-
suyu,  which  was  inhabited  by  a warlike  people  who  invaded
their  country,  and  used  their  pastures  up  to  the  very  doors
of  tlveir  houses,  and  did  them  other  injuries.  They  said
that  they  had  waged  war  to  the  death  with  these  people,
and  although  truces  had  been  made,  those  of  Uina-suyu  had
always  re- commenced  their  incursions.  The  people  of
Aymara  added  that  when  their  enemies  became  vassals  of
the  Ynca  they  must  desist  from  these  hostilities,  and  that  on
this  condition  they  themselves  would  submit  and  receive
him  as  their  prince  and  lord.

The  Ynca  replied,  through  one  of  his  captains,  that  he
had  come  for  no  other  reason  than  to  abolish  all  such  customs,
and  to  teach  barbarous  nations  to  follow  the  laws  of  men
and  not  of  beasts,  and  to  instruct  them  in  the  knowledge  of
the  Sun  theii  God : that  to  do  away  with  such  practices,
and  to  establish  order  was  the  business  of  the  Ynca,  and  that
there  was  no  necessity  to  impose,  as  a condition  of  vassalage,
what  would  be  done  as  a duty  ; for  that  it  was  not  for  them
to  make  laws  but  to  receive  him  as  a child  of  the  Sun,  and


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


237


they  must  leave  the  quarrels  to  the  decision  of  the  Ynca,
who  would  know  how  to  deal  with  them.

With  this  reply  the  ambassadors  returned,  and  next  day
all  the  people  on  that  hill,  numbering  as  many  as  12,000
armed  men,  with  their  wives  and  children,  making  a total
number  of  30,000  souls,  came  forth.  They  marched,  each
according  to  his  village,  and  placed  themselves  on  their  knees
before  the  Ynca  according  to  custom,  submitting  as  vassals,
and  in  token  of  homage  presenting  gold  and  silver  and  lead,
and  all  the  other  goods  they  possessed.  The  Ynca  received
them  with  much  clemency,  and  ordered  them  to  be  fed,  for
they  were  suffering  from  hunger.  He  also  gave  them  food
to  last  until  they  reached  their  villages,  that  they  might  not
suffer  on  the  road,  and  ordered  them  to  return  presently  to
their  homes.


CHAPTER  XI.

THE  CONQUEST  OF  THE  AYMARAS.  THE  CURACAS  ARE
PARDONED.  LANDMARKS  ARE  FIXED  ON  THE  BOUNDARIES.

The  people  having  been  dismissed,  the  Ynca  went  to  a
town  of  the  same  province  of  Aymara  called  Huaquirca,*
which  now  contains  more  than  2,000  houses  ; whence  he
sent  messengers  to  the  Caciques  of  Uma-suyu,t  commanding
them  to  appear  before  him,  that  he  might  decide  upon  their
differences  with  the  Aymaras  respecting  pasture  grounds,
and  that  he  would  wait  for  them  at  Huaquirca,  to  give  them


* A village,  with  a church,  in  the  modern  province  of  Aymaraes.
t Umasuyu  or  Omasuyos  is  a Bolivian  province  extending  along  the
eastern  shores  of  lake  Titicaca ; but  that  cannot  be  the  region  referred
to  in  the  text,  as  it  is  upwards  of  two  hundred  miles  from  Huaquirca.
There  must  have  been  another  district  with  the  same  name  bordering  on
Aymaraes.


238


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


laws  and  ordinances  according  to  which  they  might  live  as
reasonable  beings,  instead  of  killing  each  other  like  brute
beasts  for  so  small  a matter  as  the  pasturage  of  their
flocks:  for  that  it  was  notorious  there  was  abundant  room  for
the  flocks  of  both  nations.  The  Curacas  of  Umu-suyu,
having  assembled  to  consider  their  reply,  for  the  message
had  been  addressed  to  them  as  a body,  replied  that  they  had
no  need  to  go  to  the  Ynca;  that  if  he  had  need  of  them  he
might  seek  them  in  their  own  land,  when  they  would  await
his  coming  with  arms  in  their  hands  ; that  they  knew  not
that  he  was  a child  of  the  Sun,  nor  that  the  Sun  was  God,
nor  did  they  want  to  know  ; that  they  had  their  own  gods,
with  whom  they  were  at  accord,  and  that  they  desired  no
other  gods.  They  added  that  the  Yuca  should  send  his  laws
and  sermons  to  those  who  desired  to  have  them,  for  that  they
considered  it  a very  good  law  to  take  what  they  wanted  by
force,  and  to  defend  their  own  land  by  arms  against  those
who  wished  to  annoy  them  ; that  this  was  their  answer,  and
if  the  Ynca  wanted  any  other,  they  would  give  him  one  in
the  field,  as  valiant  soldiers.

The  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  and  his  officers,  having  con-
sidered the  reply  of  the  Chiefs  of  Uma-suyu,  resolved  that
they  would  march  into  their  country  as  rapidly  as  possible,
and  overcome  their  insolence  and  audacity  more  by  dint  of
fear  and  wonder  than  by  injuring  them.  For  the  law  and
commandment  of  the  first  Ynca  Manca  Ccapac,  given  to  all
his  descendants,  was  that  under  no  circumstances  should
blood  be  shed  in  their  conquests,  until  all  other  means  had
failed ; but  that  the  enemy  should  be  conquered  with  kind-
ness, for  thus  the  Yncas  would  be  loved  ; while  they  would
be  for  ever  detested  by  those  who  were  conquered  by  arms.
The  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  seeing  how  wise  it  would  be
to  keep  this  law  for  the  increase  and  preservation  of  his
realm,  ordered  18,000  men  to  be  assembled  with  all  diligence,
from  amongst  the  best  soldiers  in  his  army,  with  whom  he


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


239


marched  day  and  night,  and  very  soon  reached  the  province  of
Uma-suyu,  where  the  unsuspecting  enemy  did  not  anticipate
their  approach  for  a month,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  the  march
for  a great  army.  Seeing  the  Ynca  thus  suddenly  appear  in
the  midst  of  their  villages,  with  an  army  of  chosen  men,  and
that  the  rest  of  his  forces  were  following  him,  they  knew
that  they  could  not  assemble  for  battle  in  time  to  prevent
the  destruction  of  their  houses.  So  they  repented  of  their
insolent  reply,  laid  down  their  arms,  and  called  their  Curacas
together  from  all  parts  with  all  despatch,  desiring  them  to  seek
for  mercy  and  pardon.  The  Curacas  presented  themselves
before  the  Ynca  as  they  arrived,  some  at  once,  others  after-
wards, and  besought  pardon,  confessing  that  he  was  a child
of  the  Sun,  and  praying  that  as  the  son  of  such  a father,  he
would  receive  them  as  vassals,  and  they  promised  to  serve
him  faithfully.

The  Ynca,  far  from  realizing  the  fears  of  the  Curacas,  who
expected  to  be  put  to  death,  received  them  with  much  kind-
ness, and  ordered  them  tobetold  that,  as  ill-taught  barbarians,
they  could  not  understand  what  was  best  in  religion  and
in  morality,  but  that  when  they  had  enjoyed  the  benefit  of
the  laws,  order,  and  government  of  his  ancestors  they  would
rejoice  to  be  his  vassals  ; and  would  despise  their  own  idols,
as  soon  as  they  comprehended  the  many  benefits  which  all
the  world  receives  from  their  father  the  Sun,  who  ought  to
be  adored  and  looked  upon  as  God.  They  were  also  told
that  their  own  idols,  which  they  called  the  gods  of  their
land,  were  merely  the  figures  of  vile  and  filthy  animals,  which
ought  to  be  despised,  instead  of  being  treated  as  gods.  The
Ynca  ordered  that  they  should  obey  him  and  his  officers  in
all  things,  as  well  as  regards  religion  as  civil  laws,  for  that
their  father  the  Sun  had  ordered  both  one  and  the  other.

The  Curacas,  with  great  humility,  replied  that  they  pro-
mised not  to  take  any  other  gods  except  the  Sun,  nor  to
obey  any  laws  but  those  which  the  Ynca  imposed  on  them  ;


240


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


for  they  judged,  from  what  they  had  seen  and  heard,  that
these  laws  were  instituted  for  the  good  of  the  vassals.  The
Yuca,  to  please  his  new  vassals,  went  to  the  principal  town
of  that  province,  called  Chiriqui,  and  there,  having  con-
sidered the  dispute  concerning  the  pastures,  which  had
caused  wars  between  the  two  provinces,  he  ordered  land-
marks to  be  set  up  at  points  where  they  could  be  best  seen,
so  that  each  province  might  have  its  proper  limits,  and  not
trespass  on  those  of  its  neighbour.  These  landmarks  have
been  preserved  to  this  day  with  great  veneration,  because
they  were  the  first  that  were  ever  set  up  in  Peru,  by  order
of  the  Yncas.

The  Curacas  of  both  provinces  kissed  the  hand  of  the
Ynca,  giving  him  many  thanks  for  having  made  a partition
which  satisfied  both  sides.  The  king  visited  all  parts  of
those  provinces  to  establish  laws  and  ordinances,  intending
afterwards  to  return  to  Cuzco,  and  not  to  continue  his  con-
quests, although  he  might  well  have  done  so,  consideriug
the  success  that  had  hitherto  attended  them.  The  Ynca
Ccapac  Yupanqui  entered  the  capital  in  triumph,  with  his
army,  and  the  Curacas  and  chief  people  of  the  three  pro-
vinces which  had  been  newly  conquered  accompanied  the
king  to  see  the  imperial  city,  and  they  were  borne  on  men’s
shoulders  in  golden  litters,  as  a sign  that  they  had  submitted
to  the  Ynca.  The  king’s  officers  surrounded  the  litters,  and
the  soldiers  marched  in  front,  according  to  their  squadrons,
those  of  each  province  by  themselves,  marching  in  the  order  in
which  each  had  been  reduced,  the  earliest  being  nearest  to
the  YTica,  and  the  last  furthest  from  him.  The  whole  city
came  out  to  receive  the  army  with  dancing  and  singing,  as
was  the  custom.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


241


CHAPTER  XII.

THE  YNCA  SENDS  AN  ARMY  TO  CONQUER  THE  QUECHUAS.

THEY  ARE  REDUCED  TO  SUBMISSION,  WITH  THEIR
OWN  CONSENT.

For  four  years  the  Ynca  was  occupied  in  the  government
and  improvement  of  his  realm,  when,  deeming  it  to  be
undesirable  that  he  should  pass  so  much  time  at  peace,
without  giving  an  opportunity  for  martial  exercises,  he
issued  orders  that  arms  and  provisions  should  be  collected
with  great  care  for  the  ensuing  year.  When  the  time
arrived  he  appointed  his  brother,  named  Auqui  Titu,  as
Captain-General,  and  four  Yncas  from  amongst  his  nearest
relations,  men  experienced  in  affairs  both  of  peace  and  war,
as  masters  of  the  camp.  Each  was  to  have  the  immediate
command  of  five  thousand  soldiers,  and  all  five  were  to
govern  the  whole  army.  They  were  ordered  to  extend  the
conquests,  already  achieved  by  the  Ynca,  in  the  Cunti-suyu
region ; and,  in  order  to  give  them  a propitious  start,  he
went  with  them  as  far  as  the  bridge  of  Huaca-chaca,  whence,
having  commended  to  them  the  example  of  the  Yncas  their
ancestors,  he  returned  to  Cuzco.

The  Ynca  General  and  his  masters  of  the  camp  entered
the  province  of  Cota-pampa,  where  they  met  the  lord  of
the  province,  accompanied  by  a relation  of  his,  who  was
lord  of  another  province,  called  Quechua.  The  Caciques,
having  heard  that  the  Ynca  was  sending  an  army  to  their
land,  had  met  to  receive  him  joyfully  as  their  king  and
lord,  for  they  had  looked  forward  to  the  coming  of  the
Yncas  for  many  days,  and  thus  they  came  forth  with  people
dancing  and  singing,  and  received  the  Ynca,  Auqui  Titu,
with  demonstrations  of  satisfaction  and  joy.  They  said  : —
“ You  are  welcome,  Ü YTica  Apu,”  (which  means  General)

Q


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


242

“ to  make  us  servants  and  vassals  of  the  child  of  the  Sun,
and  we  adore  you  as  his  brother ; assuring  you  that,  if  you
had  not  come  so  soon,  we  intended  to  have  gone  ourselves
to  Cuzco  in  the  following  year,  to  offer  submission  to  the
king,  and  to  entreat  him  to  receive  us  into  his  empire.
For  the  fame  of  his  deeds,  and  of  the  wonders  done  by
these  children  of  the  Sun,  both  in  peace  and  war,  are  well
known  to  us,  and  have  made  us  so  desirous  to  become  their
vassals,  that  each  day  seems  a year  to  us.  We  also  desired
to  be  his  vassals,  that  we  might  be  freed  from  the  tyranny
and  cruelty  of  the  nations  called  Chanca  and  Ilancohualla,
and  others  bordering  upon  us,  which  we  have  endured
for  many  years,  since  the  time  of  our  ancestors,  when
they  took  much  land  from  us,  and  troubled  us  with
unreasonable  oppression  ; so  that  we  also  desired  to  be
vassals  of  the  Yncas,  that  we  might  be  delivered  from  our
tyrants.  The  Sun,  thy  father,  guard  and  protect  you,  that
thus  our  desires  may  be  fulfilled.”  Having  said  this,  they
made  their  obeisances  to  the  Ynca,  and  presented  much
gold  to  be  sent  to  the  king.  The  province  of  Cota-pampa,
after  the  war  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  was  the  repartimiento  of
D on  Pedro  Luis  de  Cabrera,  a native  of  Seville ; and  that
of  Cotanera,*  as  well  as  another,  of  which  we  shall  presently
speak,  called  Huamanpallpa.f  were  the  property  of  Garcilasso
de  la  Vega,  my  lord,  and  this  was  the  second  repartimiento
he  received  in  Peru.  Of  the  first  we  shall  speak  further  on,
in  its  place.

The  General,  Auqui  Titu,  and  his  captains,  replied  in  the
name  of  the  Ynca,  and  said  that  they  rejoiced  at  the  good
disposition  of  the  chiefs  in  former  years,  and  at  their  present
willingness  to  serve  the  Ynca,  and  that  they  would  fully

* I have  not  been  able  to  identify  this  place,  but  it  must  be  a village
in  the  province  of  Cotabambas  or  Aymaraes.

t This  is  probably  Huambalpa,  a district  in  the  province  of  Cangallo,
department  of  Ayacucho.


ROVAI,  COMMENTARIES.


243


report  both  the  one  and  the  other,  as  well  as  every  word
they  had  then  spoken,  to  his  majesty,  that  he  might  reward
them,  as  he  rewarded  all  who  served  him.  The  Curacas
were  much  pleased  that  their  words  would  come  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Ynca,  and  each  day  they  displayed  more
zeal  to  do  all  that  the  General  and  his  captains  ordered.
Having  established  the  usual  good  order  of  government  in
those  two  provinces,  the  officers  advanced  to  another,  called
Huamanpallpa,  which  was  also  conquered  without  war  or  any
opposition  whatever.  The  Yncas  then  crossed  the  river
Amancay  by  two  or  three  branches,  which  flow  through
these  provinces,  and,  uniting  further  on,  form  the  great
river  called  Amancay.

One  of  these  branches  flows  past  Chuquinca,  where  the
battle  was  fought  between  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron  and
the  Marshal  Don  Alonzo  de  Alvarado  ;*  and  on  this  same
river  was  fo  ught,  some  years  previously,  the  battle  between
Don  Diego  de  Almagro  and  the  said  Marshal, f in  both  of
which  Don  Alonzo  de  Alvarado  was  defeated,  as  we  shall
more  fully  relate  in  its  place,  if  God  spares  us  to  reach  so
far.  The  Ynca  marched  onwards,  reducing  the  provinces
on  either  side  of  the  river  Amancay,  which  are  numerous,
and  are  all  included  under  this  name  of  Quechua.*  They
all  contained  much  gold  and  large  flocks.

* In  1554.  The  formidable  rebellion  of  Giron  is  fully  described  by
the  Ynca  in  the  second  part  of  his  work,  and  by  Fernandez  of  Palencia.

+ Alvarado  was  sent  against  Almagro  by  Pizarro,  who  was  at  Lima.
The  battle  was  fought  on  July  12th,  1537.  See  my  translation  of  The
Life  of  Don  Alonzo  Enriquez  de  Guzman,  pp.  114-115,  and  note.

t This  is  the  first  time  that  the  word  Quechua  occurs.  It  appears
that  the  people  dwelling  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Abancay  and  in  the
adjacent  country  were  called  Quechuas  or  Quichuas.


244


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XIII.

THEY  CONQUER  MANY  VALLEYS  ON  THE  SEA  COAST.

Having  made  tlie  usual  arrangements,  they  set  out  over
the  uninhabited  region  of  the  Huallaripa,  a mountain  range
famous  for  the  quantity  of  gold  that  has  been  taken  out  of
it,  and  for  the  much  larger  quantity  that  remains.  Having
crossed  this  desert  country,  which  is  thirty-five  leagues
wide,  they  descended  on  to  the  sea  coast  llanos * The  whole
country  along  the  sea  coast,  and  all  other  land  in  a hot
climate,  is  called  by  the  Indians  yunca,  which  means  “ hot
land  and  under  this  name  of  yunca  they  included  many
lands  along  the  sea  coast.  The  Spaniards  called  the  country
over  which  irrigation,  from  the  rivers  flowing  from  the  moun-
tains to  the  sea  extends,  valles,  and  this  is  the  only  part  of  the
coast  that  is  inhabited.  For,  beyond  the  land  irrigated  by
the  water,  all  the  country  is  uninhabitable,  and  consists  of
sand,  on  which  neither  herb  nor  any  other  useful  thing  can
grow.

At  the  point  where  these  Yncas  came  out  on  the  llanos
is  the  great,  fertile,  and  populous  valley  of  Acari,f  which
formerly  contained  more  than  twenty  thousand  Indians.
The  Yncas  reduced  them  to  obedience  with  much  ease.

* The  llanos  are  the  sea-coast  deserts  intervening  between  the  irri-
gated valleys.  From  July  to  October,  when  there  is  the  greatest
amount  of  moisture  in  the  atmosphere,  these  llanos , and  the  mountains
which  bound  them,  are  carpeted  with  wild  flowers  of  all  colours — com-
positie,  wild  tobacco,  nympha,  oxalis,  salvia,  verbena,  heliotrope,  ama-
ranth, solanum,  etc.  During  the  rest  of  the  year  they  are  parched  and
arid  wastes.

t On  the  sea-coast,  in  the  province  of  Caraana,  department  of  Are-
quipa.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


245


From  the  valley  of  Acari  the  invaders  advanced  into  those
of  Urna,  Camana,  Caravilli,  Picta,  Quilca,*  and  others  that
are  further  on  along  that  coast,  which  runs  north  and  south
for  a distance  of  sixty  leagues.  The  whole  of  the  above
valleys  are  more  than  twenty  leagues  long,  following  the
course  of  their  rivers  from  the  mountains  to  the  sea,  and
their  width  is  the  distance  to  which  the  water  can  be  led
for  irrigation  on  either  side,  some  two  leagues,  some  more
and  some  less,  according  as  the  supply  of  water  is  large  or
small.  There  are  some  of  the  coast  rivers  which  the  Indians
never  allow  to  reach  the  sea,  drawing  all  the  water  off
to  irrigate  their  crops  and  trees.  The  Ynca  General,  Auqui
Titu,  and  his  masters  of  the  camp,  having  reduced  all  these
valleys  to  submission  to  the  king  without  a battle,  sent  a
report  of  all  that  had  happened,  and  especially  informed  the
Ynca  concerning  the  secret  customs  of  those  Indians,  of
their  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  of  their  gods,  which  were
the  fish  that  they  killed.  He  also  reported  that  there  were
some  * * * *,  not  in  all  the  valleys,  but  one  here  and  one
there,  nor  was  it  a habit  of  all  the  inhabitants,  but  only  of
certain  particular  persons,  who  practised  it  in  private.  He
likewise  informed  the  Ynca  that  there  was  no  more  land  to
conquer  in  that  direction,  for  that  it  was  joined  on  one
side  to  the  country  already  annexed,  and  bounded  on  the
other  by  the  sea  coast.

The  Ynca  was  much  pleased  with  the  account  of  the
conquest,  and  still  more  that  it  had  been  achieved  without
the  shedding  of  blood.  He  sent  orders  that,  after  making
the  customary  administrative  arrangements,  the  army  should
return  to  Cuzco.  He  also  directed  that  the  * * * * should
be  sought  out  with  great  diligence,  and  be  publicly  burnt
alive  ; that  their  houses  should  be  burnt,  their  trees  pulled
up  and  crops  destroyed.  That  there  might  be  no  memory


* Coast  valleys  of  the  province  of  Camana.


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


246

whatever  of  a thing  so  abominable,  a law  was  issued  that,
if  hereafter  any  one  should  fall  into  this  habit,  the  whole  of
his  villages  should  be  destroyed  for  one  man’s  crime,  and
all  the  inhabitants  burnt.

All  was  done  as  the  Ynca  had  commanded,  to  the  ex-
treme wonder  of  the  natives  of  the  valleys  that  the  criminals
should  be  punished  in  this  new  fashion.  But  the  crime
was  so  abhorred  by  the  Yncas  and  all  their  people  that  the
very  name  of  it  was  considered  odious,  and  never  allowed
to  cross  their  lips.  Any  Indian  of  Cuzco,  not  being  of  the
Ynca  race,  who  angrily  applied  that  name  to  another,  was
looked  upon  by  the  other  Indians  as  infamous  for  many
days,  because  he  had  allowed  such  a word  to  pass  his  lips.

As  soon  as  the  General  and  his  officers  had  obeyed  all  the
commands  of  the  Ynca,  they  returned  to  Cuzco,  where  they
were  received  in  triumph,  and  were  granted  many  favours.
Some  years  afterwards  the  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui  con-
ceived a desire  to  make  a new  expedition  in  person,  and
extend  his  dominions  in  the  direction  of  Colla-suyu,  for  in
the  two  previous  campaigns  his  army  had  not  gone  beyond
Cunti-suyu.  So  he  ordered  an  army  of  20,000  men  to  be
assembled  for  the  ensuing  year.

While  the  people  were  assembling,  he  made  arrangements
for  the  government  of  the  whole  kingdom,  naming  his
brother  Auqui  Titu  as  his  lieutenant,  with  the  four  masters
of  the  camp  who  had  served  with  him  as  his  councillors.
He  also  selected  four  other  masters  of  the  camp  and  other
officers,  all  Yncas,  to  accompany  the  army;  and  although  all
the  soldiers  who  came  from  the  different  provinces  had  one
of  the  chiefs  of  their  own  nation  with  them,  as  soon  as  they
joined  the  royal  army,  \rnca  officers  were  placed  over  these
chiefs,  whose  orders  they  obeyed,  and  they  acted  under  the
Yncas  as  their  lieutenants.  In  this  way  the  whole  army
was  regulated  by  the  Ahicas,  without  depriving  the  chiefs  of
the  other  nations  of  their  offices.  Because  the  Yncas  ordered


ROYAL  COMM  EN  TAR  IKS.


247


that  in  all  things,  which  were  not  contrary  to  their  own  laws
and  ordinances,  the  wishes  of  the  Curacas  of  the  different
provinces  should  be  considered.  Thus  they  all  took  pleasure
in  serving  the  Yncas.  The  Ynca  ordered  that  the  prince
his  heir  should  accompany  him,  to  obtain  experience  of  war,
although  he  was  still  very  young.


CHAPTER  XIV.

TWO  GREAT  CURACAS  REFER  THEIR  DIFFERENCES  TO
THE  YNCA,  AND  BECOME  HIS  SUBJECTS.

When  the  time  for  setting  out  on  the  campaign  arrived,
the  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui  departed  from  Cuzco  and
marched  to  the  lake  of  Paria,  which  was  the  extreme  limit
of  his  father’s  conquests  in  that  direction.  He  caused  his
officers  to  muster  the  contingents  on  the  road,  from  each
province,  and  took  care  to  visit  the  towns  which  were
within  reach  on  either  side  of  the  road,  to  give  satisfaction
to  the  people  by  his  presence.  They  looked  upon  a visit  of
the  Ynca  as  so  great  an  honour  that,  in  many  places,  they
preserve  the  memory  of  the  spot  where  one  of  the  Yncas
had  encamped  to  this  day,  or  of  the  village  where  he  had
asked  for  something,  granted  some  favour,  or  rested  on  his
march.  The  Indians  still  venerate  these  places,  because
they  had  once  been  honoured  by  the  presence  of  one  of
their  kings.

The  Ynca,  as  soon  as  he  arrived  at  the  lake  of  Paria,*  took
measures  to  reduce  the  surrounding  country  to  obedience.
Some  submitted  by  reason  of  the  good  things  they  had
heard  of  the  Ynca,  and  others  because  they  had  no  means
of  resistance.  While  he  was  occupied  in  these  conquests,
messengers  arrived  from  two  great  captains  in  the  country
* Or  of  Aullagas,  which  receives  the  drainage  of  lake  Titicaca.


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


1248

of  Colla-suyu,  who  were  making  a cruel  war  against  each
other.  And  that  this  history  may  be  better  understood,  it
must  be  known  that  these  two  great  Curacas  were  the  de-
scendants of  two  famous  captains  who,  in  the  times  before
the  Yucas,  had  risen  up  in  those  provinces,  each  one  by
himself,  and  gained  many  towns  and  vassals,  thus  becoming
great  lords.  Not  content  with  what  they  had  each  acquired,
they  turned  their  arms  one  against  the  other,  according  to
the  ordinary  custom  of  a reigning  power,  which  cannot
brook  an  equal.  They  made  cruel  war,  sometimes  one  and
sometimes  the  other  losing  and  gaining,  although  they
maintained  the  war  like  brave  captains  during  the  whole
period  that  they  lived.  They  left  this  feud  as  an  inheritance
to  their  sons  and  descendants,  who  carried  it  on  with  the
same  valour  as  their  ancestors,  up  to  the  time  of  the  Ynca
Ccapac  Yupanqui.

Beholding  this  continual  and  cruel  war,  which  had  often
all  but  destroyed  both  sides,  and  fearing  that,  owing  to  the
equality  in  force  and  valour,  they  might  be  altogether
annihilated,  the  two  chiefs  agreed,  in  concert  with  their
captains  and  relations,  to  submit  their  quarrel  to  the  arbi-
tration of  the  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  and  to  abide  by  his
decision  touching  their  feud.  They  came  to  this  resolution,
moved  by  the  fame  of  former  Yncas  and  of  the  present  one,
whose  justice  and  rectitude,  with  the  marvels  which  their
father  the  Sun  had  worked  for  them,  were  so  widely  noised
abroad  amongst  those  nations,  that  all  desired  to  experience
them.  One  of  these  lords  was  named  Cari,  and  the  other
Chipana,  and  all  their  ancestors,  from  the  first,  had  the
same  names.  Their  successors  wished  to  preserve  their
memories  in  their  names,  which  one  inherited  from  the
other,  to  remind  them  of  their  ancestors,  and  to  induce  them
to  imitate  those  valorous  captains.  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon
(chapter  c)  briefly  alludes  to  these  events,  although  he
places  them  long  after  the  time  when  they  really  occurred.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


249


He  calls  one  Curaca  Cari,  and  the  other  Sapana.*  When
these  chiefs  heard  that  the  Ynca  was  pursuing  his  conquests
near  their  provinces,  they  sent  messengers  giving  him  an
account  of  their  wars  and  of  what  they  sought  from  him,
beseeching  permission  to  come  and  kiss  his  hand  and  give
him  a fuller  account  of  their  differences,  that  he  might  give
his  decision  upon  them.  They  protested  that  they  would
abide  by  what  the  Ynca  ordered,  for  that  the  whole  world  must
acknowledge  him  to  be  a child  of  the  Sun,  from  whose
rectitude  they  hoped  for  justice  to  both  sides,  so  that  there
might  henceforth  be  perpetual  peace.

The  Ynca  heard  what  the  messengers  had  to  say,  and
answered  that  the  Curacas  should  come,  and  that  he  would
endeavour  to  decide  between  them  ; and  that  he  hoped  to
make  them  friends,  because  the  laws  and  ordinances  which
he  would  ordain  would  be  decreed  by  his  father  the  Sun,
whom  he  would  consult,  that  he  might  be  more  certain  of
the  correctness  of  his  decision.  The  Curacas  rejoiced  greatly
at  this  reply,  and  came  to  Paria,' j*  where  the  Ynca  then  was,
a few  days  afterwards,  each  entering  on  the  same  day  by
different  roads,  as  had  been  previously  agreed.  On  being
presented  to  the  king  they  both  kissed  his  hands  at  the  same
time,  not  desiring  to  obtain  any  advantage.  Then  Cari,
whose  territory  was  nearest  to  that  of  the  Ynca,  spoke  in
the  name  of  both,  and  gave  a long  account  of  the  disputes
between  them,  and  of  its  causes.  He  said  that  sometimes
they  arose  from  the  envy  that  one  felt  at  the  deeds  and
successes  of  the  other  ; at  others  from  ambition  and  covet-
ousness ; and  at  others  from  questions  as  to  boundaries  or

* See  my  translation,  p.  363.  Cieza  de  Leon  makes  these  chiefs  to
be  contemporaneous  with  the  Ynca-Huira-ccocha.  He  says  that  one
of  them  conquered  a large  island  in  lake  Titicaca,  and  found  there  a
white  people  who  had  beards.

t Near  Oruro,  and  about  thirty  miles  north  of  the  lake  of  Aullagas.
The  climate  is  cold ; and  the  Indians  cultivate  quinua.  potatoes,  and
barley.


250


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


jurisdiction.  He  prayed  his  Majesty  to  decide  between
them,  ordering  what  he  thought  proper,  for  that  they  were
now  tired  of  the  wars  that  they  had  waged  during  many
years.  The  Ynca,  having  received  them  with  his  usual
affability,  ordered  that  they  should  serve  for  some  days  in
his  army,  and  that  two  of  the  oldest  and  most  experienced
Ynca  captains  should  instruct  them  in  the  natural  laws,  by
which  the  Yncas  governed  their  provinces,  that  the  inhabit'
ants  might  live  in  peace,  respecting  as  well  the  honour  as
the  property  of  their  neighbours.  He  also  sent  two  Yncas,
his  relations,  into  the  provinces  of  these  Curacas,  to  inquire
into  their  boundaries,  and  to  sift  the  causes  of  these  wars  to
the  bottom.  Having  received  full  information,  and  con-
sulted his  council,  the  Ynca  sent  for  the  Curacas,  and,  in  few
words,  told  them  that  his  father  the  Sun  had  commanded
that,  in  order  to  preserve  peace  and  concord,  they  must
keep  the  laws  which  the  Ynca  captains  had  taught  them,
and  that  they  must  look  after  the  welfare  and  increase  of
their  people,  who  were  rather  destroyed  than  multiplied  by
wars  : that  if  they  continued  in  discord,  he  would  be  forced
to  raise  up  other  Curacas,  and  to  displace  them  for  their
weakness  and  inefficiency,  taking  away  their  estates,  and
blotting  out  the  memory  of  their  ancestors;  all  which  would
be  preserved  by  peace.  He  also  ordered  them  to  set  up
landmarks  at  such  and  such  points,  to  mark  the  boundaries,
which  must  not  be  altered.  Finally  he  told  them  that  their
father  the  Sun  had  so  ordered  it,  that  they  might  live  in
peace,  and  that  the  Ynca  had  confirmed  the  order,  on  pain
of  severe  punishment  if  it  was  infringed,  they  themselves
having  chosen  him  as  the  umpire  of  their  differences.

The  Curacas  replied  that  they  would  readily  obey  his
Majesty,  and,  from  the  love  they  had  acquired  for  his  ser-
vice, that  they  would  be  true  friends.  Afterwards  the
Caciques  Cari  and  Chipana  observed  the  laws  of  the  Ynca,
the  administration  of  his  court  and  of  his  whole  empire,  the


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


251


merciful  method  of  making  war,  and  the  justice  which  he
dealt  out  to  all,  without  allowing  any  oppression.  They
particularly  noted  the  kindness  with  which  they  themselves
had  been  treated,  and  the  justice  of  the  decision  respecting
the  boundaries  of  their  lands.  Having  well  pondered  over
these  things,  and  consulted  with  their  relations  and  retainers,
they  determined  to  submit  to  the  Ynca,  and  become  his
vassals.  They  also  did  this  because  they  saw  that  the
empire  of  the  Ynca  came  very  near  to  their  estates,  and  that
they  might  be  taken  by  force,  they  not  being  powerful
enough  to  resist.  They  prudently  desired  to  become  vassals
of  their  own  accord,  and  not  by  force,  so  that  they  might
not  lose  the  reward  which  such  conduct  would  merit  from
the  Ynca.  With  this  resolution  they  presented  themselves
before  him,  and  besought  his  Majesty  to  receive  them  into
his  service  as  vassals  and  servants  of  the  child  of  the  Sun,
for  that  from  that  time  they  surrendered 'their  land  to  him.
They  asked  him  to  send  governors  and  ministers  to  instruct
these  new  vassals  what  their  duties  were  in  his  service.

The  Ynca  said  that  he  approved  of  their  good  disposition,
and  would  remember  to  show  them  favour  on  all  occasions.
He  ordered  them  to  be  given  the  clothes  worn  by  the
Yncas  for  themselves,  and  other  clothes  of  less  distinction
for  their  relations,  showing  them  other  marks  of  favour,
with  which  the  Curacas  were  well  satisfied.  In  this  way
the  Ynca  added  many  provinces  and  towns  to  his  empire,
which  were  possessed  by  these  Caciques  in  the  region  of
Colla-suyu.  Among  others  were  Poco-ata,*  Muru-muru,f
Maccha,+  CaracaraJ  and  all  those  to  the  eastward  of  these

* A town  thirty-five  miles  from  Chayanta,  to  the  S.S.E.;  to  the  east-
ward of  the  lake  of  Aullagas.

+ A place  about  thirty  miles  north-west  of  Chuquisaca  (Sucre),  the
capital  of  Bolivia.

J Probably  Machaca,  about  forty-five  miles  north-west  of  Cocha-
bamba.

§ Coroeoro  ?


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


£5i2

provinces  up  to  the  great  cordillera  of  the  Antis,  besides  the
vast  uninhabited  tract  which  extends  to  the  frontier  of  the
province  of  Tapac-ri,  called  by  the  Spaniards  Tapacari.*
Th  is  desert  is  more  than  thirty  leagues  across,  and  so  very
cold  that  it  has  no  inhabitants  ; but,  owing  to  its  wide
pasture  lands,  it  is  covered  with  innumerable  flocks,  both
wild  and  domestic.  It  also  has  many  springs  of  water,  so
hot  that  the  hand  cannot  be  held  in  them  for  the  space  of  an
Ane  Maria,  and  the  source  may  be  seen  through  the  steam
caused  by  the  hot  water  on  issuing  out,  although  it  is
distant.  This  hot  water  is  impregnated  with  sulphur,  and
it  is  to  be  noted  that  amongst  the  hot  springs  there  are
others  of  excessively  cold  water,  and  very  pleasant  to  the
taste  ; and  when  they  all  unite  they  form  a river  called
Cochapampa.f

After  crossing  the  great  desert  of  the  fountains  the  road
comes  to  a mountain,  the  descent  of  which  is  seven  leagues
long  down  to  the  llano  of  Tapac-ri,  where  was  the  first
repartimiento  of  Indians  which  my  lord  Garcilasso  de  la
Vega  received  in  Peru.  It  is  a most  fertile  land,  populous
and  with  large  flocks,  more  than  twenty  leagues  long  by
eleven  wide.  Eight  leagues  further  on  there  is  another
very  beautiful  province,  called  Cochapampa,  where  there  is
a valley  thirty  leagues  long  and  four  wide,  with  a very
large  river  which  forms  it.  These  two  beautiful  provinces
were  included  in  the  territory  which  the  two  Curacas,  Cari
and  Chipana,  surrendered  in  the  manner  already  described.
By  this  acquisition  the  Yncas  enlarged  their  empire  by  a
territory  sixty  leagues  long.  The  province  of  Cochapampa,

* The  province  of  Tapacari  is  in  the  Bolivian  department  of  Cocha-
bamba. It  comprises  nearly  the  whole  valley  of  Cochabamba,  besides  a
mountainous  tract,  cut  up  by  deep  ravines.  The  irrigated  valleys  yield
maize  and  fruits ; while  potatoes,  ocas,  and  quinua  grow  on  the  high
land.

t This  is  the  Rio  Grande  de  Cochabamba,  an  affluent  of  the  Pilco-
mayu.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


253


being  a region  so  large  and  fertile,  was  settled  by  the
Spaniards,  who  founded  a town  there  in  the  year  1565,
called  San  Pedro  de  Cardeña,  because  the  founder  was  a
native  of  Burgos,  named  Luis  Osorio.

As  sooij  as  these  conquests  were  made,  the  Ynca  ordered
that  two  masters  of  his  camp  should  proceed  to  the  estates
of  the  two  Curacas,  with  the  necessary  officers  for  their
government  and  for  the  instruction  of  the  new  vassals.
Then,  judging  that  these  conquests  were  sufficient  for  one
year,  being  more  than  he  had  expected,  the  Ynca  returned
to  Cuzco,  taking  with  him  the  two  Curacas,  that  they  might
see  the  Court  and  be  entertained  and  presented  with  gifts.
They  were  very  well  received  in  the  city,  and  feasted,
because  so  the  Ynca  had  ordered.  After  some  days  they
received  permission  to  return  to  their  estates,  and  they
departed,  well  satisfied  with  the  favours  they  had  received.
The  Ynca  told  them  that  he  intended  to  set  out  soon  to
reduce  the  other  Indian  nations.


CHAPTER  XV.

THEY  MAKE  A BRIDGE  OF  STRAW  AND  TWISTED  FIBRES
OVER  THE  DESAGUADERO.  CHAYANTA  IS  CONQUERED.

The  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui  was  proud  of  the  result  of
the  bridge,  which  we  call  Huaca-chaca,  over  the  river
Apurimac,  and  ordered  another  to  be  made  across  the
Desaguadero  {drain)  of  the  lake  of  Titicaca,  because  he
intended  soon  to  proceed  with  the  conquest  of  other  pro-
vinces in  the  Colla-suyu  region.  For,  that  land  being  flat
and  favourable  for  the  march  of  armies  , the  Yncas  found
the  conquest  of  it  to  be  desirable,  and  for  this  reason  they
persevered  until  they  had  possession  of  the  whole  of  it.
The  bridge  of  Huaca-chaca,  and  nearly  all  the  others  in


254


THIRD  ROOK  OF  THE


Peru,  are  made  of  osiers  ; and  that  over  the  river  called  by
the  Spaniards  the  Desaguadero,  is  also  of  twisted  fibres  and
other  materials.  It  is  on  the  water,  like  the  bridge  of  boats
at  Seville,  and  is  not  in  the  air,  as  are  the  bridges  of
twisted  fibre  which  have  already  been  described.  There
grows,  throughout  Peru,  a long  kind  of  straw,  soft  and
flexible,  which  the  Indians  call  ychu*  and  with  which  they
thatch  their  houses.  It  is  much  made  use  of,  and  is  excel-
lent pasturage  for  sheep,  and  the  Collas  make  baskets  and
hampers  of  it,  which  they  call pataas  (like  small  boxes),  as
well  as  ropes  and  cables.  Besides  this  good  straw,  a very
great  quantity  of  reeds  grows  on  the  banks  of  lake  Titicaca,
which  are  called  espadería  or  enea.  At  the  proper  time  the
Indians  of  the  provinces,  who  are  obliged  to  make  the
bridge,  cut  a large  quantity  of  reeds,  that  they  may  be
dried  and  ready  when  the  bridge  is  to  be  repaired.  They
make  four  cables  of  this  straw,  of  the  thickness  of  a man’s
leg,  two  of  which  they  stretch  across  from  one  side  of  the
river  to  the  other,  which  appears  not  to  flow  at  all  from
above,  but  from  below  seems  to  have  a very  strong  current,
as  those  say  who  have  seen  it.  Instead  of  boats,  they  fasten
very  large  bundles  of  reeds  across  the  cables,  of  the  thick-
ness of  a bullock,  strongly  secured  to  each  other  and  to  the
cables.  Over  the  bundles  or  faggots  are  stretched  the  two
other  cables,  which  are  very  firmly  secured  to  the  reed
faggots,  so  that  they  may  strengthen  each  other.  An
additional  quantity  of  reeds  was  spread  over  the  cables,
that  they  might  not  be  so  soon  worn  out  by  the  traffic.
They  made  a further  quantity  of  bundles  of  reeds  of  smaller
size,  about  the  thickness  of  a man’s  leg  or  arm,  which  were
also  placed  in  rows,  fastened  to  each  other  and  to  the
cables.  The  Spaniards  call  these  smaller  faggots  the  foot-
way of  the  bridge.  The  bridge  is  thirteen  to  fourteen  feet

* St  ip  a Ychu,  coarse  grass,  growing  in  patches,  which  covers  the
higher  slopes  of  the  Andes,  and  is  used  for  thatch.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


255


wide,  more  than  a yard  high,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty
paces,  a little  more  or  less,  in  length.  Hence  an  idea  may
be  formed  of  the  quantity  of  reeds  and  rushes  that  would
be  necessary  to  construct  so  great  a work.  It  must  he
understood  that  the  bridge  is  repaired  every  six  months —
that  is,  the  whole  work  is  renewed,  for  such  perishable
materials  would  not  serve  for  repairs  ; and  that  the  bridge
may  always  be  secure,  it  is  renewed  before  the  cables
become  rotten  and  break.

The  care  of  this  bridge,  as  of  other  great  works,  was,
in  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  divided  amongst  the  neighbour-
ing provinces,  and  notice  is  given  of  the  quantity  of  material
that  must  be  provided  by  each  ; and  as  it  was  collected
from  one  year  to  another,  the  bridge  was  completed  in  a
very  short  time.  The  ends  of  the  thick  cables,  which  were
the  foundations  of  the  bridge,  are  buried  under  the  ground,
and  they  do  not  erect  buttresses  of  stone  where  the  cables
are  secured.  The  Indians  say  that  this  is  the  best  plan  for
a bridge  of  this  kind,  but  it  is  also  done  because  they  change
its  position,  making  it  sometimes  higher  up,  and  at  others
lower  down,  but  not  over  any  great  distance.  As  soon  as
the  Ynca  knew  that  the  bridge  was  made,  he  set  out  from
Cuzco  with  the  prince  his  heir,  and  marched  to  the  most  dis-
tant provinces  of  the  Caciques  Cari  and  Chipana,  which,  as  has
already  been  said,  were  Tapac-ri  and  Cochapampa.  The
Caciques  were  ready  with  men  at  arms  to  serve  the  Ynca.
From  Cochapampa  they  went  to  Chayanta,*  passing  over  a
wild  desert  where  there  is  not  a foot  of  serviceable  ground,
but  rocks,  stony  wastes,  and  cliffs.  Nothing  grows  in  this
desert  except  certain  plants  with  thorns  as  long  as  a man’s
finger,  of  which  the  Indians  make  needles  to  do  the  little
sewing  they  have  need  of.  These  plants  ( cirios ) grow  in  all
parts  of  Peru.f  After  crossing  the  wilderness,  they  entered

* A town  of  Bolivia,  twenty-eight  miles  east  of  the  lake  of  Aullagas,
and  about  seventy  miles  south-east  of  Oruro.

t Cactus.


256


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


the  province  of  Chayanta,  which  is  twenty  leagues  long  and
nearly  as  many  across.  The  Ynca  ordered  the  prince  to  send
out  messengers  with  the  usual  demands.

The  Indians  of  Chayanta  did  not  agree  as  to  the  answer
that  should  be  given  to  these  messages.  Some  said  that  it
was  very  just  that  the  child  of  the  Sun  should  be  received
by  them  as  God,  and  that  his  laws  should  be  kept,  for  that
it  might  be  believed  that,  being  favoured  by  the  Sun,  he
would  be  just,  kind,  and  beneficent  in  his  treatment  of
vassals.  Others  said  that  they  had  no  want  of  a king  nor
of  new  laws  and  customs  ; that  those  they  already  had  were
very  good,  for  that  they  had  been  good  enough  for  their
ancestors,  and  that  their  gods  were  sufficient  for  them,  with-
out adopting  a new  religion  and  new  customs  ; that  it
seemed  worse  for  them  to  subject  themselves  to  the  will  of
a man  who  was  now  preaching  religion  and  holiness,  but
who  to-morrow,  when  they  were  once  subjugated,  would
impose  what  laws  he  chose,  all  for  his  own  benefit  and  for
the  injury  of  the  vassals  ; and  that  it  was  better  to  preserve
their  liberty  as  heretofore,  or  to  die  for  it,  than  to  experi-
ence these  evils.

This  difference  of  opinion  lasted  for  some  days,  each
party  desiring  that  its  view  should  prevail,  until  at  last,
through  fear  of  the  arms  of  the  Ynca  on  the  one  hand,  and
owing  to  accounts  of  the  excellence  of  the  new  laws  on
the  other,  they  all  agreed  to  submit.  Their  answer  was
not  one  of  absolute  submission,  nor  of  entire  defiance,  but  it
partook  a little  of  both  alternatives.  They  said  that  they
would  rejoice  to  receive  the  Ynca  as  their  king  and  lord,
but  that  they  did  not  know  what  manner  of  laws  he  would
order  them  to  observe,  nor  whether  they  would  be  beneficial
or  hurtful.  They,  therefore,  begged  that  they  might  try
both  forms  of  government,  and  that  (while  they  were  re-
ceiving instruction  in  his  laws)  the  Ynca  and  his  army
might  enter  their  province,  with  a promise  that  he  would


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


257


depart  and  leave  them  free  if  they  did  not  like  his  laws,
while,  if  the  laws  were  as  good  as  he  represented  them  to
be,  they  would  henceforward  adore  him  as  a child  of  the
Sun,  and  recognise  him  as  their  lord.

The  Y nca  said  that  he  would  accept  the  condition,
although  he  was  well  able  to  force  them  to  submit.  But  he
chose  rather  to  imitate  the  example  of  his  ancestors,  and  to
gain  his  vassals  by  love  rather  than  by  force.  He  gave
them  his  word  to  leave  them  in  the  liberty  they  then
enjoyed  if  they  did  not  desire  to  worship  the  Sun  nor  to
keep  his  laws ; for  he  hoped  that,  when  they  knew  and
understood  them,  not  only  that  they  would  not  hate  them,
hut  that  they  would  love  them,  and  lament  that  they  had
not  known  them  many  ages  before.

Having  made  this  promise,  the  Ynca  entered  Chayanta,
where  he  was  received  with  veneration  and  respect,  but  not
with  joy  and  applause,  as  had  been  the  case  in  the  other
provinces,  because  they  knew  not  how  the  affair  might  end.
Thus  they  remained  between  fear  and  hope  until  the  elders,
who  accompanied  the  Ynca  as  councillors  and  governors  of
the  army,  in  presence  of  the  heir  to  the  throne,  who  assisted
at  some  of  the  meetings,  explained  the  laws,  as  well  those
concerning  their  idolatry,  as  those  relating  to  the  govern-
ment of  the  state.  This  was  done  many  times  and  during
many  days,  until  the  people  clearly  understood  the  laws.
The  Indians,  carefully  considering  how  beneficial  they  would
be  to  them,  said  that  the  Sun,  and  his  children  the  Yncas,
who  had  given  such  laws  and  ordinances  to  men,  deserved
to  be  worshipped  and  looked  upon  as  gods  and  lords  of  the
earth.  They  therefore  promised  to  obey  the  rules  and
statutes  of  the  Ynca,  and  to  abandon  their  own  idols,  rites,
and  customs.  They  made  this  protestation  before  the  prince,
and  worshipped  him  in  place  of  his  father  the  Sun,  and  of
the  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui.

As  soon  as  the  solemnities  of  this  submission  were  com-

R


258


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


pleted,  there  were  great  dances  and  balls,  with  songs  and
festivities  in  praise  of  the  Sun  and  of  the  Yncas,  and  of  their
good  laws  and  government ; and  they  submitted  with  all  the
show  of  love  and  goodwill  that  they  could  display.


CHAPTER  XVI.

OF  THE  VARIOUS  DEVICES  OF  THE  INDIANS  FOR  CROSSING
THE  RIVERS,  AND  FOR  FISHING.

Now  that  an  account  has  been  given  of  the  two  kinds  of
bridges  which  the  Yncas  ordered  to  be  made  for  crossing
rivers — one  of  osiers  and  the  other  of  grass  and  rushes — it
will  be  well  that  we  should  relate  other  means  and  con-
trivances they  used  for  crossing  them  ; for,  owing  to  their
great  cost  and  the  time  lost  in  constructing  them,  the
bridges  were  only  made  on  the  main  lines  of  road;  but,  as
that  land  is  so  long  and  narrow,  and  is  crossed  by  so  many
rivers,  the  Indians,  taught  by  necessity,  invented  various
modes  of  crossing  them,  according  to  their  different  circum-
stances, as  well  as  for  navigating  the  sea,  to  the  small  extent
to  which  they  ventured.  Rut  for  navigating  the  sea  they  had
no  knowledge  of  piraguas,  nor  of  canoes,  like  the  Indians  of
Florida,  of  the  Windward  Islands,  and  of  the  Tierra  Firme,
which  are  like  troughs  ; for  there  is  no  large  timber  in  Peru
suitable  for  making  them  ; and  though  it  is  true  that  there
are  very  tall  trees,  the  wood  is  as  heavy  as  iron.  They,
therefore,  used  another  kind  of  wood,  as  slight  as  a man’s
thigh,  as  light  as  wood  of  the  fig  tree,  the  best  kind  coming
from  the  province  of  Quitu,*  whence  it  was  sent,  by  order
of  the  Yncas,  to  all  the  rivers.  Of  these  canes  they  made
large  and  small  balsas  of  five  or  six  long  poles  tied  together,
the  middle  one  being  longer  than  the  others  ; the  first  on
* Bamboo,  no?/  called  Caña  de  Guayaquil.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


259


each  side  of  the  central  pole  were  shorter,  the  second
shorter  still,  the  third  still  shorter,  that  thus  the  balsa  might
cut  through  the  water  more  easily  than  if  they  were  all  the
same  length ; and  the  balsas  were  of  the  same  shape  at  the
stern  as  at  the  bow  ; they  stretched  two  cords  along,  by
which  to  pass  from  one  side  of  the  river  to  the  other,  and
often,  when  the  boatmen  had  failed  to  place  them,  the
passenger’s  themselves  stretched  them,  so  as  to  pass  from
one  side  to  the  other.  I remember  having  taken  a passage
in  certain  balsas,  which  were  made  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas,
and  the  Indians  held  them  in  veneration.

Besides  the  balsas  they  make  another  kind  of  small  boat
of  rolled  up  bundles  of  rushes  of  the  thickness  of  a bullock ;
they  fasten  them  securely  together;  from  the  centre  towards
the  bow  their  size  diminishes,  like  the  bow  of  a ship,  so
that  they  may  cut  through  the  water  ; from  two-thirds  the
distance  from  the  stem  the  width  increases.  The  top  of  the
bundles  is  flat  for  receiving  the  cargo.*  A single  Indian
manages  each  boat.  He  places  himself  on  the  end  of  the
stern,  with  his  breast  over  the  boat,  and  uses  his  arms  and
legs  as  oars,  thus  propelling  it  through  the  water.  If  the
river  is  full,  the  boat  reaches  the  opposite  side  at  a point  a
hundred  or  two  hundred  paces  lower  down  than  where  it
started.  When  any  person  takes  a passage,  he  lies  down  on
his  breast,  at  full  length  along  the  boat,  with  his  head
towards  the  boatman.  He  is  told  to  take  hold  of  the  cords,
and  not  to  rise  nor  to  open  his  eyes  to  look  at  anything.
Once,  when  I was  crossing  a very  full  and  rapid  river  in
this  way  (for  it  is  in  such  as  these  that  people  are  told  to  do
this,  in  quiet  streams  it  being  unnecessary,)  owing  to  the
excess  of  care  and  kindness  of  the  Indian  boatmen,  who
told  me  not  to  raise  my  head  or  open  my  eyes,  I,  being
quite  a boy,  got  as  frightened  as  if  the  earth  was  going  to
open  and  the  sky  to  fall.  A desire  came  upon  me  to  look
* These  are  the  kind  of  boats  now  used  on  lake  Titicaca.


260


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


up  and  see  whether  any  enchantment  or  thing  of  the  other
world  was  to  be  seen.  So,  when  I felt  that  we  were  in  the
middle  of  the  river,  I raised  my  head  a little,  and  saw  the
water,  and  truly  it  seemed  to  me  as  if  we  were  falling  down
from  the  sky,  which  made  my  head  giddy,  owing  to  the
furious  current  of  the  river  and  the  violence  with  which  the
boat  dashed  along.  I was  forced,  through  fear,  to  shut  my
eyes  again,  and  to  confess  that  the  boatmen  were  right  in
telling  me  not  to  open  them.

They  make  other  balsas  of  great  calabashes,  entire,  placed
in  nets,  and  secured  one  to  the  other,  over  a space  of  a yard
and  a half,  more  or  less,  according  to  circumstances.  They
place  a board  in  front,  like  a saddle,  where  the  Indian  boat-
man places  his  head,  and  he  swims  along,  bringing  the
balsa  with  him,  and  thus  ferrying  the  cargo  across  the
river,  bay,  or  arm  of  the  sea.  If  it  is  necessary,  one  or  two
Indians,  as  assistants,  go  behind,  also  swimming,  and  push-
ing the  balsa  along.

On  those  great  rivers  where,  owing  to  the  rapid  current,
balsas  of  calabashes  and  boats  of  rushes  cannot  be  used,  and
where,  owing  to  the  rocks  and  other  dangers,  there  is  no
beach  on  which  to  embark  or  disembark,  they  make  a very
thick  cable  of  the  fibre  called  chahuar*  and  stretch  it
from  one  side  to  the  other,  fastening  it  to  large  trees  or  to
strong  rocks.  A basket  of  rushes,  with  a handle  of  thick
wood,  fit  to  carry  three  or  four  persons,  is  made  to  travel
along  th^  cable.  A cord  is  fastened  to  each  end  of  it,  by
which  it  is  drawn  from  one  side  to  the  other.  The  passengers
inside  help  to  pull  the  cords,  and  as  the  cable  is  so  long  it
forms  a bight  in  the  middle,  and  it  is  necessary  to  haul  the
basket  little  by  little  till  it  reaches  the  lowest  part  of  the
cable,  because  it  sinks  very  much,  and  thence  upwards  it  is
hauled  across  by  the  force  of  men’s  arms.  Indians,  sent
from  the  neighbouring  provinces,  in  their  turns,  are  told  off

* Aloe  fibre.


■N


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


201


for  this  duty,  who  assist  travellers  to  cross  without  any
recompense.  The  passengers  in  the  basket  help  to  pull  at
the  cord,  and  many  cross  by  hauling  on  it  themselves,
without  any  assistance.  They  place  their  feet  against  the
basket,  and  haul  themselves,  by  standing  pulls,  along  the
cable.  I remember  having  crossed  in  this  way  two  or  three
times,  being  still  quite  a young  boy  scarcely  emerged  from
childhood,  and  the  Indians  carried  me  along  the  roads  on
their  shoulders.  They  also  sent  their  flocks  across  in  these
baskets,  a few  sheep  at  a time  ; but  this  is  a troublesome
business,  as  they  struggle  in  the  basket,  and  are  got  across
with  much  difficulty.  The  same  is  now  done  with  the
smaller  flocks  of  Spain,  such  as  goats,  sheep,  and  swine  ;
but  larger  animals,  such  as  horses,  mules,  asses,  and  cows,
owing  to  their  strength  and  weight,  cannot  be  taken  across
in  the  basket.  They  must  be  sent  round  to  bridges  or  to
good  fords.  They  do  not  use  this  method  of  crossing  rivers
on  the  main  roads,  but  on  the  bye-paths  which  the  Indians
make  from  one  village  to  another.  They  call  it  uruya.

The  Indians  along  the  coast  of  Peru  embark  on  the  sea
to  fish  in  the  small  boats  we  have  already  described.  They
go  from  four  to  six  leagues  off  the  land,  and  more  if  it  is
necessary,  for  that  sea  is  generally  smooth,  and  admits  of  the
use  of  such  frail  barks.  When  they  want  to  convey  large
cargoes  they  use  the  rafts  of  wood.  The  fishermen,  when
they  navigate  the  sea,  sit  upon  their  legs,  placing  themselves
on  their  knees  upon  the  bundles  of  reeds.  They  row  with
a thick  cane,  a cubit  in  length,  which  they  hold  in  the
middle.  There  are  canes*  in  that  land  as  thick  as  a man’s
thigh,  of  which  we  shall  say  more  further  on.  In  rowing
they  hold  the  cane  in  both  hands,  one  at  one  end  of  the
cane  and  the  other  in  the  middle.  The  hollow  part  of  the
cane  serves  as  a paddle  to  give  more  force  in  the  water.  As
soon  as  they  give  one  stroke  in  the  water  on  the  left  side.


* Bamboos.


262


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


they  shift  their  hands  and  turn  the  cane  to  give  another
stroke  on  the  right  side,  placing  the  left  hand  where  the
right  was,  and  the  right  where  the  left  was.  In  this  way
they  go  on  rowing,  and  changing  their  hands  so  as  to  pass
the  cane  from  one  side  to  the  other,  and  among  other
wonderful  things  connected  with  their  fishing  and  navigation
this  is  the  most  to  be  admired.  When  one  of  their  boats
went  at  full  speed,  it  would  not  be  overtaken  by  a courier,
how  good  soever  he  might  be.  They  fish  with  harpoons,
and  catch  fish  as  large  as  men.  This  harpoon  fishing
resembles  that  of  the  Biscayan  whale  fishery.  They  fasten
a small  line  to  the  harpoon,  such  as  sailors  call  bolatin ,*  from
twenty  to  forty  cubits  long,  the  other  end  being  secured  to
the  bow  of  the  boat.  When  a fish  is  wounded,  the  Indian
loosens  his  legs  and  embraces  the  boat  with  them,  while  he
sends  the  boat  onwards  with  his  hands  in  chase  of  the  fish,
which  is  taking  flight.  When  the  line  has  all  run  out,  he
clutches  the  boat  tightly  with  his  legs,  and  thus  raises  the
fish,  which,  if  it  is  very  large,  goes  along  with  such  velocity
as  to  appear  like  a bird  flying  through  the  sea.  In  this  way
the  Indian  and  the  fish  continue  to  fight  until  the  fish  is
tired,  and  falls  into  the  hands  of  the  Indian.  They  also  fished
with  nets  and  fish  hooks,  but  these  were  poor  and  wretched
contrivances  (each  man  fishing  by  himself,  and  not  in  com-
pany) ; for  the  nets  were  very  small  and  the  fish-hooks  badly
made,  as  they  had  no  steel  nor  iron,  though  they  had  mines
which  they  knew  not  how  to  work.  They  call  iron  quillay.
They  do  not  put  up  sails  on  their  boats  of  rushes,  for  they
have  no  supports  to  hoist  them  on,  nor  do  I believe  that
they  would  go  so  fast  with  them  as  with  their  oars;  but  they
hoist  sails  on  their  wooden  rafts  when  they  navigate  the  sea.
These  contrivances  of  the  Indians  of  Peru,  for  navigating  the
sea  and  crossing  large  rivers,  were  in  use  when  I left  the
country,  and  probably  are  so  now,  for  those  people,  being


* Spun  yarn.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


263


so  poor,  do  not  aspire  to  better  things  than  they  already
possess.*  In  the  sixth  book  of  the  History  of  Florida  we
treat  of  these  contrivances,  speaking  of  the  canoes  which
they  make  in  that  land  for  crossing  and  navigating  those
great  and  rapid  rivers  that  are  to  be  met  with  there.  We
will  now  return  to  the  conquests  of  the  Ynca  Ccapac
Yupanqui.


CHAPTER  XVII.

OF  THE  CONQUESTS  OF  FIVE  GREAT  PROVINCES,  RESIDES
OTHER  SMALLER.  ONES.

From  Chayanta  the  Ynca  marched  to  other  provinces,
having  left  a garrison  and  the  necessary  ministers  to  establish
his  idolatry  and  matters  of  finance.  Pie  first  came  to  a
region  called  Cherca,  under  which  name  many  different
nations  are  included,  all  of  which  are  within  the  Colla-suyu
division.  The  principal  places  are  Tutora,  Sipisipi,  and
Chaqui, f to  the  eastward  of  which,  towards  the  Antis,  are
other  provinces  called  Chamüru.  Here  they  grow  the  herb
cuca,  although  it  is  not  so  good  as  in  the  districts  of  Cuzco.
There  is  another  province  called  Sacaca,  and  many  others
which  I omit,  to  avoid  prolixity. + The  Ynca  sent  the  usual
messages  to  the  inhabitants.

These  nations,  being  aware  of  what  had  happened  in
Chayanta,  nearly  all  replied  in  the  same  way,  saying  that

* On  the  Peruvian  coast,  especially  at  Arica,  the  Indians  navigated
and  fished  in  balsas  made  of  inflated  seal  skins.  Acosta  says : — “ The
Indians  of  Tea  and  Arequipa  say  that  they  used,  in  former  times,  to
navigate  the  ocean  to  some  islands  very  far  to  the  westward,  and  that
they  did  this  on  inflated  seal  skins.”  Lib.  i,  cap.  xx,  p.  68.

t Near  Potosí.

f All  these  places  are  in  the  province  formerly  called  Charcas,  and
now  forming  the  southern  portion  of  the  modern  republic  of  Bolivia.


264


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


they  considered  it  an  auspicious  thing  to  worship  the  Sun,
and  to  have  the  Ynca,  his  child,  for  their  lord;  that  they
had  heard  of  his  laws  and  good  government ; and  that  they
besought  him  to  receive  them  under  his  protection,  for  that
they  offered  their  lives  and  property  to  conquer  and  subdue
the  surrounding  nations  ; and  that  they  prayed  that  war
might  not  be  made  upon  them,  as  they  had  destroyed  their
old  idols,  and  adopted  the  new  religion  and  laws.

The  Ynca  ordered  an  answer  to  be  sent  to  them,  to  the
effect  that  they  need  not  undertake  the  conquest  of  their
neighbours,  for  that  he  would  take  care  to  do  so,  when  and
how  it  might  appear  most  advantageous  to  his  people  ; that
they  had  no  occasion  to  fear  any  harm  being  done  to  them
for  having  submitted  to  him  and  received  his  laws ; for  that,
as  soon  as  they  had  experienced  the  result  of  such  conduct,
they  would  rejoice  at  being  able  to  live  under  a rule
ordained  by  the  Sun.  After  this  reply  they  freely  admitted
the  Ynca  into  all  those  provinces,  respecting  which,  as  no
event  occurred  worthy  of  remembrance,  I merely  give  a
general  account.  The  Anca  was  two  years  in  completing
these  conquests,  or  three,  as  some  relate ; and,  having  left
adequate  garrisons,  he  returned  to  Cuzco,  visiting  the  inter-
vening towns  and  provinces  on  the  road.  The  heir,  his  son,
was  ordered  to  go  by  another  way,  that  he  might  also  visit
the  vassals,  who  rejoiced  greatly  at  seeing  their  kings  or
princes  in  their  provinces.

The  Ynca  was  received  with  great  rejoicing  at  his  court.
He  entered,  surrounded  by  his  captains,  with  the  Curacas
of  the  newly  conquered  provinces  marching  in  front,  wdio
came  to  see  the  imperial  capital.  A few  days  afterwards
the  Prince  Ynca  Rocca  arrived,  and  was  received  with  much
satisfaction,  and  with  dancing  and  songs  composed  in  praise
of  his  victories.  The  Ynca,  having  rewarded  his  captains,
dismissed  them  to  their  homes,  and  he  remained  at  his  court,
attending  to  the  government  of  his  kingdom,  which  now


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


265


extended  from  Cuzco,  towards  the  south,  for  more  than
180  leagues,*  which  is  the  distance  to  Tutyra  and  Chaqui.
To  the  westward  it  reached  the  South  Sea,  which  at  one
point  is  more  than  60  leagues  from  Cuzco,  and  at  another
more  than  80. f To  the  east  the  dominion  of  the  Ynca
extended  to  the  river  of  Paucar-tampu,  which  is  13  leagues
from  the  city  in  a straight  line.  To  the  south-east  the  king-
dom reached  as  far  as  Callavaya,  40  leagues  from  Cuzco. +
It  thus  seemed  to  the  Ynca  that  he  should  not  make  new
conquests,  but  that  he  should  settle  the  provinces  that  he
had  acquired,  by  conferring  benefits  upon  the  vassals,  and
he  was  occupied  in  this  way  for  some  time,  living  in  peace
and  quietness.  He  enriched  the  house  of  the  Sun  and  of
the  select  virgins,  which  the  first  Ynca,  Manco  Ccapac,  had
founded.  He  ordered  other  buildings  to  be  erected  within
the  city,  as  well  as  in  the  provinces,  wherever  it  seemed
desirable.  He  also  caused  great  channels  to  be  made  for
irrigating  the  land,  and  many  bridges  to  be  placed  over  the
rivers  and  great  streams  for  the  security  of  travellers.  He
opened  new  roads  between  the  different  provinces,  that
there  might  be  communication  between  all  parts  of  his
empire.  In  fine,  he  did  everything  that  could  contribute
to  the  public  good  and  to  the  well-being  of  his  people,  as
well  as  to  his  own  grandeur  and  majesty.

* This  is  a very  fair  approximation  to  the  distance  from  Cuzco  to
Chaqui,  near  Potosi.

t These  distances  are  also  fairly  correct.

X Also  correct.


266


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XVIII.

THE  PRINCE  YNCA  ROCCA  REDUCES  MANY  GREAT
PROVINCES,  INLAND  AND  ON  THE  SEA  COAST.

The  Ynca  was  thus  occupied  for  six  or  seven  years,  at  the
end  of  which  time  he  thought  it  would  be  well  to  turn  again
to  military  exercises,  and  the  extension  of  his  dominions.
He  therefore  ordered  20,000  armed  men  to  be  assembled,
and  with  four  experienced  masters  of  the  camp,  to  march
towards  Chincha-suyu,  Avhich  is  the  northern  division ; under
the  command  of  the  prince  Ynca  Rocca,  his  son.  For  the
Yncas  had  not  extended  their  sway  in  that  direction  beyond
the  limits  reached  by  the  first  Ynca,  Manco  Ccapac.  That
boundary  was  at  Rimac-tampu,  seven  leagues  from  the  city.
The  northern  division,  being  a rugged  and  thinly  peopled
country,  the  Yncas  had  not  hitherto  undertaken  its  conquest.

The  prince  and  his  army  set  out  from  Cuzco,  reached  the
river  Apurimac,  and  crossed  it  in  great  balsas  which  had
been  collected;  and,  the  country  being  uninhabited,  marched
onwards  to  Curahnasi*  and  Amancay,f  eighteen  leagues
from  Cuzco.  The  few  Indians  of  that  neighbourhood  were
easily  reduced.  From  the  province  of  Amancay  he  advanced
by  the  left  hand  of  the  high  road  from  Cuzco  to  Rimac,  and
crossed  the  uninhabited  region  called  Ccocha  casa,*  which
is  twenty-two  leagues  wide.  He  then  entered  the  province
called  Sura,  which  is  populous,  and  rich  in  gold  and  in
flocks.  Here  the  Ynca  was  received  peacefully,  and  obeyed
as  lord  of  the  country.  Thence  he  passed  on  to  another

* A rich  valley,  now  containing  several  thriving  sugar-cane  estates,
between  the  rivers  Apurimac  and  Abaneay.

t Amancay  means  a lily.  The  place  is  corruptly  called  Abaneay  by
the  Spaniards.

f Ccocha  a lake,  and  caca  ice,  in  Quichua.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


267


province  called  Apucara,  where  he  was  also  well  received ;
and  the  reason  that  these  provinces  so  readily  submitted
was  that,  being  at  enmity  with  each  other,  none  of  them  was
able  singly  to  resist  the  Ynca.

From  Apucara  he  marched  to  the  province  of  Rucana,
which  is  divided  into  two  divisions,  one  called  Rucana  and
the  other  Hatun-rucana,  which  means  great  Rucana.  It  is
inhabited  by  a handsome  and  well  disposed  people,  who
willingly  submitted.  Thence  the  Ynca  marched  down  to
the  sea  coast,  which  the  Spaniards  call  the  llanos,  and  came
to  the  first  valley  in  that  direction,  called  Nanansca.  The
word  signifies  a hurt  or  wound,*  but  it  is  not  known  for
what  reason  it  was  given  to  this  valley.  It  may  have  been
from  some  visitation  or  punishment  which  had  befallen  the
inhabitants.  The  Spaniards  call  it  Lanasca.f  The  Ynca
was  here  also  received  peacefully,  and  obeyed  readily,  and
the  same  thing  happened  in  all  the  other  valleys  between
N añasca  and  Arequipa,  a distance  of  more  than  eighty
leagues  in  length  and  fourteen  or  fifteen  broad.  The  prin-
cipal valleys  are  Acari  and  Camana,  in  which  there  were
20,000  inhabitants.  There  are  other  smaller  and  less  im-
portant valleys,  called  Atico,  Ocoña,  Atequipa,  and  Quilca,
which  were  all  reduced  to  submission  with  great  ease
by  the  prince  Ynca  Rocca,  because  they  had  no  power  to
resist  him,  each  valley  being  ruled  by  a petty  chief,  and  the
larger  ones  having  two  or  three  chiefs,  between  whom  there
were  feuds  and  animosities.

It  will  be  proper,  seeing  that  we  are  on  the  spot,  not  to
proceed  until  we  have  related  a strange  event  which  took
place  in  the  valley  of  Acari,  very  soon  after  the  Spaniards
conquered  it,  although  we  shall  somewhat  anticipate  our
history  in  point  of  time.  Two  chiefs,  neither  of  whom  had
been  baptised,  had  a bitter  quarrel  respecting  their  bound-

* Nanani,  I hurt.  The  participle  is  Nanasca , hurt  or  wounded.

t It  is  now  called  Nasca.


268


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


aries,  insomuch  that  they  fought  a battle,  in  which  men
were  killed  and  wounded  on  both  sides.  The  Spanish
governor  sent  a commissioner  to  administer  justice  between
the  parties,  and  arrange  the  dispute.  He  settled  the  bound-
ary in  the  way  that  seemed  to  him  to  be  just,  and  sent  to
order  the  Curacas  to  establish  peace  and  friendship  with
each  other.  This  they  promised,  although  one  of  them,  who
considered  that  he  was  injured  by  the  decision,  retained  his
anger,  and  desired  to  avenge  himself  on  his  adversary  under
the  veil  of  friendship.  So,  on  the  day  when  the  peace  was
ratified,  they  all  dined  together  in  an  open  place,  one  faction
facing  the  other.  After  dinner  the  Curaca  rose  up  excitedly,
taking  two  cups  of  their  liquor  to  drink  to  his  new  friend
(as  is  the  usual  custom  with  the  Indians),  one  of  them  being
poisoned,  to  kill  him.  He  presented  the  glass  to  the  other
Curaca,  who  suspected  the  truth,  and  said — “ Give  me  that
other  glass,  and  drink  this  yourself.”  The  other,  in  order
that  he  might  not  appear  timid,  took  it  in  his  hand,  and
gave  the  harmless  glass  to  his  enemy.  He  then  drank  the
deadly  poison,  and  died  in  a few  hours,  as  well  from  the
strength  of  the  poison  as  from  rage  at  seeing  that  he  had
killed  himself  when  he  intended  to  destroy  his  foe.


CHAPTER  XIX.

THEY  TAKE  INDIANS  FROM  THE  SEA  COAST  TO  COLONISE
THE  COUNTRY  INLAND.  THE  YNCA
CCAPAC  YUPANQUI  DIES.

The  Ynca  took  Indians  of  Nanasca  and  transported  them
to  the  banks  of  the  river  Apurimac,  near  the  high  road  from
Cuzco  to  Ritnac.*  For  that  river  flows  through  a region
which  is  so  hot  that  the  Indians  of  the  cold  and  temperate


* Lima.


ROYAL  COMM  ENT  ARIES.


269


climate  of  the  Sierra  soon  sicken  and  die  in  it.  It  has  already
been  said  that  the  order  of  the  Yncas  was  that,  when  Indians
were  thus  transported  from  one  province  to  another  (whom
Ave  call  Mitmac ),  they  should  always  be  sent  to  a climate
similar  to  that  of  their  native  land,  that  the  change  might  do
them  no  injury.  It  was  therefore  forbidden  to  send  Indians
of  the  Sierra  to  the  Llanos,  because  they  would  certainly
die  in  a few  days.  The  Ynca,  mindful  of  this  danger,  took
Indians  from  one  hot  climate  to  inhabit  another.  It  was  only
necessary  to  send  a few  to  the  banks  of  the  river  Apurimac,
because  it  flows  between  very  lofty  and  precipitous  moun-
tains, and  has  very  little  available  land  on  either  side  of  its
current.  The  Y nca  desired  that  this  small  strip  of  land
should  not  be  lost,  but  should  be  turned  into  a garden  for
raising  the  numerous  and  excellent  fruits  which  ripen  on  the
banks  of  that  famous  river.

This  being  done,  and  the  usual  orders  having  been  given
for  the  government  of  the  newly  acquired  provinces,  the
prince  Ynca  Rocca  returned  to  Cuzco,  where  he  was  very
well  received  by  his  father  and  the  court.  The  captains  and
soldiers  were  sent  home,  after  having  received  rewards  for
their  services  in  the  war.  The  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui  re-
solved not  to  make  any  further  conquests,  for  he  felt  that  he
Avas  growing  old,  and  he  desired  to  confirm  the  people
already  subjugated  in  their  allegiance.  He  lived  for  some
years  in  peace,  very  carefully  attending  to  the  welfare  of  his
ATassals,  Avho,  in  their  turn,  shoAved  their  devotion,  as  Avell  in
their  work  for  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  as  for  the  other
edifices,  some  built  by  order  of  the  Ynca,  and  others
spontaneously  by  the  Indians  to  please  their  Sovereign,
each  province  building  those  required  for  its  own  districts.

In  this  period  of  quiet  and  rest  the  Ynca  Ccapac  Yupan-
qui died.  He  was  a very  brave  prince,  worthy  of  that  name
of  Ccapac  which  the  Indians  so  highly  venerated.  He  Avas
mourned  for  in  the  court  and  throughout  the  empire,  was


270


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


embalmed,  and  placed  with  his  ancestors.  He  left  his  eldest
son,  Ynca  Rocca,  as  his  successor,  1^  his  wife  and  sister,  the
Coya  Mama  Curiyllpay.  He  left  many  other  sons  and
daughters,  legitimate  and  illegitimate;  but  as  I do  not  know
the  number  with  certainty,  I do  not  give  it.  It  is  believed
that  there  were  more  than  eighty,  for  most  of  these  Yncas
left  one  hundred  or  two  hundred  children,  and  some  had
more  than  three  hundred  sons  and  daughters.


CHAPTER  XX.

A DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  TEMPLE  OF  THE  SUN,  AND  OF  ITS
GREAT  RICHES.

One  of  the  principal  idols  of  the  Kings  Yncas  and  their
vassals  was  the  imperial  city  of  Cuzco,  which  the  Indians
worshipped  as  a sacred  thing,  both  because  it  was  founded
by  the  first  Ynca,  Manco  Ccapac,  and  on  account  of  the
innumerable  victories  which  have  been  won  by  its  citizens.
It  was  also  venerated  as  the  court  and  home  of  the  Yncas.
This  veneration  was  so  great  that  it  was  shown  even  in  very
small  things.  For  if  two  Indians  of  equal  rank  met  each
other  in  the  road,  one  coming  from  and  the  other  going  to
Cuzco,  he  who  was  coming  from  the  city  was  accosted  by
the  other  as  a superior,  because  he  had  been  at  Cuzco,  and
this  respect  was  shown  with  more  solemnity  if  the  traveller
was  a resident,  and  still  more  if  he  was  a native  of  the
capital.  The  same  feeling  prevailed  as  regards  seeds  and
pulses,  or  anything  else.  Whatever  came  from  Cuzco,
although  in  reality  not  superior,  was  preferred  solely  for
that  reason.  Being  thus  held  in  such  veneration,  these
kings  ennobled  the  capital  to  the  utmost  of  their  power,
with  sumptuous  edifices  and  royal  palaces,  some  of  which
we  shall  describe.  Among  these  the  most  remarkable  was


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


271


the  temple  of  the  Sun,  which  they  adorned  with  incredible
riches,  each  Ynca  augmenting  its  splendour,  and  excelling
his  predecessor.  The  riches  of  that  edifice  were  so  wonder-
ful that  I should  not  have  the  audacity  to  write  an  account
of  them  if  they  had  not  been  alluded  to  by  all  the  Spanish
historians  of  Peru;  but  neither  what  they  have  said,  nor
what  I shall  now  say,  can  give  an  adequate  idea  of  the
reality.  They  attribute  the  edifice  to  the  Ynca  Yupanqui,
grandfather  of  Huayna  Ccapac,  not  because  he  founded  it,
for  it  had  existed  since  the  time  of  the  first  Ynca,  but
because  he  completed  the  adornment  of  the  interior,  and
brought  it  to  the  state  of  splendour  and  majesty  in  which
the  Spaniards  found  it.

Coming  to  a description  of  the  temple,  it  must  be  known
that  the  house  of  the  Sun  is  now  the  church  of  the  divine
San  Domingo.  As  I have  not  got  the  exact  length  and
breadth,  I do  not  give  it  here.  It  is  built  of  smooth  masonry,
very  accurately  and  regularly  placed.

The  high  altar  (T  use  this  term  to  make  myself  under-
stood, though  these  Indians  did  not  know  anything  of
building  an  altar)  was  at  the  east  end.  The  roof  was  very
lofty  and  of  wood,  that  there  might  be  plenty  of  air ; the
covering  of  thatch,  for  they  had  not  attained  to  the  art  of
making  tiles.*  All  the  four  walls  of  the  temple  were
covered,  from  roof  to  floor,  with  plates  and  slabs  of  gold.
In  the  side,  where  we  should  look  for  the  high  altar,  they
placed  a figure  of  the  Sun,  made  of  a plate  of  gold  of  a
thickness  double  that  of  the  other  plates  which  covered  the
walls.  The  figure  was  made  with  a circular  face  and  rays
of  fire  issuing  from  it,  all  of  one  piece,  just  as  the  Sun  is  re-
presented by  painters.  It  was  so  large  as  to  occupy  the
whole  of  one  side  of  the  temple,  from  one  wall  to  the  other.
The  Yncas  had  no  other  idols  in  that  temple  save  the  image

* For  an  account  of  an  ancient  thatch  roof  at  Azangaro,  see  my

Travels  in  Peru  and  India,  p.  193.


o?  o


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


of  the  Sun,  because  they  worshipped  no  other  gods  but  the
Sun,  although  there  are  not  wanting  persons  who  state  the
contrary.

This  figure  of  the  Sun,  when  the  Spaniards  entered  the
city,  fell  to  the  lot  of  a noble  knight,  one  of  the  first  con-
querors, named  Mancio  Serra  de  Leguisamo,  whom  T knew,
and  who  was  alive  when  I went  to  Spain.  He  was  a great
gambler,  insomuch  that,  though  the  figure  of  the  Sun  was  so
large,  he  gambled  to  such  an  extent  that  he  lost  it  in  one
night.  Hence  we  may  observe,  following  the  Father  Acosta,
that  the  saying  originated — ^He  plays  away  the  Sun  before
dawn.”  Some  time  afterwards  the  municipality  of  the  city
elected  him  to  the  office  of  alcalde,  seeing  that  he  was  lost
through  his  habit  of  gambling,  and  hoping  to  reclaim  him.
He  entered  upon  this  public  service  with  so  much  zeal  and
diligence  (for  he  possessed  all  the  qualities  of  a gentleman)
that  he  never  took  a card  into  his  hands  during  the  whole
of  that  year.  The  city,  seeing  this,  elected  him  for  another
year,  and  afterwards  he  filled  public  offices  during  several
successive  years.  Mancio  Serra,  occupied  in  this  way,  for-
got his  gambling  habits,  and  hated  play  ever  afterwards,  re-
membering the  numerous  difficulties  and  embarrassments  in
which  it  had  involved  him.*  From  this  example  it  may  be

* Mancio  Serra  de  Leguisamo  was  one  of  the  first  conquerors.  He
marched  with  Alonzo  de  Alvarado  against  Almagro,  and  was  taken
prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Abancay,  remaining  in  prison  at  Cuzco,  with
many  others,  until  he  was  rescued  and  liberated  by  Pizarro  himself.
When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  rose  against  the  Viceroy  Blasco  Nunez  de  Vela,
Mancio  Serra  de  Leguisamo,  then  become  a citizen  of  Cuzco,  joined
him  ; but  afterwards  he  fled  to  Arequipa  and  thence  to  Lima,  with  about
forty  other  cavaliers,  intending  to  rejoin  the  viceroy  and  return  to  his
allegiance.  He  married  an  Yuca  princess,  Doña  Beatriz  Nusta,  and  had
a son  by  her,  who  was  a schoolfellow  of  our  author.  The  curious  dying
confession  of  Mancio  Serra  de  Leguisamo  has  been  preserved  by  Calancha
(i,  cap.  xv,  p.  98).  It  is  dated  1589,  and  addressed  to  Philip  II.  He
concludes  it  by  saying — “ I pray  to  God  that  he  will  pardon  me,  for  I
am  the  last  to  die  of  all  the  conquerors  and  discoverers ; it  is  notorious
that  there  are  none  surviving  except  I alone,  and  I now  do  what  I can


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


273


seen  how  much  idleness  fosters  vice,  and  how  profitable
occupation  is  for  the  cultivation  of  virtue.

Returning  to  our  history,  I may  say  that  from  that  piece
alone,  which  fell  to  the  share  of  a single  knight,  an  idea  can
be  formed  of  the  treasure  which  was  found  in  the  city  and
temple  by  the  Spaniards.  On  either  side  of  the  image  of
the  Sun  were  the  bodies  of  the  dead  kings,  arranged  ac-
cording to  priority,  as  children  of  that  Sun,  and  embalmed
sons  to  appear  as  if  they  were  alive,  although  the  process  is
not  known.  They  were  seated  on  chairs  of  gold,  placed
upon  the  golden  slabs  on  which  they  had  been  used  to  sit.
Their  faces  were  towards  the  city,  except  that  of  ITuayna
Ccapac,  which  was  distinguished  above  the  rest  by  being
placed  facing  the  figure  of  the  Sun,  as  the  most  beloved  of
his  children.  He  deserved  this  ; for  in  life  he  was  revered
as  a god,  by  reason  of  his  virtues  and  the  regal  qualities
that  he  displayed  from  the  time  he  was  a child.  The  Indians
hid  these  bodies  with  the  rest  of  the  treasure,  most  of  which
has  not  been  brought  to  light,  up  to  the  present  time.  In
the  year  1559  the  licentiate  Polo  discovered  five  of  the
bodies,  three  of  kings  and  two  of  queens.*

The  principal  door  of  the  temple  looked  to  the  north,  as
it  does  now,  and  there  were  other  smaller  doors  for  the  ser-
vice of  the  temple.  They  were  all  coated  with  plates  of
gold.  Outside  the  temple,  on  the  upper  part  of  the  walls,
a cornice  of  gold,  consisting  of  a plate  more  than  a yard
wide,  ran  round  the  whole  building,  like  a crown.

to  relieve  my  conscience.”  He  bears  witness,  in  this  document,  to  th
excellence  of  the  government  of  the  Yncas,  and  to  the  good  disposition
of  the  Indians ; and  confesses  to  all  the  Spanish  injustice,  cruelty,  and
oppression,  in  which  he  participated.

* One  was  that  of  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha,  with  hair  as  white  as
snow;  the  second  was  that  of  the  great  Tupac  Ynca  Yupanqui;  the
third  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  The  women  were  Mama  Runtu.  queen  of
Huira-ccocha,  and  Ccoya  Mama  Odio,  mother  of  Huayna  Ccapac.  They
were  finally  buried  in  the  court  of  the  hospital  of  San  Andres  at  Lima.
See  note  at  p.  220  of  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon.

s


274


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XXL

OF  THE  CLOISTER  OF  THE  TEMPLE,  AND  OF  THE  EDIFICES
DEDICATED  TO  THE  MOON,  STARS,  THUNDER,
LIGHTNING  AND  RAINBOW.

Beyond  tlie  temple  there  “was  a cloister  with  four  sides,
one  of  which  was  the  wall  of  the  temple.  All  round  the
upper  part  of  this  cloister  there  was  a cornice,  consisting  of
a plate  of  gold  more  than  a yard  wide,  forming  a crown  to
the  cloister.  In  place  of  this  gold  the  Spaniards  caused  a
cornice  of  white  plaster  to  be  put  up,  of  the  same  width,  in
memory  of  the  former  one,  and  I left  it  there  in  the  walls,
which  were  still  standing,  and  had  not  been  pulled  down.
Round  the  cloister  there  were  five  rooms  or  great  halls,
square,  each  one  standing  by  itself,  not  joined  to  others,
covered  in  the  form  of  a pyramid,  and  these  formed  the
other  three  sides  of  the  cloister.

One  of  these  halls  was  dedicated  to  the  Moon,  the  wife  of
the  Sun,  and  this  was  nearest  to  the  principal  chapel  of  the
temple.  The  whole  of  it,  with  the  doorways,  was  covered
with  plates  of  silver,  which,  from  their  white  colour,  denoted
that  it  was  the  hall  of  the  moon.  The  image,  like  that  of
the  Sun,  represented  a woman’s  face  on  a plate  of  silver.
They  entered  this  hall  to  visit  the  Moon  and  to  commend
themselves  to  her,  for  they  held  her  to  be  the  sister  and
wife  of  the  Sun,  and  mother  of  the  Yncas,  and  all  their  ge-
neration. Thus  they  called  her  Mama-quilla , which  means
“ Mother  Moon  but  they  offered  up  no  sacrifices  to  her
as  they  did  to  the  Sun.  On  either  side  of  the  image  of  the
Moon  were  the  bodies  of  the  dead  queens,  placed  in  their
order,  according  to  seniority.  Mama  Ocllo,  the  mother  of
Huayna  Ccapac,  was  in  front  of  the  moon,  face  to  face,  and


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


275


she  was  thus  honoured  above  the  rest,  for  having  been  the
mother  of  such  a son.

Another  of  these  halls,  being  the  one  nearest  to  that  of
the  Moon,  was  dedicated  to  the  planet  Venus  and  the  seven
Pleiades,  and  to  all  the  other  stars.  They  called  the  star
Venus  Chasca,  which  means  one  with  long  and  curly  hair.
They  honoured  this  star,  because  they  said  that  it  was  the
page  of  the  Sun,  travelling  nearest  to  it,  sometimes  in  front
and  at  others  behind.  They  venerated  the  seven  Pleiades
because  of  their  curious  position,  and  the  symmetry  of  their
shape.  They  looked  upon  the  host  of  stars  as  handmaidens
of  the  Moon,  and  they,  therefore,  gave  them  a hall  near
that  of  their  mistress,  that  they  might  be  at  hand  for  her
service  ; for  they  said  that  the  stars  walk  through  the  heavens
with  the  Moon,  as  if  they  were  her  servants,  and  not  with
the  Sun.  This  they  said  because  they  saw  the  stars  by
night  and  not  by  day.

This  hall  was  covered  with  silver  like  that  of  the  Moon,
and  the  doorway  was  of  silver.  The  whole  roof  was  strewn
with  stars,  great  and  small,  like  the  heavens  on  a starry
night.  The  other  hall,  near  that  of  the  stars,  was  dedicated
to  lightning,  thunder,  and  the  thunderbolts.  They  in-
cluded these  three  things  in  the  one  word  Yllapa,  and  they
distinguished  them  by  means  of  the  verb.  Thus  when  they
said  “ I saw  the  Yllapa ,”  they  meant  the  lightning;  if  they
said,  “ Listen  to  the  Yllapa ,”  they  referred  to  the  thunder  ;
and  when  they  exclaimed,  “ The  Yllapa  has  fallen  in  such
a place,”  they  alluded  to  a thunderbolt.

They  did  not  worship  these  things  as  gods,  but  respected
them  as  servants  of  the  Sun.  They  had  the  same  feeling
with  respect  to  them,  as  the  ancient  heathens  entertained
for  the  thunderbolt,  which  they  looked  upon  as  a weapon  of
their  god  Jupiter.  With  a similar  feeling  the  Yncas  dedi-
cated a hall  to  lightning,  thunder,  and  thunderbolts  in  the
house  of  the  Sun,  as  his  servants,  and  the  hall  was  lined

s2


276


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


with  gold.  They  had  no  image,  nor  other  representation  of
thunder  and  lightning,  because  as  they  could  not  draw  them
from  nature  (as  they  always  did  when  they  made  images  of
anything),  they  respected  them  under  the  name  of  Yllapa.
The  Spanish  historians,  up  to  the  present  time,  have  not  got
a correct  knowledge  of  the  threefold  meaning  of  this  word.
For  they  have  made  out  of  it  a God,  three  in  one,  which
they  have  given  to  the  Indians,  thus  assimilating  their
idolatry  to  our  holy  religion.  They  have  also  invented
Trinities  from  other  things,  with  even  less  colour  or  founda-
tion, composing  new  words  in  the  language,  such  as  the
Indians  themselves  never  imagined.  I write,  as  I have
already  said,  what  I sucked  in  my  mother’s  milk,  and  saw
or  heard  from  my  elders  ; and,  touching  the  thunder,  I have
already  said  what  else  they  believed  concerning  it.

Another  hall  (which  was  the  fourth)  was  dedicated  to  the
rainbow ; for  they  had  ascertained  that  it  proceeded  from
the  Sun  ; and  the  kings  Yncas  therefore  adopted  it  for  their
device  and  blazon,  as  descendants  of  the  Sun.  This  hall
was  all  covered  with  gold.  On  one  side  of  it,  on  the  plates
of  gold,  a rainbow  was  very  naturally  painted,  of  such  a size
that  it  reached  from  one  wall  to  the  other,  and  with  all  its
colours  exact.  They  call  the  rainbow  Chuychu , and,  owing
to  the  veneration  they  felt  for  it,  when  they  saw  it  in  the
air,  they  shut  their  mouths,  and  put  their  hands  over  them,
for  they  said  that  if  they  exposed  their  teeth  it  would  decay
and  loosen  them.  This  was  one  of  their  foolish  customs,
among  many  others,  and  they  could  give  no  reason  for  their
folly.  The  fifth  and  last  hall  was  set  apart  for  the  high
priest,  and  for  the  other  priests  who  assisted  in  the  services
of  the  temple,  all  of  whom  were  Yncas  of  the  blood  royal.
This  hall  was  not  used  by  them  to  sleep  or  eat  in,  but  as  a
hall  of  audience,  to  regulate  the  sacrifices  that  were  to  he
made,  and  all  other  matters  relating  to  the  service  of  the
temple.  This  hall,  like  the  others,  was  also  plated  with
gold,  from  floor  to  ceiling.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


277


CHAPTER  XXII.

THE  NAME  OF  THE  HIGH  PRIESTS,  AND  TOUCHING
OTHER  PARTS  OF  THE  TEMPLE.

The  Spaniards  call  the  chief  priest  Vilaorna,  instead  of
Villac  Vmu,  a word  composed  of  the  verb  Villani  (I  say)
and  of  the  noun  Vmu,  which  means  a divine  or  soothsayer.
Villac,  with  the  letter  c,  is  the  present  participle,  and,  added
to  the  word  Vmu,  the  meaning  is  the  “diviner  or  soothsayer
who  speaks.”  It  does  not  explain  what  it  is  that  he  says,
but  it  is  understood  that  he  says  to  the  people  what  he  has
been  directed,  as  chief  priest,  to  proclaim  as  a command  of
the  Sun,  in  accordance  with  their  fables,  and  what  the
devils  declared  to  him  through  their  idols  and  sanctuaries.
He  also  proclaimed  what  he  himself,  as  chief  priest,  divined
from  the  omens  and  sacrifices,  and  by  interpreting  dreams,
and  by  other  superstitions  which  they  had  in  the  time  of
their  heathenry.  They  had  no  name  for  priest,  but  they
composed  a word  from  the  same  things  that  are  done  by
priests.

Of  the  five  images  the  Spaniards  secured  three,  which
still  remained  in  their  ancient  positions.  They  only  lost  the
benches  of  gold  and  silver,  and  the  images  of  the  moon  and
stars,  which  had  been  pulled  out  of  the  ground.  Against
the  walls  of  these  temples,  looking  towards  the  cloister,  on
the  outside,  there  were  four  porches  of  masonry,  a material
of  which  every  other  part  of  these  edifices  was  also  built.
The  mouldings  round  the  corners,  and  along  all  the  inner
parts  of  the  porches,  were  inlaid  with  plates  of  gold,  as  well
as  the  walls  and  even  the  floors.  At  the  corners  of  the
mouldings  there  were  many  settings  of  fine  stones,  emeralds
and  torquoises,  but  there  were  neither  diamonds  nor  rubies


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


;¿78

in  that  land.  The  Ynca  sat  in  these  porches  when  there
were  festivals  in  honour  of  the  Sun,  sometimes  in  one  and  at
another  in  another,  according  to  the  time  of  the  feast.

In  two  of  these  porches,  built  against  a side  facing  to  the
east,  I remember  having  seen  many  holes  in  the  mouldings,
made  through  the  stones.  Those  in  the  corners  passed
right  through,  while  the  others  were  merely  marks  on  the
walls.  I heard  the  Indians  and  ministers  of  the  temple  say
these  were  the  places  in  which  the  precious  stones  were
fixed  in  the  heathen  times.  The  porches  and  all  the  door-
ways opening  on  the  cloister,  which  were  twelve  in  number
(except  those  of  the  temples  to  the  moon  and  stars)  were
inlaid  with  plates  and  slabs  of  gold  in  the  form  of  porches,
while  two,  to  be  in  accordance  with  the  white  colour  of
their  patrons,  had  their  doorways  of  silver.

Besides  the  five  great  halls  already  mentioned,  there  were
other  buildings  in  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  for  the  priests,  and
for  the  attendants  who  were  Yncas  by  privilege.  For  no
Indian,  unless  he  was  an  Ynca,  could  enter  that  house,  how
great  Lord  soever  he  might  be,  nor  any  woman  except  the
wives  and  daughters  of  the  king  himself.  The  priests
assisted  in  the  services  of  the  temple,  by  turns  of  weeks
reckoned  from  the  quarters  of  the  moon.  During  that  space
of  time  they  refrained  from  their  wives,  and  never  came
forth  from  the  temple,  either  by  day  or  night.

The  Indians  who  served  in  the  temple  as  servants,  that  is
to  say,  the  porters,  sweepers,  cooks,  butlers,  fuel  carriers,
guards,  watermen,  and  performers  of  any  other  office  apper-
taining to  the  service  of  the  temple,  came  from  the  same
towns  as  those  who  were  servants  in  the  royal  palace,  which
towns  were  obliged  to  supply  such  persons  for  the  palace
and  the  temple  of  the  Sun  ; these  two  edifices,  as  the  homes
of  a father  and  son,  having  no  difference  whatever  in  mat-
ters of  service,  except  that  the  women  performed  no  duties
in  the  temple  of  the  Sun,  and  that  no  sacrifices  were  offered


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


279


in  the  palace.  All  other  things  were  the  same  both  as  re-
gards grandeur  and  majesty.


CHAPTER  XXIII.

THE  PLACES  FOR  THE  SACRIFICES  AND  THE  THRESHOLD
WHERE  THEY  TOOK  OFF  THEIR  SANDALS  TO  ENTER
THE  TEMPLE.  CONCERNING  THEIR  FOUNTAINS.

The  places  where  the  sacrifices  were  consumed  were  in
accordance  with  the  solemnity  of  the  rites.  They  were  con-
sumed in  the  courtyards  set  apart  for  the  special  festivals.
The  general  sacrifices,  offered  up  on  the  principal  festival  of
the  Sun,  called  Jtaymi,  were  made  in  the  great  square  of
Cuzco.  Other  sacrifices  and  festivals  of  less  importance  were
celebrated  in  front  of  the  temple,  in  a great  square  where
they  performed  the  dances  of  all  the  provinces  and  nations
in  the  empire.  No  one  could  pass  from  this  square  to  the
temple  except  barefooted,  nor  could  any  person  enter  the
square  itself  with  sandals  on,  because  it  was  within  the
limits  beyond  which  all  must  go  barefooted.  I will  describe
the  extent  of  those  limits,  that  it  may  be  known  what  they
were.

Three  principal  streets  issue  from  the  great  square  of
Cuzco,  and  run  in  a north  and  south  direction  towards  the
temple.  One  follows  the  course  of  the  stream.  Another  is
that  which,  in  my  time,  was  called  the  Calle  de  la  Cárcel,
because  the  Spanish  prison  was  in  it.  I am  told  that  it  has
since  been  removed  to  another  part  of  the  city.  The  third
issues  from  the  corner  of  the  plaza,  and  runs  in  the  same
direction.  There  is  another  street,  further  to  the  eastward
than  any  of  these,  which  is  now  called  the  Calle  de  San
Agustín.  By  all  these  four  streets  a person  may  go  to  the
temple  of  the  Sun.  But  the  principal  and  most  direct  street.


280


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


being  that  vvliich  leads  to  the  door  of  the  temple,  is  that
called  by  us  de  la  Cárcel,  which  issues  from  the  centre  of
th & plaza.  By  this  street  they  went  to  the  temple  to  worship
the  Sun,  and  to  bring  their  offerings  and  sacrifices,  so  that
it  was  the  street  of  the  Sun.  Another  street  crosses  all
these  from  west  to  east,  from  the  stream  to  the  street  of  San
Agustín.  This  street,  which  crosses  the  others,  was  the
limit  within  which  all  who  approached  the  temple  were
obliged  to  go  barefooted  ; and  even  if  they  were  not  going
to  the  temple  they  had  to  bare  their  feet  on  arriving  at  this
limit,  because  it  was  prohibited  for  any  one  to  go  beyond  it
with  sandals  on  their  feet.  The  distance  from  the  street,
which  we  have  stated  to  be  the  limit,  to  the  door  of  the
temple,  was  more  than  two  hundred  paces.  To  the  east,
west,  and  south  of  the  temple  there  were  similar  boundaries,
on  arriving  at  which  people  were  forced  to  go  barefooted.

Returning  to  the  ornaments  of  the  temple,  there  were,
within  the  edifice,  five  fountains  of  water,  that  flowed  from
different  directions.  The  pipes  were  of  gold,  and  some  of
the  pillars  were  of  stone,  and  others  were  jars  of  gold  and
silver.  In  these  fountains  they  washed  the  sacrifices,
according  to  their  importance,  and  to  the  magnificence  of
the  festival.  I have  only  seen  one  of  these  fountains,  which
was  used  to  irrigate  the  vegetable  garden  of  the  monastery.
The  others  had  been  lost,  and  even  the  one  which  I saw
was  lost  for  six  or  seven  months,  so  that  the  garden  was
destroyed  for  want  of  irrigation,  the  whole  monastery,  and
even  the  city,  being  concerned  at  the  loss ; for  there  was
not  an  Indian  who  could  explain  whence  the  water  of  the
fountain  came.

Th  e cause  of  the  loss  of  the  wTater  at  that  time  was  that  it
came  from  the  western  side  of  the  monastery,  underground,
thus  passing  under  the  stream  which  flows  through  the  city.
This  stream,  in  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  was  lined  and  paved
with  masonry,  the  floor  being  of  large  flags,  so  that  it  might


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


281


not  be  injured  by  the  freshes;  and  this  masonry  work  ex-
tended for  a quarter  of  a league  beyond  the  city.  Owing
to  the  negligence  of  the  Spaniards,  it  has  fallen  out  of  re-
pair. For  this  stream  (although  it  generally  contains  very
little  water,  for  it  rises  almost  within  the  city)  is  subject  to
violent  freshes,  when  it  is  wonderfully  swollen,  and  thus
breaks  up  the  flags  and  masonry.

In  the  year  1558  it  happened  that  the  water  tore  up  the
flagstones  in  the  bed  of  the  stream,  just  over  the  place  where
the  pipe  of  the  fountain  was  laid  down,  breaking  the  pipe  it-
self ; so  that  the  garden  was  left  without  water,  and  the  silt,
brought  down  by  the  stream  every  year,  concealed  the  posi-
tion of  the  pipe,  so  that  no  sign  was  left  of  it.

The  friars,  although  they  tried  all  they  could  to  find  the
spring,  were  unsuccessful ; and  it  would  have  been  neces-
sary to  pull  down  many  edifices,  and  to  dig  very  deep,  in
order  to  follow  the  course  of  the  pipe  from  the  fountain,
because  the  fountain  was  on  high  ground,  nor  could  they
find  an  Indian  to  guide  them  in  their  search.  For  this
reason  they  cared  no  more  for  that  fountain,  nor  for  the
others  which  the  edifice  contained.  From  this  circumstance
it  may  be  gathered  that  those  Indians,  at  the  present  day,
have  few  traditions  of  ancient  times,  seeing  that  after  only
forty-two  years  they  had  forgotten  so  important  a thing  as
the  origin  of  the  waters  which  flowed  to  the  house  of  their
god  the  Sun.  It  seems  impossible  but  that  there  must  have
been  some  tradition  handed  down  from  forefathers  to  their  de-
scendants and  from  the  priests  to  their  successors,  so  that  the
memory  of  this  spring  might  not  be  lost.  It  is  true  that  in
those  times  the  priests  of  the  former  state  of  things  had  come  to
an  end,  among  whom  the  traditions  were  preserved,  which
bore  upon  the  service  and  honour  of  the  temple.  This,  and
many  other  traditions  concerning  which  the  Indians  can
give  no  account,  are  now  lost.  If  the  information  had  been
handed  down  in  the  knots  which  recorded  the  tribute,  or  in


282


THIRD  ROOK  OF  THE


the  allotments  of  the  royal  services,  or  in  the  histories  of
successive  reigns,  which  are  profane  matters,  no  doubt  the
particulars  respecting  these  fountains  would  have  been  pre-
served ; like  many  other  things,  the  memory  of  which  has
been  preserved  by  the  accountants  and  historians.  But
even  these  are  fading  away  and  being  superseded  by  new
stories  and  the  modern  history  of  another  order  of  things.


CHAPTER  XXIV.

OF  THE  GARDEN  OF  GOLD,  AND  OF  OTHER  COSTLY  THINGS
IN  THE  TEMPLE,  IN  IMITATION  OF  WHICH  THERE
ARE  MANY  OTHERS  IN  THE  TEMPLES  OF
THAT  EMPIRE.

Returning  to  the  fountain,  I have  to  say  that,  after  it  had
been  lost  for  six  or  seven  months,  some  little  Indian  boys
were  playing  along  the  side  of  the  stream,  when  they  saw
the  spring  of  water  coming  up  through  the  broken  and
hitherto  stopped  up  pipe.  At  the  novelty  of  the  sight  they
called  others  to  behold  it,  until  at  last  some  older  Indians
and  Spaniards  came,  who  suspected  that*  from  being  so  near
the  convent,  it  was  the  water  which  had  been  lost.  They
ascertained  the  direction  taken  by  the  pipe,  and  seeing  that
it  led  towards  the  buildings,  they  felt  that  their  conjecture
was  correct,  and  gave  notice  to  the  monks.  The  holy  men
repaired  the  pipes  with  great  care,  although  not  with  the
efficiency  that  was  afterwards  attained,  and  brought  back
the  water  to  their  garden,  without  further  attempts  to  find
whence  it  came.  It  is  certain  that  there  is  much  earth  above
the  water,  for  the  pipes  are  very  deep  in  the  ground.

That  garden,  which  now  supplies  the  convent  with  vege-
tables, was  in  the  time  of  the  ATicas  a garden  of  gold  and
silver,  such  as  they  also  had  in  the  royal  palaces.  It  con-


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


283


tained  many  herbs  and  flowers  of  different  kinds,  many
small  plants,  many  large  trees,  many  large  and  small
animals  both  wild  and  domestic,  and  creeping  things,  such
as  serpents,  lizards,  and  toads,  as  well  as  shells,  butterflies,
and  birds.  Each  of  these  things  was  placed  in  its  natural
position.  There  was  also  a large  field  of  maize,  the  grain
they  call  quinua,  pulses,  and  fruit  trees  with  their  fruit;  all
made  of  gold  and  silver.  There  were  also,  in  the  building,
billets  of  wood  imitated  in  gold  and  silver,  and  great  figures
of  men,  and  women,  and  children,  as  well  as  granaries,
called  pinia,  all  for  the  ornamenting  and  the  majesty  of  the
house  of  the  Sun  their  god.

Every  year,  on  the  occasion  of  the  principal  feasts,  new
objects  in  gold  and  silver  were  presented  to  the  temple,  so
that  its  wealth  continued  to  increase;  for  all  the  silversmiths,
dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  Sun,  had  no  other  business
than  to  make  these  things.  There  was  also  a vast  quantity
of  pots,  vases,  and  jars  in  the  temple.  In  fine,  there  was  in
that  edifice  no  article  of  any  kind  which  was  not  made  of
gold  and  silver,  even  down  to  the  spades  and  hoes  for  use
in  the  garden.  Hence,  with  good  reason,  they  called  the
temple  of  the  Sun,  and  the  building  attached  to  it,  Ccuri-
cancha,  which  means  a “ court  of  gold.”

In  imitation  of  this  temple  of  the  city  of  Cuzco,  others
were  made  in  the  provinces,  of  many  of  which,  and  of  the
house  of  the  select  virgins,  Pedro  de  Cieza  de  Leon  makes
mention  in  his  account  of  that  land,  in  which  he  describes  it
province  by  province,  though  he  does  not  mention  all  the
temples,  but  only  those  which  are  met  with  on  the  main
roads,  leaving  in  oblivion  those  in  the  great  provinces  on
the  right  and  left  of  the  roads.  I also  shall  omit  special
mention  of  them,  to  avoid  prolixity,  for  it  is  unnecessary  to
specify  them,  seeing  that  I shall  describe  the  principal
temple,  and  that  all  the  others  are  much  alike.

Each  Curaca  was  bound  to  adorn  the  temple  in  his  district


284


THIRD  BOOK  OF  THE


in  proportion  to  his  wealth  in  gold  and  silver,  as  well  to
serve  and  honour  his  God,  as  to  shew  respect  to  his  king,
who  was  a child  of  the  Sun.  So  that  all  those  temples  of
the  provinces  vied  with  that  of  Cuzco  in  their  platings  of
gold  and  silver.

The  nearest  relations  of  the  Curacas  were  the  priests  of
the  temples  of  the  Sun.  The  chief  priest  of  each  large  pro-
vince, as  bishop,  was  an  Ynca  of  the  blood  royal;  for  the
sacrifices  offered  to  the  Sun  were  ordered  in  conformity  with
the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  Cuzco,  and  not  with  the  super-
stitions of  each  province,  the  practice  of  which  was  pro-
hibited. Such  were  the  sacrificing  of  men,  women,  and
children;  the  eating  of  human  flesh;  and  other  very  barbar-
ous things  practised  in  the  first  age  of  heathenry,  which
were  forbidden  by  the  Yncas.  In  order  that  the  people
might  not  return  to  these  wicked  habits,  they  were  obliged
to  have  an  Ynca,  who  was  a noble  of  the  blood  royal,  as
their  high  priest.

The  high  priests  of  Ynca  blood  were  also  sent  to  do  honour
to  the  vassals,  for,  as  we  have  already  said,  the  people  in
many  parts  highly  valued  the  presence  of  an  Ynca  as  their
superior — their  priest  in  time  of  peace,  and  their  leader  in
war.  Thus  they  felt  that  they  were  inferior  members  of  a
body,  the  head  of  which  was  represented  by  an  Ynca.  This
will  suffice  respecting  that  most  rich  and  costly  temple,
though  much  more  might  be  said  by  one  who  understood
better  how  to  describe  it.


ROYA  L COMMENTARIES.


285


CHAPTER  XXV.

OF  THE  FAMOUS  TEMPLE  OF  TITICACA,  AND  OF  THE  FABLES
AND  ALLEGORIES  CONCERNING  IT.

Among  the  other  famous  temples  that  were  dedicated  to
the  Sun,  in  Peru,  and  might  compete  with  that  of  Cuzco  in
costly  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver,  there  was  one  on  the
island  called  Titicaca,  which  means  “the  rock  of  lead/5
The  name  is  composed  of  titi  which  is  “ lead,”  and  caca
which  is  “ a hill,”  both  syllables  being  pronounced  at  the
back  of  the  throat.  Por,  if  the  word  is  pronounced  as  the
letters  sound  in  Spanish,  it  means  an  uncle,  the  brother  of  a
mother.  The  lake  called  Titicaca,  took  its  name  from  the
island,  which  is  about  two  shots  of  an  arquebus  from  the
mainland.  It  is  five  to  six-hundred  paces  round.  The
Yncas  say  that  it  was  on  this  island  that  the  Sun  placed  his
two  children,  male  and  female,  when  he  sent  them  down  to
instruct  the  barbarous  people  who  then  dwelt  on  thehgarth.
To  this  fable  they  add  another  of  more  ancient  origin.
They  say  that,  after  the  deluge,  the  rays  of  the  Sun  were
seen  on  this  island,  and  on  the  great  lake,  before  they  ap-
peared in  any  other  part.  The  lake  is  eighty  fathoms  deep,
and  eighty  leagues  round.  Father  Bias  Valera,  writes
that  the  reason  why  ships  cannot  sail  on  the  waters  of  the
lake  is  that  it  contains  much  loadstone ; but  of  this  I can  say
nothing.

The  first  Yuca,  Manco  Ccapac,  taking  advantage  of  the
ancient  fable,  and  assisted  by  his  own  genius  and  sagacity,
seeing  that  the  Indians  venerated  the  lake  and  the  island  as
sacred  things,  composed  a second  fable  ; saying,  that  he  and
his  wife  were  children  of  the  Sun  ; and  that  their  father  had
placed  them  on  that  island,  that  they  might  thence  pass


286


THIKD  BOOK  OF  THE


through  the  country,  teaching  the  people  in  the  manner  that
has  been  fully  related  in  the  beginning  of  this  history.  The
Yucas  Amantas,  who  were  the  philosophers  and  learned  men
of  the  State,  reduced  the  first  fable  to  the  second  ; teaching
it  as  a prophecy,  if  one  may  use  such  a term.  They  said
that  the  Sun  having  shed  his  first  rays  on  that  island,  whence
to  illuminate  the  world,  was  a sign  and  promise  that  on  the
same  spot  he  would  place  his  own  children  ; whence  to  go
forth  instructing  the  natives,  and  drawing  them  away  from
the  savage  condition  in  which  they  lived  ; as  those  kings
actually  did  in  after  times.  With  these  and  similar  fables,
the  Yncas  made  the  Indians  believe  that  they  were  children
of  the  Sun;  and  they  confirmed  this  belief  by  the  numerous
benefits  they  conferred  upon  the  people.  Owing  to  these
two  traditions,  the  Yncas,  and  all  the  people  under  their
sway,  looked  upon  that  island  as  a sacred  place  ; and  they
ordered  a very  rich  temple,  lined  with  gold  plates,  and
dedicated  to  the  Sun,  to  be  erected  on  it.  Here  all  the
vassals  of  the  Ynca,  offered  up  much  gold  and  silver,  and
precious  stones  every  year,  as  a token  of  gratitude  to  the  Sun,
for  the  two  acts  of  grace  which  had  taken  place  on  that  spot.
This  temple,  had  the  same  service  as  that  of  Cuzco.  There
was  said  to  be  such  a quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  as  offer-
ings, heaped  up  in  the  island,  besides  what  was  worked  for
the  use  of  the  temple,  that  the  stories  of  the  Indians  con-
cerning it  are  more  wonderful  than  credible.  The  Father
Bias  Valera,  speaking  of  the  riches  of  this  temple,  and  of  the
quantity  of  wealth  that  had  been  collected  there,  says  that
the  Indian  colonists  (called  Mitmac ) who  lived  in  Copa-
cavana,  declared  that  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  heaped
up  as  offerings,  was  so  great  that  another  temple  might  have
been  made  out  of  it,  from  the  foundations  to  the  roof,  with-
out using  any  other  materials.  But  as  soon  as  the  Indians
heard  of  the  invasion  of  the  country  by  the  Spaniards,  and
that  they  were  seizing  all  the  treasure  they  could  find,  they
threw  the  whole  of  it  into  the  great  lake.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


287


Another  story  of  a similar  kind  occurs  to  me.  In  the
valley  of  Urcos,  six  leagues  to  the  southward  of  Cuzco,
there  is  a small  lake,  less  than  half  a league  in  circumference,
but  very  deep,  and  surrounded  by  high  mountains.  It  is
commonly  reported  that  the  Indians  threw  much  of  the
treasure  of  Cuzco  into  it,  as  soon  as  they  knew  that  the
Spaniards  were  approaching;  and,  among  other  costly  things,
they  threw  in  the  chain  of  gold  which  Huayna  Ccapac
ordered  to  be  made,  and  which  I shall  mention  in  its  proper
place.  Twelve  or  thirteen  Spaniards,  inhabitants  of  Cuzco,
not  of  the  number  of  those  who  possess  Indians,  but  mer-
chants and  traders,  formed  a company  of  profit  or  loss,  to
drain  that  lake  and  secure  the  treasure.  They  sounded  the
lake  and  found  that  its  depth  was  twenty-three  to  twenty-four
fathoms,  without  counting  the  mud  at  the  bottom,  which
was  also  deep.  They  agreed  to  make  a tunnel  to  the  east-
ward of  the  lake,  where  the  river  called  Yucay  flows,  be-
cause in  that  direction  the  land  is  lower  than  the  bottom  of
the  lake,  so  that  they  would  thus  be  able  to  draw  oft’  the
water  and  leave  the  lake  dry.  For  in  other  directions  they
could  not  drain  it,  because  it  was  surrounded  by  mountains.
They  did  not  open  the  drain  by  digging  from  the  surface,  as
it  seemed  more  economical  to  excavate  underground,  by
means  of  a horizontal  tunnel.  They  began  their  work  in
the  year  1557,  with  great  hopes  of  obtaining  the  treasure,
and  excavated  for  a distance  of  fifty  paces.  Then  they  came
to  a rock,  which  they  tried  to  break,  but  it  turned  out  to  be
of  flint,  and  they  saw  that  more  fire  came  from  their  blows
than  stone.  After  spending  many  ducats  of  their  wealth,
they  lost  heart,  and  gave  up  the  attempt.  I entered  the
tunnel  two  or  three  times  when  the  work  was  going  on.  It
is  a general  belief,  not  confined  to  these  Spaniards,  that  the
Indians  concealed  a vast  amount  of  treasure  in  lakes,  caves,
and  forests,  which  now  is  beyond  hope  of  recovery.

The  Kings  Yncas,  besides  the  temple  and  its  rich  orna-


288


THIRD  BOOK  OF  COMMENTARIES.


ments,  greatly  ennobled  that  island  of  Titicaca,  because  it
was  the  spot  were  their  first  ancestors  originally  appeared,
coming  from  heaven,  as  they  themselves  declared.  The
island  was  levelled  as  completely  as  possible,  rocks  and
cliffs  being  removed,  and  terraces  being  constructed.  These
terraces  were  filled  with  good  and  fertile  earth,  brought
from  a distance,  in  which  maize  might  be  cultivated,  for  in
that  region  the  climate  is  so  cold  that  maize  can  by  no  means
be  raised.  In  these  terraces  they  sowed  other  seeds ; and,
among  other  advantages  obtained  from  them,  they  furnished
a harvest  of  maize  in  small  quantity,  the  heads  of  which
were  conveyed  to  the  king  as  sacred,  and  deposited  in  the
temple  of  the  Sun,  as  well  as  with  the  select  virgins  who
were  in  Cuzco,  and  in  the  other  convents  and  temples
throughout  the  kingdom,  one  year  to  some,  and  another  to
others,  that  all  might  enjoy  the  possession  of  those  grains,
which,  as  it  were,  had  come  from  heaven.  They  sowed
them  in  the  gardens  of  the  temples  of  the  Sun,  and  of  the
convents  of  virgins  in  the  provinces,  and  the  harvests  from
them  were  distributed  amongst  the  people.  Some  of  these
grains  were  placed  in  the  granaries  of  the  Sun,  and  in  those
of  the  king  and  the  state,  that  they  might,  as  sacred  things,
guard,  enrich,  and  protect  from  corruption  the  bread,  which
was  garnered  for  general  sustenance.  The  Indian  who
could  obtain  a grain  of  that  maize  to  place  in  his  ears
believed  that  he  would  never  want  for  bread  during  the  re-
mainder of  his  life.  To  such  a point  did  their  superstition
reach/  in  any  matter  relating  to  their  Yncas.


END  OF  THE  THIRD  BOOK.


FOURTH  BOOK

OF  THE

ROYAL  COMMENTARIES  OF  THE  YNCAS.

IT  TREATS  OF  THE  VIRGINS  DEDICATED  TO  THE  SUN,  AND  OF  THE  LAW
AGAINST  THOSE  WHO  MAY  VIOLATE  THEM.  IT  DESCRIBES  THE  WAY
IN  WHICH  THE  COMMON  INDIANS  WERE  MARRIED,  AND  ALSO  HOW
THE  MARRIAGE  OF  THE  HEIR  TO  THE  CROWN  WAS  CELEBRATED.

ALSO  HOW  ESTATES  WERE  INHERITED,  AND  HOW  CHILDREN
WERE  BROUGHT  UP.  IT  GIVES  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE
LIFE  OF  THE  YNCA  ROCCA,  AND  OF  HIS  CONQUESTS,

OF  THE  SCHOOLS  HE  FOUNDED,  AND  OF  HIS
SAYINGS.  IT  ALSO  RELATES  THE  EVENTS
OF  THE  REIGN  OF  THE  SEVENTH
YNCA  YAHUAR-HUACCAC,  AND
GIVES  AN  ACCOUNT
OF  A

STRANGE  APPARITION

WHICH  APPEARED  TO  THE  PRTNCE  HIS  SON.

IT  CONTAINS  TWENTY-FOUR  CHAPTERS.


T


THE  FOURTH  BOOK.


CHAPTER  I.

THE  HOUSE  OF  THE  VIRGINS  DEDICATED  TO  THE  SUN.

The  Kings  Yncas  had,  in  their  vain  religion,  great  things
worthy  of  much  attention,  and  one  of  these  was  the  perpe-
tual virginity  which  women  observed  in  many  conventual
houses,  that  were  built  for  them  in  the  different  provinces
of  the  empire.  In  order  that  it  may  be  understood  what
women  these  were,  to  whom  they  were  dedicated,  and  in
what  employments  they  were  occupied,  I shall  relate  how
all  this  was ; for  the  Spanish  historians  who  treat  of  this
matter  pass  it  by  like  the  proverb  which  says — “ the  cat  out
of  the  arms.”  I shall  treat  specially  of  the  house  at  Cuzco,
because  all  the  others  which  were  established  throughout
Peru  were  on  the  same  model.

The  quarter  of  the  city  of  Cuzco  called  Aclla-huasi,
which  signifies  the  house  of  the  chosen  ones,  is  between  the
two  streets  issuing  from  the  great  square  and  leading  to  the
convent  of  Santo  Domingo,  which  used  to  be  the  temple  of
the  Sun.  One  of  these  streets  is  that  which  issues  from  the
corner  of  the  square  on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  cathedral,
running  north  and  south.  When  I left  that  city  in  the
year  1560,  this  street  was  the  principal  mart  for  shopkeepers.
The  other  street  is  that  which  issues  from  the  centre  of  the
square,  near  the  prison,  and  goes  straight  to  the  convent  of
Santo  Domingo,  also  running  north  and  south.  The  front
of  the  house  faced  the  square,  between  these  two  streets,
and  the  back  of  it  extended  to  the  street  which  crosses
them  from  east  to  west,  so  that  it  was  in  an  island,  as  it

t 2


292


I-’OURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


were,  between  these  three  streets  and  the  square.*  Between
it  and  the  temple  of  the  Sun  there  was  another  very  large
block  of  houses,  and  there  were  houses  round  the  great
square  in  front  of  the  temple.  From  all  this  it  may  clearly
be  seen  that  those  historians  give  an  erroneous  account  of
the  city,  when  they  say  that  the  virgins  dwelt  in  the  temple
of  the  Sun,  and  that  they  were  priestesses  who  assisted  the
priests  in  their  sacrifices.  For  there  is  a great  distance
between  one  building  and  the  other,  and  it  was  the  inten-
tion of  the  Kings  Yncas  that  no  man  should  enter  the
house  of  the  virgins,  and  that  no  woman  should  enter  the
temple  of  the  Sun.  It  was  called  the  house  of  the  chosen
ones,  because  they  were  selected  by  reason  either  of  their
lineage,  or  of  their  beauty.  They  were  obliged  to  be  vir-
gins ; and  to  ensure  their  being  so,  they  were  set  apart  at
the  age  of  eight  years  and  under.

And  as  these  virgins  of  the  house  at  Cuzco  were  dedi-
cated to  the  Sun,  they  were  obliged  to  be  of  the  same
blood,  that  is  to  say,  daughters  of  the  Yncas,  either  of  the
King  or  of  his  relations,  being  free  from  all  foreign  blood.
Those  who  were  not  of  pure  blood  could  not  enter  the
house  at  Cuzco  of  which  we  are  now  speaking.  They  gave
as  a reason  for  this  that  as  they  could  only  offer  virgins  for
the  service  of  the  Sun,  so  it  was  likewise  unlawful  to  offer
a bastard  with  mixed  foreign  blood.  For  though  they
imagined  that  the  Sun  had  children,  they  considered  that
they  ought  not  to  be  bastards,  with  mixed  divine  and
human  blood.  So  the  virgins  were  of  necessity  legitimate
and  of  the  blood  royal,  which  was  the  same  as  being  of  the
family  of  the  Sun.  There  were  usually  as  many  as  1500
virgins,  but  no  rule  existed  which  limited  their  number.

Within  the  house  there  were  women  who  had  grown  old

* The  walls  of  the  Aclla-huasi  or  House  of  the  chosen  virgins,  are
still  standing,  exactly  in  the  position  described  in  the  text.  They  form
part  of  the  convent  of  Santa  Catalina.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


293


in  the  service,  and  who  were  called  Mama  cuna,  which,
literally  translated,  would  mean  matrons ; but  the  exact
signification  of  the  word  is  a woman  who  has  to  perform  the
duties  of  a mother.  It  is  composed  of  the  words  Mama  (a
mother)  and  of  the  particle  Cuna,  which  has  numerous
meanings,  according  to  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used,  and
its  position  in  the  sentence.*  This  was  an  appropriate
name  for  the  aged  women,  because  some  held  the  office  of
abbesses,  others  of  mistresses  of  the  novices,  to  instruct
them  in  the  worship  of  their  idolatry,  and  in  their  duties,
such  as  weaving  and  sewing.  Others  were  portresses,  others
had  to  look  after  the  supplies  and  to  ask  for  what  was
needed.  Their  needs  were  most  abundantly  furnished  forth
from  the  estates  of  the  Sun,  whose  servants  they  were.


CHAPTER  II.

THE  RULES  AND  DUTIES  OF  THE  CHOSEN  VIRGINS.

They  lived  in  perpetual  seclusion  to  the  end  of  their
lives,  and  preserved  their  virginity ; and  they  were  not  per-
mitted to  converse,  or  have  intercourse  with,  or  to  see  any
man,  nor  any  woman  who  was  not  one  of  themselves.  For  it
was  said  that  the  women  of  the  sun  should  not  be  made
common  by  being  seen  of  any ; and  this  seclusion  was  so
strict  that  even  the  Ynca  did  not  allow  himself  the
privilege  of  seeing  and  conversing  with  them,  in  order  that
no  other  might  venture  to  seek  a similar  privilege  ; only  the
Ccoya,  who  was  queen,  and  her  daughters,  had  leave  to  enter
the  house  and  converse  with  the  virgins,  both  young  and
old.

The  Ynca  sent  the  queen  and  her  daughters  to  visit  the
secluded  virgins,  and  thus  to  learn  how  they  were,  and  what


* Cuna  is  the  plural  particle  for  nouns.


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


294

they  needed.  I saw  this  house  when  it  was  entire,  for  the
house  of  the  virgin,  the  temple  of  the  sun,  and  four  great
enclosures  which  had  been  palaces  of  their  Yucas,  were  the
only  buildings  which  were  respected  by  the  Indians  in  their
general  insurrection  against  the  Spaniards,  and  which  they
did  not  burn.  They  destroyed  all  the  others,  but  these  they
spared  because  one  had  been  the  house  of  the  sun  their  god,
and  the  other  of  the  virgins  of  their  kings.  Among  other
arrangements  in  the  house  of  the  virgins,  there  was  a narrow
passage,  admitting  of  only  two  people  to  walk  abreast,  which
traversed  the  whole  building.  In  this  passage  there  were
many  recesses  on  either  hand,  which  were  used  as  offices
where  the  women  worked.  At  each  door  there  was  a care-
ful portress,  and  in  the  last  recess,  at  the  end  of  the  passage,
were  the  women  of  the  sun.  The  house  had  its  chief  en-
trance, which  was  opened  to  no  one  but  the  queen,  and  to
receive  those  who  came  to  be  nuns.

At  the  commencement  of  the  passage,  where  was  the  door
used  for  ordinary  occasions,  there  were  twenty  porters  to
carry  things  required  for  the  house  to  the  second  door.  But
they  were  not  allowed  to  pass  the  second  door  on  pain  of
death,  even  if  they  were  called  from  within,  and  no  one
might  call  them.

There  were,  for  the  service  of  the  virgins  and  of  the  house,
five  hundred  girls,  who  were  also  obliged  to  be  virgins,
daughters  of  those  A7ncas  by  courtesy  who  received  that  title
from  the  first  Ynca  as  a reward  for  submitting  to  his  rule.
But  they  were  not  of  the  blood  royal,  and  were  employed  not
as  women  dedicated  to  the  sun,  but  as  servants.  They  were
not  allowed  to  be  daughters  of  strangers,  but  of  the  Yncas
by  privilege.  These  girls  had  their  mama-cunas  of  the  same
caste  as  themselves,  who  taught  them  their  duties.  These
mama-cunas  were  those  who  had  grown  old  in  the  house,
and  who  then  received  the  name  and  the  office,  as  if  it  had
been  said  to  them,  “ Now  you  may  become  a mother  and  a


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


295


mistress  of  the  house.”  In  the  division  which  the  Spaniards
made  amongst  those  who  settled  in  Cuzco,  of  the  royal
buildings,  one  half  of  this  convent  fell  to  the  share  of  Pedro
del  Barco,*  of  whom  we  shall  make  mention  further  on.
This  was  the  part  containing  the  offices.  The  other  half  was
given  to  the  Licentiate  de  la  Gama,f  whom  I knew  in  my
childhood,  and  afterwards  it  belonged  to  Diego  Orton  de
Guzman, $ a native  of  Seville  whom  I knew,  and  who  was
alive  when  I started  for  Spain.

* Pedro  del  Barco,  a native  of  Lobon  in  Estremadura,  was  one  of
Pizarro’s  followers.  He  accompanied  Hernando  de  Soto  from  Caxa-
marco  to  Cuzco,  and  these  two  intrepid  Spaniards  were  thus  the  first
Europeans  to  enter  the  imperial  city  of  the  incas.  They  returned  to
Caxamarca  with  news  of  the  wonderful  riches  they  had  seen  in  the
palaces  and  temples  of  the  capital.  Pedro  del  Barco  afterwards  re-
ceived half  the  convent  of  the  Virgins  of  the  Sun  as  his  share  of  the
spoils  of  Cuzco.  He  sold  it  to  an  apothecary  named  Hernando  de
Segovia,  who  accidentally  discovered  a treasure,  under  the  pavement,
worth  72,000  ducats.  This  Segovia  was  personally  known  to  our  author
in  Cuzco,  and  afterwards  the  Ynca  saw  him  at  Seville,  when  he  came
home  with  a large  fortune.  He  died  of  grief  and  sadness  at  having
left  the  city  of  Cuzco ; a fate  which,  we  are  told  by  the  Ynca,  befell
others  whom  he  had  known  both  in  Cuzco  and  afterwards  in  Spain.

When  Gonzalo  Pizarro  rose  in  rebellion,  many  of  the  citizens  of
Cuzco  were  forced  to  join  him;  but  Pedro  del  Barco,  with  others,  fled
from  his  army  while  it  was  marching  to  Lima,  and  went  to  Arequipa.
Thence  he  and  his  companions  travelled  by  land  to  Lima,  intending  to
join  the  Viceroy;  but  they  were  captured  by  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and
thrown  into  prison.  Soon  afterwards  Gonzalo’s  cruel  old  Lieutenant
Carbajal  took  Pedro  del  Barco  and  two  others  out  of  prison,  and  hanged
them  on  a tree  outside  the  walls  of  Lima.  Carbajal  laughed  and  jeered
at  the  unfortunate  victims,  and  told  Barco  he  would  be  allowed  to
choose  which  branch  he  fancied  most,  because  he  was  a wealthy  man,
and  one  of  the  original  conquerors  of  Peru.  The  half-caste  orphan
children  of  Pedro  del  Barco  were  adopted  and  treated  with  great  kind-
ness by  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  the  Ynca  historian’s  father.  One  of
them,  an  old  schoolfellow  of  our  author,  was  afterwards  banished  to
Chile  by  the  Viceroy  Francisco  de  Toledo.

t This  lawyer  held  a bloody  assize  after  the  battle  of  Chupas,  and
put  many  of  the  younger  Almagro’s  followers  to  death,  at  Guamanga.

X This  cavalier  distinguished  himself  on  the  royal  side  in  the  bloody


FOURTH  1ÍO OK.  OF  THE


£96

The  principal  duty  of  the  virgins  of  the  sun  was  to  weave
and  to  make  all  that  the  Ynca  wore  on  his  person,  and  like-
wise all  the  clothes  of  his  legitimite  wife  the  Ccoya.  They
also  wove  all  the  very  fine  clothes  which  were  offered  as
sacrifices  to  the  sun.  That  which  the  Ynca  wore  as  a band
round  his  head  was  called  llautu.  It  was  the  width  of  the
little  finger  and  very  thick,  so  as  to  be  almost  square,  being
passed  four  or  five  times  round  the  head,  and  the  crimson
fringe  which  hung  from  it  went  from  one  temple  to  the
other.

The  Ynca’s  dress  was  a tunic  descending  to  the  knees,
called  uncu.  The  Spaniards  call  it  cusmo,  but  this  is  a word
belonging  to  some  provincial  dialect,  and  not  to  the  general
language.  They  also  had  a square  mantle  in  place  of  a cloak,
called  yacolla ; the  nuns  also  made  for  the  Ynca  certain
bags  which  were  square;  they  were  worn  under  one  arm,
secured  by  a highly  embroidered  band,  two  fingers  in  width,
passed  from  the  left  shoulder  to  the  right  side.  These  bags
were  called  chuspa,  and  were  solely  used  for  carrying  the
herb  called  cuca,  which  the  Yncas  ate,  and  which  was  not
then  so  common  as  it  is  now;*  for  only  the  Yncas  and  his
relations,  and  some  Curacas,  to  whom  the  Ynca  extended  this
favour,  were  allowed  to  use  it,  and  to  these  a few  baskets
( cestos ) were  sent  every  year.

The  nuns  also  made  small  tassels  of  two  colours,  yellow
and  red,  called  paycha,  fastened  to  a fine  band  about  a cubit
long,  which  were  not  for  the  Ynca  but  for  those  of  the  blood
royal,  who  wore  them  round  their  heads  and  the  tassel  fell
over  the  left  temple.

battle  of  Chupas,  when  the  younger  Almagro  was  defeated  by  Vaca  de
Castro.  He  was  robbed  of  much  silver  by  the  rebel  Giron,  in  a subse-
quent insurrection  at  Cuzco.

* In  these  days  no  Peruvian  Indian  is  without  his  gaily  coloured
chuspa,  containing  his  beloved  coca  leaves.


ROYAI,  COMMENTARIES.


297


CHAPTER  III.

THE  VENERATION  IN  WHICH  THE  THINGS  WERE  HELD
THAT  WERE  MADE  BY  THE  CHOSEN  VIRGINS  J AND
THE  LAW  THAT  WAS  MADE  AGAINST  THOSE
WHO  MIGHT  VIOLATE  THEM.

The  nuns  made  all  these  things  with  their  own  hands,  in
great  quantities  for  the  Sun,  their  husband  ; but,  as  the  Sun
could  not  dress  nor  fetch  the  ornaments,  they  sent  them  to
the  Ynca,  as  his  legitimate  son  and  heir,  that  he  might  wear
them.  The  Ynca  received  them  as  things  sacred,  and  he
and  all  his  people  held  them  in  greater  veneration  than  the
Greeks  and  Romans  would  have  done  if,  during  the  time  of
their  idolatry,  such  things  had  been  made  by  their  goddesses,
Juno,  Venus,  and  Pallas.  For  these  gentiles  of  the  new
world,  being  more  simple  than  those  of  antiquity,  worshipped
with  extreme  veneration  and  heartfelt  adoration  that  which,
in  their  vain  religion,  they  looked  upon  as  sacred  and  divine.
As  those  things  were  made  by  the  hands  of  the  Ccoyas,  or
wives  of  the  Sun,  and  were  made  for  the  Sun,  and  as  these
women  were  by  birth  of  the  same  blood  as  the  Sun,  for  all
these  reasons  their  work  was  held  in  great  veneration.  So
that  the  Ynca  could  not  give  the  things  made  by  the  virgins
to  any  person  whatever  who  was  not  of  the  blood  royal,  be-
cause they  said  that  it  was  unlawful  for  ordinary  mortals  to
use  divine  things.  The  Yncas  were  prohibited  from  giving
them  to  the  Curacas,  or  captains,  how  great  soever  their
services  might  have  been,  unless  they  were  relations.  Fur-
ther on  we  shall  relate  what  other  clothes  the  Ynca  pre-
sented to  the  Curacas,  viceroys,  and  governors,  as  a mark  of
great  favour.

Besides  the  above  duties,  the  nuns  had  to  make  the  bread


298


F0U1ÍTH  BOOK  OF  THE


called  concu  at  the  proper  season,  for  the  sacrifices  that  were
offered  up  to  the  Sun  at  the  great  festivals  called  Haiymi  and
Sitúa.  They  also  made  the  liquor  which  the  Ynca  and  his
family  drank  on  those  occasions,  which  in  their  language  is
called  aca,  the  last  syllable  being  pronounced  in  the  fauces,
for  if  it  is  pronounced  as  the  Spanish  letters  would  sound,  it
means  dung.  All  the  furniture  of  the  convent,  down  to  the
pots,  pans,  and  jars,  were  of  gold  and  silver,  as  in  the  temple
of  the  sun,  because  the  virgins  were  looked  upon  as  his
wives.  They  also  had  a garden  of  trees,  plants,  herbs,  birds,
and  beasts,  made  of  gold  and  silver,  like  that  in  the  temple.

The  things  we  have  mentioned  were  those  which  the  nuns
were  chiefly  occupied  in  making.  All  things  relating  to
them  were  in  conformity  with  the  life  and  conversation  of
women  who  observed  perpetual  seclusion  and  virginity.
There  was  a law  for  the  nun  who  should  transgress  this  rule
of  life,  that  she  should  be  buried  alive  and  that  her  accom-
plice should  be  strangled.  But  as  it  seemed  to  them  but  a
slight  punishment  only  to  kill  a man  for  so  grave  an  offence
as  the  violation  of  a woman  dedicated  to  the  Sun,  his  god,
and  the  father  of  his  kings,  the  law  directed  that  the  wife,
children,  servants,  and  relations  of  the  delinquent  should  be
put  to  death,  as  well  as  all  the  inhabitants  of  his  village  and
all  their  flocks,  without  leaving  a suckling  nor  a crying
baby,  as  the  saying  is.  The  village  was  pulled  down  and
the  site  strewn  with  stones,  that  the  birth-place  of  so  bad  a
son  might  for  ever  remain  desolate  and  accursed,  where  no
man  nor  even  beast  might  rest.

This  was  the  law,  but  it  was  never  put  into  execution,  be-
cause no  man  ever  transgressed  it ; for,  as  we  have  said  in
other  places,  the  Indians  of  Peru  were  very  fearful  of  break-
ing the  laws,  and  kept  them  very  carefully,  especially  those
relating  to  their  religion  and  their  king.  But  if  any  one  had
broken  this  law,  the  sentence  would  have  been  literally
executed  without  any  remission  whatever,  as  if  it  had  been


ROYAI,  COMMENTARIES.


299

only  a matter  of  killing  a small  clog.  For  the  Yncas  never
made  laws  to  frighten  their  vassals,  bat  always  with  the  in-
tention of  enforcing  them  on  those  who  ventured  to  trans-
gress.


CHAPTER  IV.

THERE  WERE  MANY  OTHER  HOUSES  OF  VIRGINS.  THE
STATEMENT  RESPECTING  THE  RIGOROUS  LAW
IS  VERIFIED  BY  ZARATE.

All  that  has  been  said  was  with  reference  to  the  convent
of  the  virgins  of  Cuzco,  dedicated  to  the  Sun.  There  were
many  others  like  it  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  in  pro-
vinces where  the  Ynca,  as  a great  privilege,  ordered  them
to  be  built.  Into  these  were  admitted,  not  only  maidens  of  the
blood  royal,  but  also  those  of  mixed  blood.  As  a great  favour,
the  daughters  of  the  Curacas  were  also  allowed  to  enter;
and  those  of  the  common  people,  who  were  very  beautiful,
were  selected  as  concubines  of  the  Ynca,  but  not  of  the  Sun.
Their  parents  held  it  to  be  their  greatest  happiness  to  have
the  girls  chosen  as  concubines  of  the  king,  as  did  the  girls
themselves.

These  girls  were  guarded  with  the  same  care  and  vigilance
as  those  of  the  Sun.  They  had  servant-maids  like  the  others,
and  were  maintained  out  of  the  estates  of  the  Ynca,  because
they  were  his  women.  They  could  do  the  same  work  as
those  of  the  Sun,  weaving  and  sewing,  making  clothes  in
very  great  quantities  for  the  Ynca,  and  making  all  the  other
things  we  have  mentioned  as  being  the  work  of  the  virgins
of  the  Sun.  The  Ynca  distributed  the  work  of  these  girls
among  the  royal  family,  the  Curacas,  war  captains,  and  all
other  persons  whom  he  desired  to  honour  with  presents.
These  gifts  were  not  prohibited,  because  they  were  made  by


300


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


the  Yncas  and  for  him,  and  not  by  the  virgins  of  the  Sun  for
the  Sun.

These  houses  also  contained  Mama-cunas , who  ruled  over
the  virgins,  in  the  same  manner  as  those  at  Cuzco.  In  fine,
all  things  were  the  same,  except  that  in  Cuzco  all  the
virgins  must  be  of  the  blood  royal,  and  must  preserve  per-
petual virginity;  while  women  of  all  kinds  were  admitted
into  the  other  houses,  so  long  as  they  were  virgins  and  very
beautiful,  because  they  were  for  the  use  of  the  Ynca.  When
he  asked  for  one,  they  selected  the  most  beautiful,  to  be  sent
to  where  he  was,  as  his  concubine.

The  same  severe  law  existed  against  delinquents  who
violated  the  women  of  the  Ynca  as  against  those  who
were  guilty  with  virgins  dedicated  to  the  sun,  as  the
crime  was  considered  to  be  the  same,  but  it  was  never
enforced  because  it  was  never  transgressed.  In  confirmation
of  what  I have  stated  touching  the  rigorous  law  against
offenders  who  violated  the  women  of  the  sun,  or  of  the  Ynca,
the  accountant  Augustin  de  Zarate,  speaking  of  the  causes
of  the  violent  death  of  Atahualpa  (book  ii,  chap.  7)  has  the
following  passage,  which,  being  illustrative  of  my  remarks,
is  extracted  word  for  word  : — “ As  this  evidence  was  from
the  mouth  of  the  same  Filipillo,  he  gave  such  interpretation
as  suited  his  purposes  ; but  his  motives  never  could  be  clearly
understood.  These  were  probably  one  out  of  two  : either
this  Indian  had  an  intrigue  with  one  of  the  women  of
Atahualpa,  and  desired,  by  his  death,  to  enjoy  her  in  se-
curity, the  news  of  which  had  reached  Atahualpa,  who  com-
plained to  the  governor,  saying,  that  he  felt  this  insult  more
than  his  imprisonment  and  all  his  other  misfortunes,  even  if
death  should  be  included  in  them;  that  so  base  born  an  Indian
should  so  injure  him,  knowing  the  law  that  existed  in  that
land  against  such  a crime.  For  he  who  transgressed  in  this
way,  or  even  attempted  to  transgress,  was  burnt  alive  with
his  parents,  sons,  brothers,  and  relations,  even  down  to  his


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


301


flocks,  and  his  native  land  was  depopulated  and  sown  with
salt,  the  trees  cut  down,  the  house  destroyed,  and  other  great
punishments  were  inflicted  in  memory  of  the  crime.”  So  far
is  from  Augustin  de  Zarate,  and  it  shows  that  he  had  re-
ceived a full  account  of  this  law.  I found  the  passage  after
I had  written  what  I knew  about  it,  and  I was  rejoiced  to
meet  with  so  full  an  account  of  the  law  by  a Spanish  gentle-
man, who  thus  supports  me  with  his  authority  ; for  although
the  other  historians  speak  of  this  law,  all  they  say  is  that  the
culprits  were  punished  with  death,  without  adding  that  the
same  penalty  w’as  incurred  by  their  children,  parents,  rela-
tions, and  all  the  inhabitants  of  their  villages,  even  down  to
the  animals,  and  that  the  trees  were  pulled  up,  and  the  sites
strewn  with  stones,  or  with  salt,  which  is  all  the  same.  All
this  wTas  contained  in  the  law,  so  as  to  magnify  the  offence
and  mark  the  greatness  of  the  crime  ; and  so  it  appeared  in
the  eyes  of  the  poor  Ynca  Atahualpa,  who  declared  that  he
felt  that  insult  more  than  his  imprisonment,  and  all  his  other
misfortunes,  even  if  they  included  death  itself.

Those  who  had  once  been  sent  out  as  concubines  of  the
king,  could  not  again  return  to  the  convent,  but  served  in
the  royal  palace  as  servants  of  the  queen,  until  they  obtained
permission  to  return  to  their  homes,  where  they  received
houses  and  lands,  and  were  treated  with  much  veneration,
for  it  was  a very  great  honour  to  the  whole  neighbourhood  to
have  near  them  a woman  of  the  Ynca.  Those  who  did  not
attain  to  the  honour  of  being  concubines  of  the  king,  remained
in  the  convent  until  they  were  very  old,  and  then  had  permis-
sion to  return  home,  or  else  died  in  the  convent.


302


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  V.

THE  SERVICE  AND  ORNAMENTS  OF  THE  VIRGINS,  AND  HOW
THEY  WERE  NEVER  GIVEN  IN  MARRIAGE
TO  ANY  ONE.

Those  who  were  set  apart  for  the  reigning  King  were,
when  he  died,  called  the  mothers  of  his  successor,  and  then
received  the  name  of  mama-cuna  with  more  propriety,  because
they  had  become  mothers.  These  taught  and  had  charge  of
the  concubines  intended  for  the  new  king,  as  if  they  had
been  their  daughters-in-law.  Each  convent  had  its  governor,
who  was  obliged  to  be  an  Ynca,  as  well  as  a steward,  a
caterer,  and  other  necessary  officers  to  superintend  the  ser-
vice of  the  king’s  women,  who,  although  concubines,  were
called  wives.  In  all  the  houses  of  virgins  selected  for  the
king,  the  utensils  wrere  of  gold  and  silver,  as  in  the  houses
of  virgins  of  the  Sun  and  in  the  famous  temple,  and  also
(as  we  shall  presently  relate)  in  the  royal  palace.  In
short,  it  may  be  affirmed  that  all  the  wealth  of  gold  and
silver  and  jewels,  that  was  found  in  that  empire,  was  used
in  no  other  way  than  in  the  adornment  and  service  of  the
numerous  temples  of  the  Sun  and  convents  of  virgius,  and
of  the  royal  palaces.  The  quantity  used  by  the  Curacas
was  small,  being  only  for  drinking  cups,  and  these  were
limited  in  size  and  number,  according  to  the  privilege  that
the  Ynca  may  have  granted  to  each.  Another  small  quan-
tity was  used  on  the  robes  with  which  they  celebrated  the
great  festivals.

The  statement  that  virgins  were  taken  from  the  convents
to  be  given  to  Curacas  and  famous  captains  who  had  de-
served wrell  from  the  Ynca,  as  their  wives,  is  an  error  into
which  the  author  of  it  fell,  through  the  false  account  that  he


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


303


received.  For,  when  once  dedicated  as  a woman  of  the
Ynca,  it  was  unlawful  to  lower  any  maiden  from  that  estate,
or  to  permit  the  possibility  of  any  one  being  able  to  say,
“This  was  once  a woman  of  the  Ynca.”  Such  a practice
would  have  profaned  what  was  sacred,  for,  next  to  the  pro-
perty of  the  Sun,  that  which  belonged  to  the  Yncas  was  held
most  sacred,  especially  the  women.  It  would  not  be  per-
mitted that  such  an  insult  should  be  offered  as  would  be  in-
volved in  lowering  one  of  the  women  of  the  Ynca  to  be  the
wife  of  a private  person ; for,  even  in  matters  of  very  slight
importance,  no  affront  was  allowed  from  any  one,  how  much
more  in  an  affair  of  such  magnitude,  it  being  considered
better  to  be  the  slave  of  the  Ynca  than  the  wife  of  a lord  of
vassals,  who  were  themselves  slaves  of  the  Ynca.  We  say  this,
although  it  was  not  understood  what  it  was  to  be  a slave.  The
women  were  venerated  as  things  sacred,  as  belonging  to  the
Ynca,  while  to  be  the  wife  of  a Curaca  was  not  valued  more
than  any  other  common  woman  in  comparison  with  the  pro-
perty of  the  Ynca.  All  these  practices  were  considered  by  the
Indians  as  important,  and  observed  with  the  greatest  care,
because  they  held  their  kings  not  only  to  be  possessed  of
royal  majesty,  but  to  be  gods.


CHAPTER  VI.

OF  THE  WOMEN  WHO  WERE  FAVOURED  BY  THE  YNCA.

It  is  true  that  the  Yncas  gave  women  to  distinguished  per-
sons in  their  service,  such  as  Curacas  and  captains,  and
the  like.  But  these  were  daughters  of  other  captains,  whom
the  Ynca  took  to  present  as  wives  to  those  who  served  him
well ; and  he  who  received  a girl  from  the  Ynca  did  not
consider  himself  less  favoured  and  gratified  than  he  from


804


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


whom  the  Ynca  asked  his  daughter  ; for  the  Ynca  had  taken
the  girl  to  make  her  his  own  jewel,  and  then  to  give  her
hand  to  one  who  had  served  him  well.  In  the  favours  of
the  Ynca,  the  gift  was  not  so  much  valued,  however  great
it  might  be,  as  the  fact  that  it  had  been  received  at  the
majestic  hands  of  the  Ynca,  which  was  looked  upon  as  a
divine  and  not  a human  favour.

The  Ynca  also  gave,  although  on  rare  occasions,  girls  who
were  of  the  blood  royal,  but  illegitimate,  to  Curacas  who
were  lords  of  great  provinces,  as  well  to  do  them  a favour
as  to  oblige  them  for  having  been  loyal  vassals.  Thus  it
was  that,  having  so  many  women  to  give  away,  it  was  not
necessary  for  the  king  to  part  with  any  who  had  been  dedi-
cated in  the  convents ; for  this  would  have  been  an  insult  to
him,  to  the  women,  and  to  religion.  Such  women  were
looked  upon  as  inviolate  ; for,  if  they  were  legitimate,  they
became  virgins  of  the  Sun  or  of  the  Ynca,  it  being  a custom
to  have  concubines  of  the  blood  royal ; or  else  they  were
women  of  another  Ynca,  and,  in  either  of  these  three  states,
they  were  looked  upon  as  sacred,  and  it  was  not  lawful  that
they  should  become  the  wives  of  an  ordinary  mortal,  how
grand  a lord  soever  he  might  be,  for  this  would  be  to  con-
taminate that  blood  which  was  held  to  be  divine.  But,  as
an  illegitimate  girl  was  already  fallen  from  this  false  divinity,
it  was  not  considered  an  offence  to  give  her  as  a wife  to  a
great  lord.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


305


CHAPTER  VII.

OF  OTHER  WOMEN  WHO  PRESERVED  THEIR  VIRGINITY,

AND  OF  THE  WIDOWS.

Besides  the  virgins  who  professed  perpetual  virginity  in
the  monasteries,  there  were  many  women  of  the  blood  royal
who  led  the  same  life  in  their  own  houses,  having  taken  a
vow  of  chastity,  though  they  were  not  secluded ; for  they
did  not  cease  to  visit  their  nearest  relations  when  they  were
sick,  or  in  childbirth,  or  when  their  first-borns  were  shorn
and  named.  These  women  were  held  in  great  veneration
for  their  chastity  and  purity,  and,  as  a mark  of  worship  and
respect,  they  were  called  Ocllo,  which  was  a name  held
sacred  in  their  idolatry.  The  chastity  of  these  women  was
not  feigned,  but  was  truly  observed,  on  pain  of  being  burnt
alive  if  it  was  lost,  or  of  being  cast  into  the  lake  of  lions.  I
myself  was  acquainted  with  one  of  these  women,  when  she
was  in  extreme  old  age,  and  who,  having  never  married,
was  called  Ocllo.  She  sometimes  visited  my  mother,  and  I
was  given  to  understand  that  she  was  her  great  aunt,  being
a sister  of  her  grandfather.  She  was  held  in  great  venera-
tion and  was  given  the  first  place,  and  I am  witness  that  my
mother  so  treated  her,  as  well  because  she  was  her  aunt,  as
on  account  of  her  age  and  purity  of  life.

The  chastity  of  the  widows  must  not  be  forgotten,  which
they  preserved,  with  great  strictness,  during  the  first  year  of
their  bereavement,  and  very  few  of  those  who  had  no  chil-  y
dren  ever  married  again,  and  even  those  who  had  continued
to  live  single ; for  this  virtue  was  much  commended  in  their
laws  and  ordinances.  It  was  there  directed  that  the  lands
of  the  widows  should  be  tilled  first,  before  those  of  either
the  Curacas  or  the  Yncas,  and  other  privileges  were  con-

u


806


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THK


ceded  to  them.  It  is  also  true  that  the  Indians  did  not
approve  of  marriage  with  a widow,  especially  if  the  man  was
not  a widower  ; for  it  was  said  that  such  an  one  lost,  I know
not  what,  of  his  quality  in  marrying  a widow.  The  above
remarks  are  the  most  note-worthy  that  can  be  made  respect-
ing the  virgins  and  widows.


CHAPTER  VIII.

HOW  THEY  USUALLY  MARRIED,  AND  HOW  THEY
ARRANGED  THE  WEDDINGS.

It  will  be  well  to  treat  of  the  mode  of  marrying  through-
out all  the  kingdoms  and  provinces  subject  to  the  Yncas.
It  must  be  understood,  then,  that  every  year,  or  every  two
years,  at  a certain  time,  the  king  ordered  all  the  young  men
and  women  of  marriageable  ages,  who  were  of  his  family,  to
assemble  in  the  city  of  Cuzco.  The  girls  were  from  eighteen
to  twenty  years  of  age,  and  the  young  men  twenty-four  and
upwards ; and  they  were  not  permitted  to  marry  earlier,  be-
cause it  was  said  that  they  ought  to  be  of  an  age  to  govern
their  houses  and  estates,  and  that  if  they  married  earlier  their
conduct  would  be  childish.

The  Ynca  placed  himself  in  the  midst  of  the  contracting
parties,  who  were  arranged  near  each  other,  and,  looking
upon  them,  called  the  man  and  the  woman  to  him,  and
taking  a hand  of  each,  he  united  them  in  the  bond  of  matri-
mony, and  then  delivered  them  to  their  parents.  They  were
taken  to  the  house  of  the  bridegroom’s  father,  and  the
wedding  was  solemnised  by  the  nearest  relations  during
two  or  four  or  six  days,  or  longer  if  they  desired  it.  These
were  the  legitimate  women,  and  to  do  them  more  honour
and  favour,  they  were  called  in  their  language,  “the  wo-
men given  in  marriage  by  the  hand  of  the  Ynca.”  After


ROY  A L COMMENTARIES.


307


the  king  had  married  the  girls  of  his  own  lineage,  he,  on
the  following  day,  deputed  his  ministers  to  marry,  with  the
same  ceremonies,  the  other  sons  and  daughters  of  citizens,
preserving  the  distinction  between  the  inhabitants  of  upper
and  lower  Cuzco,  concerning  which  divisions  we  gave  a full
account  in  the  beginning  of  this  history.

The  houses  for  the  residence  of  such  bridegreoms  as  were
Yn  cas,  of  whom  we  are  now  speaking,  were  prepared  by
the  Indians  of  those  provinces  whose  duty  it  was,  according
to  the  division  of  labour  which  was  established.  The  things
for  the  use  of  the  household  were  provided  by  their  relations,
each  one  supplying  something,  and  there  were  no  other
ceremonies  nor  sacrifices.  And  if  the  Spanish  historians
assert  that  they  practised  other  things  in  their  marriages,  it
is  because  they  do  not  understand  how  to  distinguish  be-
tween the  usages  of  the  different  provinces.  Hence  it  is
that  they  have  attributed  to  the  Yncas  the  barbarous  cus-
toms which  prevailed  in  various  provinces  before  they  were
subjugated,  and  which  not  only  were  not  practised  by  the
Yncas,  but  were  prohibited  by  them  on  pain  of  severe  pun-
ishment.

The  Yncas  had  no  other  marriage  ceremony  than  that
which  we  have  described ; and  at  the  same  time  the  order
was  sent  throughout  the  empire  that  each  governor  in  his
district,  jointly  with  the  Curaca  of  the  province,  should
marry  the  young  men  and  women  who  were  of  proper  age ;
and  the  Curacas  were  directed  to  assist  at  the  weddings  as
lords  and  fathers  of  the  people  ; for  the  Ynca  never  deprived
the  Curacas  of  any  part  of  their  authority,  and  the  Ynca
Governor  assisted  at  the  weddings  which  the  Curaca  so-
lemnised, not  as  in  any  way  usurping  his  jurisdiction,  but
in  order  to  approve,  in  the  name  of  the  king,  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  Curaca  with  his  vassals.

In  the  marriages  of  the  common  people,  the  authorities  of
each  village  had  to  see  that  a house  was  built  for  each  raar-

u 2


308


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


ried  couple,  and  the  relations  provided  the  furniture.  It
was  not  lawful  for  the  natives  of  one  province  to  marry  with
those  of  another,  nor  those  of  one  village  with  those  of
another,  but  all  were  to  intermarry  in  their  own  villages  and
with  members  of  their  own  families  (as  amongst  the  tribes
of  Israel),  in  order  that  the  lineages  and  tribes  might  not
be  confounded  and  mixed,  one  with  another.  The  sisters
were  reserved,  and  all  those  of  one  village  were  looked  upon
as  relations  (like  sheep  of  one  fold),  and  the  people  of  one
province  were  considered  as  of  one  nation  and  language.
Nor  was  it  lawful  for  anyone  to  remove  from  one  province,
or  village,  to  another,  because  it  was  not  allowed  that  the
decuria  should  be  confused,  which  were  made  up  of  all  the
inhabitants  of  each  village ; and  also  that  the  households
might  be  recorded  once  for  all,  within  the  village  or  district
to  which  those  of  their  relations  belonged.


CHAPTER  IX.

THE  PRINCE,  WHO  WAS  THE  HEIR,  WAS  MARRIED  TO  HIS
OWN  SISTER,  AND  OF  THE  REASONS  WHICH
THEY  GAVE  FOR  THIS  CUSTOM.

Now  that  we  have  related  the  manner  of  marrying  amongst
the  Indians  generally,  it  will  be  well  that  we  should  describe
the  customs  relating  to  the  marriage  of  the  prince  who  was
heir  to  the  kingdom.  It  must  be  known  that  the  Kings
Yucas,  from  the  first,  established  it  as  a very  stringent  law
and  custom  that  the  heir  to  the  kingdom  should  marry  his
eldest  sister,  legitimate  both  on  the  side  of  the  father  and
the  mother,  and  she  was  his  legitimate  wife,  and  was  called
Ccoya,  which  is  the  same  as  queen  or  empress.  The  first-
born of  this  brother  and  sister  was  the  legitimate  heir  to  the
kingdom.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


309


They  kept  this  law  and  custom  from  the  time  of  the  first
Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  and  his  wife  Mama  Ocllo  Huaco,  who
came  saying  that  they  were  brother  and  sister,  children  of
the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  so  all  the  Indians  believed.  They
also  had  another  ancient  precedent  to  justify  this  first  one,
which  was  that,  as  has  already  been  said,  they  believed,  in
the  time  of  their  heathenry,  that  the  Moon  was  wife  and
sister  of  the  Sun,  from  whom  the  Ynca  was  descended.
Hence  it  was  that,  in  order  to  imitate  the  Sun  in  all  things,
the  first  Yncas  and  their  descendants  established  the  law  that
the  first  born  of  the  Ynca,  following  both  these  precedents,
married  his  sister  both  on  the  father’s  and  mother’s  side.  In
case  of  failure  of  such  sister,  they  married  the  most  nearly
related  cousin,  or  niece,  or  aunt  in  the  royal  family,  and,  on
failure  of  male  heirs,  she  might  have  inherited  the  kingdom,
as  in  the  laws  of  Spain.

If  the  prince  had  no  children  by  his  eldest  sister,  he  mar-
ried the  second,  and  the  third,  until  he  had  children,  and
the  strictness  of  this  law  and  custom  is  founded  on  the  pre-
cedents already  mentioned.  They  say  that  as  the  Sun  was
married  to  his  sister,  and  had  caused  the  same  marriage  to  be
celebrated  between  his  children,  it  was  right  that  the  same
custom  should  be  preserved  by  the  heirs  of  the  kings.  They
also  did  it  to  ensure  purity  of  the  blood  of  the  Sun;  for  they
said  that  it  was  unlawful  to  mix  human  blood,  calling  all
that  was  not  of  the  Yncas,  human.  They  also  declared  that
the  princes  married  their  sisters,  in  order  that  they  might
inherit  the  kingdom  as  much  through  the  mother  as  the
father : for  otherwise  they  affirmed  that  the  prince  might  be
bastardised  through  his  mother.  Such  was  the  strict  rule
which  they  established  respecting  the  right  succession  of  the
inheritance  to  the  kingdom.

To  these  reasons  they  added  others,  and  said  that  it  could
not  be  permitted  that  the  majesty  of  being  queen  should  be
given  to  any  woman  who  had  not  a legitimate  right  to  it  in


310


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


her  own  person,  and  not  through  union  with  the  king ; nor
was  it  just  that,  not  being  capable  of  reigning  in  her  own
person,  she  should  be  revered  and  served  by  others  who,
under  ordinary  circumstances,  would  be  her  betters.

Besides  the  legitimate  wife,  these  kings  had  many  concu-
bines, some  of  them  being  relations  of  and  within  the  fourth
degree,  and  others,  no  relations.  The  children  of  those
who  were  relations  were  looked  upon  as  legitimate,  because
they  had  no  mixture  of  foreign  blood,  for  the  Yncas  held
this  purity  in  high  veneration,  not  only  among  the  kings,
but  amongst  all  those  of  the  royal  blood.  The  children  of
strange  girls  were  considered  bastards,  and  although  they
were  respected  as  being  children  of  the  king,  they  were  not
looked  upon  with  that  deep  veneration  which  was  received
by  those  of  pure  blood ; for  the  latter  were  adored  as  gods,
while  the  former  were  only  looked  upon  as  men.  Thus,  the
Kings  Yncas  had  three  kinds  of  children,  those  of  their
wives,  who  were  legitimate  heirs  of  the  kingdom ; those  of
relations  who  were  legitimate  by  blood  ; and  the  illegitimate
offspring  of  strange  women.


CHAPTER  X.

DIFFERENT  CUSTOMS  RELATING  TO  THE  INHERITANCE
OF  ESTATES.

In  the  event  of  failure  of  sons  by  the  legitimate  wife,  it
was  lawful  for  the  eldest  relation  of  pure  blood  to  inherit
(as  Manco  Ynca  succeeded  Huascar,  as  will  be  recorded  in
its  place),  and  so  on  with  the  rest,  but  under  no  circum-
stances could  a bastard  be  allowed  to  inherit,  and  when  there
was  no  legitimate  son  of  pure  blood,  the  succession  went  to
the  nearest  legitimate  male  relation.

It  was  on  account  of  this  law  that  Atahualpe  destroyed  the


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


311


whole  royal  family,  both  men  and  women,  as  we  shall  relate
in  its  place,  because  he  was  a bastard,  and  feared  that  the
kingdom  might  be  taken  from  him,  and  given  to  one  who
was  legitimate.  All  those  of  the  blood  royal  married  with
their  relations  to  the  fourth  degree,  for  they  had  many  legiti-
mate children.  But  they  reserved  the  daughter,  whose  mar-
riage to  a brother  was  only  permitted  in  the  case  of  the
king.  The  eldest  son  always  inherited  the  kingdom,  and
this  mode  of  succession  never  failed  in  the  twelve  genera-
tions that  reigned  down  to  the  time  of  the  Spaniards.
Amongst  the  Curacas,  who  were  lords  of  vassals,  there  were
various  customs  respecting  the  inheritance  of  estates.  In
some  provinces  the  eldest  son  inherited,  the  succession  going
regularly  from  father  to  son.  In  others,  the  son  inherited
who  was  most  popular  with  the  vassals,  on  account  of  his
virtue  or  affability,  which  was  more  like  an  election  than  an
inheritance.  This  law  was  framed  that  none  of  the  sons  of
a Curaca  might  be  a tyrant  or  a profligate,  but  that  all  might
strive  to  deserve  the  inheritance  of  the  estate  and  lordships,
as  a reward  of  his  goodness  and  valour,  which  might  oblige
the  vassals  to  seek  him  for  their  lord  by  reason  of  his
valour.

In  other  provinces  the  sons  inherited  according  to  their
respective  ages.  When  the  father  died,  the  eldest  son  suc-
ceeded, then  the  second,  and  so  on  ; and  when  all  the  sons
died,  the  succession  went  to  the  sons  of  the  eldest,  and  after-
wards to  those  of  the  others.  Having  heard  of  this  mode  of
inheritance  among  some  of  the  Curacas,  a Spanish  historian
was  deceived  into  saying  that  it  was  the  usual  custom
throughout  Peru,  not  only  among  the  Curacas,  but  also  with
the  kings ; but,  in  truth,  this  custom  was  unknown  amongst
the  Kings  Yncas,  but  only  amongst  some  Curacas,  as  we  have
said.

The  three  different  customs,  or  laws,  in  use  among  the
lords  of  vassals  in  the  different  provinces,  respecting  the  in-


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


312

heritance  of  their  estates,  were  not  made  by  the  Yncas;  for
their  laws  and  ordinances  were  common  throughout  the
whole  kingdom.  The  Curacas  observed  those  laws  before
the  time  of  the  Yncas  : and  although  they  were  afterwards
conquered,  they  were  neither  deprived  of  their  estates,  nor
obliged  to  abandon  the  customs  which  they  observed  from
ancient  times,  so  long  as  they  were  not  opposed  to  those  of
the  Yncas.  On  the  contrary,  the  Yncas  confirmed  many  of
them  which  appeared  to  be  good,  especially  that  by  which
the  most  virtuous  and  best  beloved  son  inherited  the  estate ;
for  this  law  appeared  very  desirable,  and  they  therefore
ordered  it  to  be  observed  in  the  places  where  it  had  been
established.  One  of  the  kings,  indeed,  wished  to  avail  liim-
seif  of  this  law  of  the  Curacas,  in  opposing  the  harshness
and  evil  condition  of  the  prince  his  heir,  as  we  shall  see  in
its  place.  In  a village,  which  is  forty  leagues  to  the  east-
ward of  Cuzco,  called  Surcuuca,  where  I have  been,  the  fol-
lowing circumstance  occurred,  with  reference  to  the  dif-
ferent modes  of  inheritance  in  that  land.  The  Curaca  of  the
village  was  named  Don  Garcia.  When  he  was  about  to  die,
he  called  his  four  sons,  and  the  chief  men  of  the  village,  and
said  to  them,  by  way  of  a last  will,  that  they  should  keep
the  law  of  Jesus  Christ  which  they  had  lately  received,  and
always  give  thanks  to  God  for  having  sent  it  them,  and
honour  the  Spaniards  for  having  brought  it.  He  especially
enjoined  them  to  serve  their  master,  because  it  had  fallen  to
his  lot  to  be  lord  over  them.  Finally,  he  said:  “It  is  well
known  to  you,  that,  according  to  the  law  of  our  land,  the
most  virtuous  and  popular  of  my  sons  should  inherit,  and  I
charge  you  to  select  the  one  who  has  those  qualities ; and  if
none  possess  them,  I ordain  that  they  be  disinherited,  and
that  you  elect  one  of  yourselves,  so  as  to  ensure  your  own
honour,  welfare,  and  profit ; for  I desire  the  common  good
of  you  all  more  than  that  of  my  sons.”  All  this  was  related
by  the  priest  who  had  charge  of  the  village  as  the  notable
act  and  testament  of  one  of  his  flock.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


olo


CHAPTER  XI.

THE  WEANING,  SHEARING,  AND  NAMING  OF  CHILDREN.

The  Yncas  were  accustomed  to  have  a sweat  feast  at  the

O

weaning  of  their  first-borns,  but  not  at  that  of  their  daugh-
ters or  younger  sons,  at  least  the  ceremonies  on  those  occa-
sions were  not  so  solemn  as  when  the  eldest  was  weaned ;
for  the  dignity  of  primogeniture  was  much  considered  among
the  Yncas,  and  all  the  vassals  imitated  their  example.

They  weaned  their  children  at  the  age  of  two  years  and
upwards,  and  at  the  same  time  they  shaved  off  their  first
crop  of  hair,  and  gave  them  the  name  which  they  were
henceforth  to  bear.  On  this  occasion  all  the  relations
assembled,  and  selected  one  from  amongst  them  to  be  god-
father to  the  child,  who  gave  the  first  clip  to  his  god-child’s
hair.  For  scissors  they  used  blades  of  stone,  for  the  Indians
had  not  invented  scissors.  After  the  godfather  came  the
other  relations,  according  to  their  age  or  rank,  to  give  their
clip  to  the  weaned  child’s  hair;  and  when  he  was  shorn,
they  gave  him  a name,  and  presented  the  gifts  they  had
brought,  some  offering  wearing  apparel,  others  sheep,  others
arms,  others  drinking  cups  of  gold  or  silver  if  the  child  was
of  the  royal  family,  but  none  of  the  common  people  could
use  those  metals,  except  by  special  privilege.

As  soon  as  the  presentation  of  gifts  was  over,  the  cere-
mony of  drinking  began,  for  without  it  no  entertainment
was  considered  good.  They  sang  and  danced  until  night,
and  this  festivity  continued  for  three  or  four  days,  or  more,
according  to  the  will  of  the  child’s  relations.  Nearly  the
same  was  done  when  they  weaned  the  heir  to  the  throne,
except  that  regal  solemnity  was  observed,  and  that  the  god-
father was  the  High  Priest  of  the  Sun.  The  Curacas  of  the


314


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


whole  kingdom  attended  either  personally  or  through  their
ambassadors,  the  festival  continued  for  more  than  twenty
days,  and  rich  gifts  of  gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones  were
presented,  as  well  as  all  that  was  most  valuable  in  the  dif-
ferent provinces.

In  imitation  of  this  feast,  for  all  desired  to  take  a pattern
from  their  head,  the  Curacas  did  the  same,  and  in  like
manner  did  all  the  people  of  Peru  according  to  their  means,
for  this  was  one  of  the  chief  festivals.  For  the  satisfaction
of  those  who  are  curious  in  the  matter  of  language,  we  may
mention  that  the  general  language  of  Peru  has  two  names
for  a son.  The  father  says  Churi  and  the  mother  Huahua.
(This  word  might  be  written  without  the  h.  h,  with  only  the
four  vowels,  each  one  being  pronounced  by  itself  in  two
diphthongs,  but  T have  added  the  h,  h,  that  two  syllables
may  not  be  formed.)  Both  the  words  mean  a child,  in-
cluding those  of  both  sexes  and  numbers ; and  the  rule  is
so  strict  that  the  parents  cannot  misuse  the  words  without
making  a male  female  and  a female  male.  To  distinguish
the  sexes  they  add  the  words  which  signify  male  or  female;
and  to  say  a child  in  the  plural  or  singular,  the  father  says
Churi , and  the  mother  Uaiia.  There  are  four  different
words  to  express  brothers  and  sisters.  The  male  to  the
male  says  Huauque  for  brother.  The  female  to  the  female
says  Nana  or  sister.  But  if  a brother  should  say  Nana  to
his  sister,  although  it  signifies  sister,  he  would  be  making  a
woman  of  himself.  In  like  manner,  if  a sister  should  say
Huauque  to  her  brother,  though  it  means  brother,  it  would
be  to  make  herself  a man.  The  brother  says  to  his  sister
Pana,  which  also  means  sister,  and  the  sister  to  her  brother
says  Tora  or  brother.  But  a brother  cannot  say  to  his  brother
Tora,  though  the  word  signifies  brother,  for  it  would  be  to
make  a woman  of  him;  nor  can  one  sister  call  another  Pana ,
though  it  means  sister,  for  it  would  make  a man  of  her.
Thus  there  are  words  of  the  same  meaning  appropriated


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


OlO


some  to  the  use  of  men,  and  others  to  that  of  women,  with-
out their  being  able  to  exchange  them  on  pain  of  confusing
the  sexes..  All  which  things  ought  to  be  attended  to  in
teaching  our  holy  religion  to  the  Indians,  so  that  they  may
not  have  occasion  to  laugh  at  our  barbarisms.  The  Fathers
of  the  Company  are  diligent  in  all  things,  and  other  religious
men  work  hard  at  this  language,  in  order  to  teach  the  hea-
thens, as  we  said  at  the  beginning.


CHAPTER  XII.

THEIR  CHILDREN  WERE  BROUGHT  UP  WITHOUT  ANY

CARE.

Their  children  were  strangely  brought  up,  both  those  of
the  Yncas  and  those  of  the  people,  whether  rich  or  poor,
without  any  distinction,  and  with  as  little  care  as  could  be
bestowed  upon  them.  As  soon  as  a child  was  born,  they
bathed  the  little  creature  with  cold  water  before  wrapping
it  in  a blanket ; and  each  morning,  before  it  was  wrapped
up,  they  washed  it  with  cold  water,  generally  in  the  open
air.  And  when  the  mother  would  show  unusual  tender-
ness, she  took  the  water  in  her  mouth  and  washed  the
whole  of  the  child’s  body  with  it,  except  the  head,  and  par-
ticularly the  crown  of  the  head,  which  they  never  touched.
They  said  that  they  did  this  to  accustom  the  children  to  the
cold  and  to  hard  work,  and  also  to  strengthen  their  limbs.
They  did  not  loosen  the  children’s  arms  from  the  swaddling
bands  for  more  than  three  months,  saying  that  if  they  were
loosened  before  that  time,  the  arms  would  become  weak.
They  were  always  kept  tied  up  in  their  cradles,  which  were
benches  badly  made,  four  feet  long,  and  one  foot  was
shorter  than  the  others,  that  the  child  might  be  able  to
* * * *.  The  seat  or  litter,  on  which  they  put  the


316


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


child,  was  made  of  a thick  net,  as  strong  as  a board,  and
the  same  net  went  round  each  side  of  the  cradle,  that  the
child  might  not  fall  out.

Neither  in  giving  them  milk,  nor  at  any  other  time,  did
they  ever  take  them  in  their  arms,  for  they  said  that  this
would  make  them  cry,  and  want  always  to  be  in  their
mothers’  arms  and  never  in  their  cradles.  The  mother
leant  over  her  child  and  gave  it  the  breast,  and  this  was
done  three  times  a day,  in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the
evening.  They  did  not  give  the  child  milk  at  any  other
time,  even  if  it  cried,  for  they  said  that  if  they  did  it  would
want  to  be  sucking  all  day  long,  and  become  dirty  with
vomitings,  and  that  when  it  was  a man  it  would  grow  up  a
great  eater  and  a glutton.  The  animals,  they  said,  did  not
give  milk  to  their  young  all  day  long,  but  only  at  certain
hours.  The  mother  herself  brought  up  her  child,  and  she
was  not  allowed  to  give  it  out  to  nurse,  how  great  lady  so-
ever she  might  be,  unless  she  was  suffering  from  illness ;
and  while  she  was  suckling  the  child  she  abstained  from
* * *,  because  they  said  it  was  bad  for  the  milk,  and  made

the  child  pine  away.  They  called  those  who  had  thus
pined  away  ayuscn,  which  is  the  past  participle,  and  means
literally  the  incapable,  or  more  properly  the  changeling.
In  the  same  way  one  lad  said  it  to  another,  mocking  him
that  his  mistress  had  more  favour  for  another  than  for  him.
But  no  one  was  allowed  to  say  it  to  a married  person,  for  it
was  a word  ele  las  cinco , and  he  who  said  it  incurred  great
punishment.  I knew  a Palla  of  the  blood  royal  who  gave
her  child  out  to  nurse  from  necessity ; and  the  nurse  was
treacherous  and  gave  it  no  nourishment,  so  that  it  pined
away  and  had  . nothing  left  on  it  but  skin  and  bones.  The
mother  seeing  that  her  child  had  become  an  ayusca  (at  the
end  of  eight  months  after  the  milk  had  become  dry),  applied
plasters  of  herbs  to  her  back,  which  brought  the  milk  back,
and  she  began  to  nurse  her  child  again,  and  so  restored  it


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


317


to  health.  She  would  not  give  it  to  another  nurse,  because
she  said  that  the  mother’s  milk  was  what  nourished  it  best.

If  the  mother  had  sufficient  milk  to  nourish  the  child,  she
never  gave  it  any  other  food  until  it  was  weaned,  because
they  said  it  injured  milk ; and  they  kept  the  children  dirty
and  untidy.  When  it  was  time  to  take  the  children  out  of
the  cradle,  in  order  not  to  have  to  carry  them,  they  made
holes  in  the  ground,  and  put  the  children  into  them  up  to
their  breasts,  wrapping  them  in  dirty  napkins,  and  putting
a few  trifles  before  them  to  play  with.  There  they  put  the
child  to  jump  and  kick,  but  they  never  carried  it  in  their
arms,  even  if  it  was  a son  of  the  greatest  Curaca  in  the
kingdom.

When  the  child  could  crawl  on  all  fours,  it  went  to  one
side  or  the  other  of  its  mother  to  take  the  breast,  and  sucked
with  its  knees  on  the  ground,  but  it  was  not  allowed  to  get
on  her  lap.  And  when  it  wanted  the  other  breast,  it  had  to
go  round,  that  the  mother  might  not  be  obliged  to  take  it  in
her  arms.  The  mother  cared  less  about  child-bearing  than
about  nursing,  for  in  giving  birth  she  went  to  a stream,  or
washed  with  cold  water  in  the  house,  and  washed  the
house ; beginning  immediately  afterwards  to  concern  her-
self about  her  household  affairs,  as  if  nothing  had  happened.
They  gave  birth  without  the  aid  of  a midwife,  and  if  such  a
person  was  ever  used,  she  was  more  a sorceress  than  a mid-
wife. This  was  the  usual  custom  of  the  Indian  women  in
Peru,  in  bearing  and  nursing  their  children,  without  dis-
tinction between  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low.


318


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XIII.

THE  Til  FE  AND  EMPLOYMENT  OF  THE  MARRIED  WOMEN.

The  life  of  the  married  women  was  usually  a continual
round  of  household  duties.  They  spun  and  wove  cloths  of
wool  in  the  cold  country,  and  of  cotton  in  the  warmer  re-
gions. Each  one  worked  for  herself,  and  for  her  husband
and  family.  They  did  not  sew  much,  because  the  clothes
worn  both  by  men  and  women  had  few  seams.  All  they
wove  was  first  twisted,  both  wool  and  cotton.  All  the
cloths,  as  many  as  they  wanted  to  make,  were  taken  from
four  selvages  ; and  they  did  not  have  the  warp  longer  than
was  required  for  each  mantle  or  shirt.  The  vestments  were
not  cut  out,  but  were  entire,  just  as  the  cloth  came  from  the
frame ; for  before  they  began  to  weave,  they  settled  the  re-
quired length  and  breadth,  more  or  less.

There  were  neither  tailors,  shoemakers,  nor  hosiers,  among
these  Indians ; for  they  had  no  need  of  the  things  used  by
us,  and  did  without  them.  The  women  looked  after  the
clothing  belonging  to  the  house,  and  the  men  took  care  of
the  shoes ; for,  as  we  explained,  in  the  account  of  arming  a
knight,  they  had  to  know  how  to  make  sandals,  and  even  the
Yncas  of  the  blood  royal  and  the  Curacas  had  servants  who
made  sandals.  Nor  did  they  themselves  disdain,  now  and
then,  to  practise  making  them,  as  well  as  all  kinds  of  arms
required  in  their  employment  as  knights ; for  they  took
much  delight  in  observing  their  statutes.  In  the  work  of  the
field  both  men  and  women  were  engaged  in  helping  one
another.

In  some  provinces,  at  a great  distance  from  Cuzco,  which
had  not  yet  been  well  cared  for  by  the  Kings  Yncas,  the
women  went  to  work  in  the  fields,  and  the  men  stayed  at  home


ROYA  I,  COMMENTARIES.


319


to  spin  and  weave.  But  I speak  of  the  nations  that  imitated
the  court,  which  included  nearly  the  whole  empire,  and  the
others,  being  barbarous,  merit  only  to  be  forgotten.  The  In-
dian women  were  so  fond  of  work,  and  such  enemies  to  wasting
even  the  shortest  space  of  time,  that  even  in  going  from  the
villages  to  the  city,  or  in  passing  from  one  house  to  another
on  necessary  business,  they  took  with  them  the  means  both
of  spinning  and  twisting.  On  the  road  they  went  along
twisting  what  they  had  already  spun,  as  being  more  easy ;
and  on  their  visits,  they  took  with  them  the  distaff,  and  spun
while  they  conversed.  Those  who  went  along  the  roads
twisting  or  spinning  belonged  to  the  lower  classes.  The
Pallas  of  the  blood  royal,  when  they  paid  visits,  caused
their  servants  to  carry  their  distaffs  ; but  both  visitors  and
those  who  were  visited,  were  thus  occupied  while  they
talked,  so  as  not  to  be  idle.  They  made  the  spindles  of  cane.
The  spindle  had  a knob  at  the  end,  and  was  not  hollow.
They  made  a knot  of  the  thread  they  were  spinning,  and
loosened  the  spindle,  making  the  thread  as  long  as  possible  ;
they  then  recovered  it  in  the  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  to  turn
it  on  the  spindle.  They  carried  the  distaff  in  the  left  hand,
and  not  at  the  girdle,  holding  it  with  the  two  smaller  fingers,
and  taking  hold  with  both  hands  to  thin  off  the  thread,  and
get  rid  of  anything  sticking  to  it.  They  did  not  bring  it  to
the  mouth,  because,  in  my  time,  they  did  not  spin  linen,  as
they  had  none,  but  only  cotton  and  cloth.  They  spin  slowly
because  of  the  complicated  nature  of  the  method  I have
described.*

* Rivero  says  that  all  the  textures  of  wool  woven  by  the  ancient
Peruvians,  which  he  had  examined,  were  as  strong  as  they  were  beauti-
ful in  colour  and  design.  The  Peruvians  had  good  permanent  vegetable
dyes  of  flesh  colour,  yellow,  gray,  blue,  green,  black,  and  red.


320


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XIV.

HOW  THE  WOMEN  VISITED  EACH  OTHER,  HOW  THEY
MENDED  THEIR  CLOTHES,  AND  HOW  THERE
WERE  PUBLIC  WOMEN.

If  any  woman  who  was  not  a Palla,  even  though  she  might
be  the  wife  of  a Curaca,  or  lord  of  vassals,  went  to  pay  a
visit  to  a Palla  of  the  blood  royal,  she  did  not  bring  any
work  of  her  own  with  her.  But,  after  the  first  words  of  the
visit,  or  rather  adoration,  for  such  it  was,  she  begged  to  be
given  some  work,  saying  that  she  had  not  come  on  a visit,
but  to  serve  as  an  inferior  to  a superior.  The  Palla,  as  a
great  favour,  complied  with  this  request,  and  gave  some  of
the  work  that  either  she  or  one  of  her  daughters  was  doing ;
for  she  did  not  degrade  her  to  the  level  of  the  servant  girls,
by  giving  her  some  of  their  work.  This  favour  was  all  that
the  visitor  could  wish  for,  seeing  that  the  Palla  thus  made
her  in  some  sort  on  an  equality  with  herself  and  her  daugh-
ters. A like  interchange  of  condescension  and  humility  was
shown  in  all  intercourse  between  the  men  and  women  of
that  commonwealth,  the  inferiors  studying  how  to  serve  and
please  the  superiors,  and  the  superiors  how  to  show  kindness
to  their  inferiors,  from  the  Ynca,  who  is  king,  to  the  poorest
Llamanchec,  who  is  shepherd.

The  good  custom  amongst  the  Indian  women  of  visiting
each  other,  and  bringing  their  work  with  them,  was  imi-
tated by  the  Spanish  ladies  in  Cuzco  until  the  time  of  the
rebellion  of  Francisco  Hernandez  Giron,  which  put  an  end
to  this  virtuous  habit,  as  such  treasons  usually  do  destroy
good  manners,  with  their  cruel  and  tyrannical  sway.  I had
nearly  forgotten  to  say  how  the  common  people  mended
their  clothes,  which  is  remarkable.  If  the  cloth  belonging


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


321


to  their  dress,  or  to  the  furniture  of  their  house,  was  torn,
not  through  being  worn  out,  but  by  an  accident,  either  from
a briar,  or  a spark  from  the  fire,  they  took  it,  and  with  a
needle  made  from  a thorn  (for  they  knew  not  how  to  make
them  of  metal)  and  a thread  of  cotton  of  the  same  colour  and
size  as  the  cloth,  they  began  to  weave.  First  they  passed
the  thread  of  the  warp  along  the  places  of  the  torn  threads,
and  then  that  of  the  web,  taking  these  fifteen  or  twenty
times  beyond  the  torn  part  on  either  side,  where  they  cut  it.
They  then  went  over  the  place  again,  crossing  the  thread,
and  always  weaving  the  web  with  the  warp,  and  the  warp
with  the  web.  In  this  way  the  mended  part  looked  as  if  it
had  never  been  torn.  Even  if  the  rent  was  as  large  as  the
palm  of  the  hand,  or  larger,  they  mended  it  in  the  same
way,  the  mouth  of  a pot  or  a calabash  serving  for  a frame;
so  that  the  cloth  might  be  tight  and  equal.  It  is  true  that
the  Spanish  weaving  is  different  from  that  of  the  Indians,
but  Spanish  cloth  would  not  suffer  from  this  method  of
mending.  It  is  also  worthy  of  note  that  the  hearths,  in
their  houses,  where  they  cooked  their  food,  were  ovens  of
clay,  large  or  small,  according  to  the  condition  of  the  master.
The  fire  was  applied  to  the  mouth,  and  above  they  made  a
hole,  or  two  or  three,  according  to  the  number  of  the  dishes
to  be  cooked.  This  curious  plan  was  adopted  by  these
thrifty  people,  that  they  might  not  waste  the  heat,  nor  use
more  fuel  than  was  necessary  ; and  they  wondered  at  the
wasteful  ways  of  the  Spaniards.

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  public  women,  whom  the
Yncas  permitted  in  order  to  avoid  greater  evils.  They
lived  in  the  fields  in  certain  poor  huts,  each  one  by  herself,
and  not  together.  They  were  not  allowed  to  enter  the
towns,  that  they  might  have  no  intercourse  with  other  women.
They  were  called  Pampay-runa,  a name  which  denotes
their  place  of  abode  and  their  occupation;  for  it  is  composed
of  Pampa,  meaning  an  open  field  or  square  (it  has  both


x


322


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


significations),  and  liana,  which  in  the  singular  means  a
person,  man  or  woman,  and  in  the  plural  denotes  a number
of  people.  The  two  words  together,  if  the  former  is  taken
in  its  signification  of  a field,  mean  a people  living  in  the
open  fields ; and  if  the  signification  of  a square  is  taken  for
pampa,  the  term  Pampay-runa  means  a person  or  woman
of  the  square,  that  is  to  say,  that  as  all  the  square  is  public,
and  intended  to  receive  whosoever  may  wish  to  go  into  it,
so  these  women  were  public  for  all  the  world.

The  men  treated  them  with  extreme  contempt.  Women
could  not  speak  to  them,  on  pain  of  receiving  the  same
name,  being  shorn  in  public,  declared  as  infamous,  and  re-
pudiated by  their  husbands  if  they  were  married.  They
were  not  called  by  their  own  names,  but  simply  Pampayruna,
which  means  a prostitute.


CHAPTER  XV.

THE  SIXTH  YNCA,  NAMED  YNCA  ROCCA,  CONQUERS  MANY
NATIONS,  AND  AMONG  THEM  THE  CHANCAS  AND
HANCOHUALEU.

The  King  Ynca  Rocca,  whose  name,  as  has  already  been
quoted  from  the  missionary  Bias  Valera,  means  a prudent
prince  of  mature  judgment,  took  the  red  fringe  on  the  death
of  his  father;  and,  having  celebrated  the  funeral  ceremonies,
passed  three  years  in  visiting  all  parts  of  his  dominions.
Soon  afterwards  he  ordered  his  warriors  to  be  assembled,  to
continue  the  conquests  in  the  direction  of  Chincha-suyu,
which  is  to  the  northward  of  Cuzco.  He  caused  a bridge
to  be  made  across  the  river  Apurimac,  which  is  on  the  high
road  from  Cuzco  to  the  City  of  the  Kings;  for  it  appeared  to
him  to  be  beneath  his  dignity  that,  being  now  king,  he  should
cross  that  river  with  his  army  in  balsas,  as  he  had  done


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


323


when  he  was  only  prince.  At  that  time  the  late  Ynca  had
not  ordered  a bridge  to  be  made,  because  the  provinces  in
that  direction  were  not  then  subjugated.

As  soon  as  the  bridge  was  made,  the  Ynca  started  from
Cuzco  with  20,000  men,  and  four  masters  of  the  camp.  He
ordered  that  the  army  should  cross  the  bridge  in  squadrons
three  abreast,  to  commemorate  its  opening.  He  arrived  at
the  valley  of  Amancay,  which  word  signifies  a lily,  and  the
name  was  given  because  of  the  great  number  of  those  flowers
that  grow  there.  This  flower  is  different  from  the  lily  of
Spain  both  in  form  and  smell,  for  the  Amancay  lily  is  in  the
shape  of  a bell,  with  a green  bud,  without  any  smell;  and
the  Spaniards  only  called  it  a lily  because  it  resembles  one
in  its  green  and  white  colour.  From  Amancay  the  Ynca
turned  to  the  right  of  the  road,  towards  the  great  snowy
Cordillera.  He  met  with  few  villages,  and  these  he  re-
duced to  subjection.  They  call  the  inhabitants  of  this  re-
gion Tacmana  and  Quiñualla.  Thence  he  marched  to
Cocha-cassa,  where  he  ordered  large  depots  of  grain  to  be
formed.  His  next  march  was  to  Curampa,  and  he  easily
extended  his  sway  over  these  provinces,  because  they  con-
tained few  inhabitants.  From  Curampa  he  advanced  to  the
great  province  of  Antahuaylla,*  the  coniines  of  which  ex-
tend along  the  royal  road  for  a distance  of  sixteen  or  seven-
teen miles.  The  inhabitants  are  rich  and  very  warlike.
They  were  called  Chancas,  and  boasted  that  they  were  de-
scended from  a lion,  wherefore  they  adored  the  lion  as  a
god,  and,  both  before  and  after  they  were  conquered  by  the
A7ncas,  it  was  the  custom  among  them,  on  days  of  festival,
for  two  dozen  Indians  to  come  forth  dressed  in  the  way
Hercules  is  painted,  covered  with  lion  skins,  and  their
heads  thrust  into  the  skulls  of  lions.  I have  seen  them  so
attired  in  the  feast  of  the  most  holy  sacrament  at  Cuzco.

* Now  called  Andahuaylas,  a town  and  rich  valley  in  the  department
of  Ayacucho.  Anta  means  copper,  and  Huaylla  a meadow.

x 2


324


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


Under  the  general  name  of  Chancas  many  other  small
tribes  are  included,  as  Hancohuallu,*  Utunsulla,f  Uramarca,
Vilca,*  and  others;  and  all  these  boasted  their  descent  from
various  fathers,  some  from  a fountain,  others  from  a lake,
others  from  a very  high  hill ; and  each  tribe  looked  upon
the  thing  believed  to  be  its  progenitor  as  a god,  and  offered
sacrifice  to  it.  The  ancestors  of  these  tribes  came  from  a
great  distance,  and  overran  many  provinces  until  they
reached  that  where  they  now  live,  which  is  the  province  of
Antahuaylla.  They  conquered  it  by  force  of  arms,  drove
the  former  inhabitants  out,  and  forced  the  Quechua  Indians
into  a corner,  taking  many  districts  from  them.  They  also
obliged  these  Quechuas  to  pay  tribute,  treated  them  tyran-
nically, and  did  other  famous  things,  of  which  their  de-
scendants still  boast.  The  King  Rocca  Ynca  was  well  in-
formed of  all  these  things,  and  when  he  reached  the  borders
of  the  province  of  Antahuaylla,  he  sent  the  usual  summons
to  the  Chancas  that  they  should  submit  to  the  Children  of
the  Sun,  or  prepare  to  decide  the  question  by  force  of  arms.
The  tribes  assembled  to  consider  the  reply  that  should  be
given  to  this  message,  and  there  were  different  opinions  which
divided  the  assembly  into  two  parties.  One  side  said  that  it
was  right  that  they  should  receive  the  Ynca  as  their  lord,
because  he  was  a child  of  the  Sun  ; while  the  other  side
(which  was  composed  of  the  descendants  of  the  lion)  declared
that  it  was  not  proper  to  recognise  a foreign  lord,  they  being
lords  of  so  many  vassals  and  descendants  of  a lion.  They
said  that  they  knew  their  own  descent,  but  they  were  not
going  to  believe  that  the  Ynca  was  a child  of  the  Sun  ; and

* Hancohualla  appears  to  have  been  close  to  Vilca.

+ Correctly  Hatun-sulla.  Hatun  is  great.  Sulla  means  dew.  This
district  is  in  a wild  part  of  the  Cordillera,  on  the  road  from  G-uamanga
to  the  coast.

I About  twenty  miles  east  of  Guamanga.  See  an  account  of  the  great
ruins  at  Vilca  or  Vilcas  in  my  translation  of  Cieza  de  Leon,  p.  312.


110 YA L COMMENTARIES.


325


that  it  was  more  in  accordance  with  their  pedigree  and  with
the  deeds  of  the  Chancas,  their  ancestors,  to  force  other
nations  to  submit  to  their  sway,  than  to  become  subjects  of
the  Ynca,  before  they  had  made  trial  of  the  strength  of  their
arms.  They,  therefore,  decided  that  it  was  better  to  resist
the  Ynca  than  basely  to  submit  at  the  first  summons,  without
having  first  displayed  their  banners  and  gone  out  armed
into  the  field.

The  Chancas  occupied  many  days  in  this  dispute,  some-
times inclining  to  submit  and  at  others  resolved  to  resist,
without  being  able  to  agree  amongst  themselves.  Knowing
this,  the  Ynca  determined  to  invade  their  province,  in  order
to  intimidate  them,  that  they  might  not  resolve  upon  war
when  they  saw  his  kindness  and  humanity;  and  that  they
'’might  not,  confiding  in  their  many  previous  victories,  pre-
sume to  make  any  attack  upon  his  person,  which  might  oblige
him  to  begin  a rigorous  war  and  to  inflict  severe  punishment.
He  ordered  his  masters  of  the  camp  to  enter  the  province
of  Antahuaylla,  and  at  the  same  time  he  sent  a messenger  to
the  Chancas,  to  tell  them  that  they  must  either  acknowledge
him  as  their  lord  or  prepare  their  necks,  for  that  he  would
put  them  all  to  death,  being  unable  longer  to  suffer  the  dis-
play of  rebellious  feeling  they  had  hitherto  shown.  The
Chancas,  seeing  the  determination  of  the  Ynca,  and  knowing
that  many  Quechuas  and  Indians  of  other  tribes  were  in  his
army,  whom  they  had  given  offence  to  in  former  times,
abated  their  pride  and  submitted  to  the  yoke  of  the  Ynca,
more  through  fear  of  his  arms  and  of  the  vengeance  of  their
enemies  than  for  love  of  his  laws  and  government.  So  they
sent  to  say  that  they  would  meekly  obey  him  as  lord,  and
submit  to  his  laws  and  ordinances.  But  they  did  not  lose
the  rancour  of  their  hearts,  as  we  shall  presently  see.

The  Ynca,  having  established  the  necessary  officials  in
Antahuaylla,  proceeded  in  his  conquests  to  another  province
called  Uramarca,  the  inhabitants  of  which  are  also  of  the


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


326

Chanca  nation.  This  province  is  small  in  extent,  although
it  is  well  peopled  by  a brave  and  warlike  race,  and  it  was
not  reduced  without  some  resistance.  If  their  power  and
numbers  had  equalled  their  warlike  and  gallant  spirit,  they
would  have  made  a desperate  defence;  for  in  this  direction
the  people  did  not  show  themselves  to  be  so  mild  and  friendly
towards  the  Yncas  as  those  of  Cuntisuyu  and  Collasuyu.  But
at  last,  though  not  without  signs  of  unwillingness,  the  people
of  Uramarca  submitted.  Thence  the  Ynca  marched  to  the
province  of  a people  called  Hancohuallu  and  Villca  (called
by  the  Spaniards  Vilcas)  who  yielded  to  his  sway  with  similar
unwillingness  ; for  these  people,  also  belonging  to  the  Chanca
nation,  were  lords  of  other  provinces  that  they  had  subju-
gated by  force  of  arms,  and  from  day  to  day  they  extended
their  power  with  much  ambition,  treating  their  newly  con-
quered vassals  with  scorn  and  tyranny.  The  King  Ynca
Rocca  put  a stop  to  all  this  when  he  had  reduced  them  to
submission,  so  that  they  were  much  disheartened  and  their
subjugation  rankled  in  their  hearts.  They  sacrificed  children
to  their  gods  on  days  of  festival  in  both  these  provinces.
When  the  Ynca  learned  this  he  addressed  them  in  a dis-
course, intended  to  persuade  them  to  desist  from  this  cruel
practice,  and  to  worship  the  Sun  ; and  to  prevent  the  per-
petration of  such  acts  in  future  he  ordained  a law,  and  pro-
mulgated it  from  his  own  mouth  that  it  might  be  the  more
respected,  to  the  effect  that  if  another  child  was  put  to  death
the  whole  tribe  should  be  exterminated,  and  their  country
peopled  by  other  nations  who  would  love  and  not  kill  their
children.  The  people  felt  this  very  deeply,  for  they  were
persuaded  by  the  devils,  who  were  their  gods,  that  these  were
the  sacrifices  most  agreeable  to  them.

From  Villca  the  Ynca  turned  aside  to  the  left  of  the  road,
in  the  direction  of  the  sea  coast,  and  reached  one  of  two  very
large  provinces,  which  are  both  called  Sullu  ; though,  for  the
sake  of  distinction,  they  call  one  of  them  Utunsullu.  These


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


327

provinces  include  many  tribes  with  different  names,  some
with  a large  number  of  men,  others  with  few,  which,  to
avoid  prolixity,  I shall  not  enumerate.  The  whole  number
of  inhabitants  exceeded  forty  thousand.  The  Ynca  spent
many  months  among  them  (the  natives  even  relate  that  he
remained  there  for  three  years),  not  desiring  to  force  them
to  obedience  by  the  use  of  arms,  but  by  kindness  and  benefits.
But  these  Indians,  being  so  numerous  and  some  of  them
rude  and  warlike,  were  often  on  the  point  of  breaking  out
into  war  ; though  at  last  the  good  management  and  kindness
of  the  Ynca  prevailed  to  such  an  extent  that,  at  the  end  of
that  long  time,  they  eventually  received  his  laws,  and  the
officers  that  were  appointed  by  the  Ynca  to  rule  them.  After
this  success  he  returned  to  Cuzco.  In  the  two  last  provinces
reduced  by  the  Ynca,  called  Sullu  and  Utunsullu,  some
mines  of  gold  and  quicksilver  were  discovered  about  thirty-
two  years  ago,  which  are  very  rich,  and  the  latter  are  of  great
importance  in  the  preparation  of  silver.*


CHAPTER  XVI.

OF  THE  PRINCE  YAHUAR-HUACCAC,  AND  THE  MEANING
OF  HIS  NAME.

After  some  years  passed  in  peace  and  quiet  throughout  his
dominions,  the  Ynca  determined  to  send  the  prince  and  heir,
who  was  his  son  Yahuar-Huaccac,  to  conquer  Antisuyu,
which  is  to  the  eastward  of  Cuzco,  and  not  distant  from  that
city.  In  that  direction  the  Yncas  had  not  hitherto  extended
their  empire  beyond  the  limit  reached  by  the  first  Ynca,
Manco  Ccapac,  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Paucar-tampu.

Before  proceeding  with  the  history,  it  will  be  well  to  ex-

* According  to  this,  the  provinces  of  Sullu  must  have  included
lluancavelica,  where  the  quicksilver  mine  was  discovered.


o£8  — FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE

plain  the  meaning  of  the  name  Yahuar  huaccac,  and  to  state
why  it  was  given  to  that  prince.  The  Indians  relate  that,
when  he  was  a child  of  three  or  four  years  of  age,  he  wept
blood.  They  do  not  know  whether  this  only  happened  once
or  several  times,  but  he  probably  had  some  disease  in  his
eyes  which  brought  blood  into  them.  Others  declare  that
he  was  born  weeping  blood,  and  these  are  more  positive
about  it  than  the  others ; it  may  have  been  that  some  drops
of  blood  from  the  mother  got  into  the  child’s  eyes,  and  these
people,  being  so  very  superstitious,  may  have  declared
that  they  were  the  tears  of  the  child.  However  this  may
be,  they  declare  that  he  wept  blood ; and,  being  so  given
to  a belief  in  omens,  they  thought  much  of  this  unhappy
omen  in  the  life  of  the  prince,  and  feared  some  great  mis-
fortune for  him,  or  some  curse  from  his  father  the  Sun,  as
they  said.  This  is  the  origin  of  the  name  Yahuar  huaccac,
which  means  “ he  who  weeps  blood,”  and  not  “ tears  of
blood,”  as  some  interpret  it.  And  this  weeping  took  place
when  he  was  a child,  and  not  after  he  was  grown  up  aird  had
been  conquered  and  taken  prisoner,  as  some  declare.  For
no  such  thing  ever  happened  to  any  Ymca  until  the  time  of
the  unfortunate  Huascar,  who  was  seized  by  the  traitor
Atahualpha,  his  bastard  brother,  as  we  shall  relate  in  its
proper  place,  if  the  most  high  God  spares  us  to  get  so  far.
Nor  is  it  true  that  they  stole  him  when  he  was  a child,  as
another  historian  asserts,  for  such  a proceeding  would  be
very  much  opposed  to  the  veneration  in  which  all  the  Indians
held  their  Yncas ; and  the  servants  deputed  to  watch  over
the  prince  would  never  have  been  so  careless  as  to  allow  him
to  be  stolen,  nor  would  any  Indian  have  been  so  audacious
as  to  make  the  attempt.  For  all  the  people  knew  that  if  any
man  even  imagined  such  a thing,  without  attempting  to  put
it  into  execution,  he  would  have  been  buried  alive  with  all
his  relations  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  his  village  and  pro-
vince. We  have  explained,  on  several  occasions,  that  the


KOVAL  COMM  IÜNTAK1ES.  329

people  adored  their  kings  as  gods,  children  of  their  god  the
Sun,  and  held  them  in  the  greatest  veneration,  a veneration
which  exceeded  that  which  any  other  heathen  nation  felt  for
its  gods.

With  reference  to  this  omen  of  the  tears  of  hlood,  I re-
member another  superstition  by  which  the  Indians  judged
of  omens,  from  the  winking  of  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids.
The  relation  of  this  superstition  relating  to  the  eyes,  will
not,  therefore,  be  inappropriate.  The  Yucas  and  all  their
vassals  believed  that  it  was  a good  or  evil  omen,  according
as  a person  winked  with  the  upper  or  lower  eyelid ; it  was
a good  sign  if  a man  winked  with  the  upper-eyelid  of  his  left
eye,  and  they  said  that  he  would  see  pleasant  and  joyful
things  ; but  it  was  still  better  if  he  winked  the  upper  eyelid
of  his  right  eye,  for  then  he  would  see  extremely  happy  and
delightful  sights.  On  the  other  hand,  the  winking  of  the
lower  eyelids  betokened  misfortune:  the  right  lower  eyelid
was  a sign  of  mourning  and  woe,  and  the  left  one  betokened
the  extreme  of  misery.  They  believed  so  firmly  in  these
auguries,  that  if  the  latter  accident  occurred  they  began  to
weep  as  mournfully  as  if  all  the  woes  they  feared  had  really
happened.  And,  in  order  to  avert  these  imagined  evils,  they
resorted  to  a superstition  which  was  as  ridiculous  as  that  of
the  evil  omen.  They  took  a piece  of  straw,  moistened  it
with  saliva,  and  applied  it  to  the  lower  eyelid,  with  the  idea
that,  by  preventing  the  tears  from  being  shed,  it  would
make  the  evil  omen  of  the  winking  lower  eyelid  pass  away.
They  had  almost  the  same  superstition  respecting  sounds  in
the  ears,  the  particulars  of  which  I omit,  that  concerning
the  eyes  being  more  to  the  point ; but  both  are  really  be-
lieved in,  for  I was  myself  a witness  to  them.

The  King  Ynca  Rocca  (as  we  have  said)  determined  to
send  his  son  to  conquer  Antisuvu,  and  for  this  purpose  he
ordered  fifteen  thousand  warriors  to  assemble,  under  three
Masters  of  the  camp,  who  were  appointed  to  accompany  him


330


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


as  councillors.  He  was  dispatched  with  complete  instructions
as  to  what  he  was  to  do.  The  prince  advanced  prosperously
to  the  river  Paucar-tamho  and  marched  on  to  Challa-pampa,*
reducing  the  few  Indians  inhabiting  those  parts  to  subjection.
Thence  he  went  on  to  Pillcu-pata,  where  he  ordered  four
villages  to  be  formed  by  the  strangers  in  his  army;  from
Pillcu-pata  he  marched  to  Plavisca  and  Tunu,f  which  were
the  first  farms  of  coca  possessed  by  the  Yncas.  This  coca
is  the  herb  so  highly  esteemed  by  the  Indians.  The  inherit-
ance called  Havisca  afterwards  belonged  to  my  lord  Garcilasso
de  la  Vega,  who  granted  it  to  me  during  his  life,  and  I lost
it  through  my  leaving  the  country  and  going  to  Spain.  To
enter  these  valleys  where  they  cultivate  the  coca,  a moun-
tain is  crossed  called  Canac-huay,  by  an  almost  perpendicular
descent  five  leagues  long  ;%  and  it  causes  terror  even  to  look
at  it,  how  much  more  to  ascend  and  descend  it,  for  along  the
whole  length  the  road  goes  up  in  the  shape  of  a serpent,
turning  first  to  one  side  and  then  to  the  other.


CHAPTER  XVII.

THE  IDOLS  OF  THE  INDIANS  CALLED  ANTIS,  AND  THE
CONQUEST  OF  THE  CHANCAS.

In  these  provinces  of  the  Antis  they  usually  worshipped
the  tigers  as  gods,  and  also  the  great  serpents  that  they  called
Amaru;  these  serpents  are  much  larger  round  than  the
girth  of  a man’s  thigh,  and  twenty-five  or  thirty  feet  long,

* A pleasant  village  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Paucar-tampu  river.

t Havisca  was  the  first  coca  plantation  in  the  montañas  or  forests  at
the  eastern  base  of  the  Cordilleras.  Tunu  or  Tono  is  the  river  which
drains  the  montaña  of  Paucartambo,  and  has  now  been  ascertained  to
be  a tributary  of  the  Beni.

í I rode  down  this  descent  in  three  hours,  in  May  1853.  It  is  not
more  than  eight  miles  long.  The  scenery  is  magnificent.


HOYA  I,  COMMENTAR1KS.


0 > i

001

others  being  smaller.  The  Indians  worshipped  them  by
reason  of  their  greatness  and  monstrosity  ; they  are  harmless,
and  they  say  that  a magician  bewitched  them  so  that  they
could  do  no  harm,  but  that  before  they  were  exceedingly
ferocious.  They  worshipped  the  tiger  by  reason  of  its  fero-
city and  courage ; and  they  said  that  the  serpents  and  tigers
were  the  original  possessors  of  the  land,  and  that  they  had  a
right  to  adoration  as  its  lords,  while  the  Indians  themselves
were  strangers.*  They  also  adored  the  herb  called  cuca,  or
coca  as  the  Spaniards  spell  it.  In  this  expedition  the  prince
Yahuar-huaccac  increased  the  boundaries  of  the  empire  by
nearly  thirty  leagues  of  land,  though  the  new  territory  was
thinly  populated  ; he  did  not  advance  any  further,  owing  to
the  difficulty  of  passing  the  forests,  swamps,  and  morasses  in
that  region.  The  province  is  called  Anti,  and  hence  all  the
territory  on  that  side  is  known  as  Antisuyu.

Having  completed  the  conquest,  the  prince  returned  to
Cuzco.  The  king  his  father  then  desisted  from  further  con-
quests, for  in  Antisuyu,  to  the  ( eastward,  there  was  nothing
left  to  conquer  ; and  to  the  westward,  which  is  called  Cun-
tisuya,  there  was  also  no  province  unsubdued  ; the  empire
extending  in  that  direction  as  far  as  the  sea  coast.  Thus,
from  east  to  west,  on  the  parallel  of  Cuzco,  the  width  of  the
empire  was  more  than  one  hundred  leagues,  and  from  north
to  south  the  length  was  two  hundred  leagues.  Over  all  this
extent  of  country  the  Indians  had  been  taught  to  make  royal
edifices,  gardens,  and  baths  for  the  Ynca;  as  well  as  depots
on  the  royal  roads,  where  they  stored  the  supplies,  arms,  and
clothes  for  the  common  people.

After  some  years,  during  which  the  King  Ynca  Eocca  had
remained  at  peace,  he  resolved  to  undertake  a grand  expe-
dition with  the  object  of  completing  the  conquest  of  the  pro-
vinces called  Chancas,  which  his  father,  the  Ynca  Ccapac

* For  an  account  of  the  idolatry  of  the  Antis,  as  described  by  Father
Blas  Videra,  see  page  51.


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


Yupanqui,  bad  commenjced  in  the  region  of  Collasuyu.  He
ordered  thirty  thousand  warriors  to  be  assembled,  a larger
army  than  had  ever  been  brought  together  by  any  of  his
ancestors ; he  appointed  six  masters  of  the  camp,  besides
captains  and  officers  of  lower  grades,  and  directed  the  prince
Yahuar-huaccac  to  remain  in  charge  of  the  government,  with
four  other  Yucas  as  his  councillors.

The  Ynca  left  Cuzco  by  the  road  to  Collasuyu,  and  the
men  of  war  continued  to  join  his  army  along  the  line  of
march,  until  he  arrived  on  the  confines  of  the  provinces
Chuncuri,  Pucuna,  and  Muyumuyu,  which  were  nearest  to
his  dominions.  He  sent  a messenger  with  the  usual  sum-
mons, demanding  that  the  inhabitants  should  live  under  the
laws  of  his  father  the  Sun,  and  acknowledge  him  as  their  god,
abandoning  their  idols  made  of  wood  and  stone  and  their
many  evil  customs  which  they  practised,  contrary  to  natural
and  human  laws.  The  natives  were  enraged,  and  their  war-
like young  captains  took  up  arms  with  much  fury,  saying
that  it  was  a strange  thing  to  command  them  to  abandon  their
gods  and  accept  a strange  god,  and  to  repudiate  their  laws
and  customs  and  adopt  those  of  the  Ynca,  who  took  away
land  from  his  vassals  and  imposed  taxes  and  tributes  until
his  subjects  became  slaves.  They  declared  that  they  would
in  no  wise  submit  to  this,  but  would  rather  die  fighting  for
their  gods,  their  country,  and  their  liberty.


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


333


CHAPTER  XVIII.

THE  REASONING  OF  THE  OLDER  MEN,  AND  HOW  THEY
RECEIVED  THE  YNCA.

The  older  and  more  prudent  men  said  that  they  ought  to
consider  what  they  had  learnt  from  their  neighbours  who
were  vassals  of  the  Ynca;  namely,  that  their  laws  were  good
and  their  government  was  mild;  that  they  treated  their
vassals  as  their  own  children,  and  not  as  conquered  people  ;
that  the  lands  they  took  were  not  what  the  inhabitants  re-
quired, but  what  was  superfluous  and  could  not  be  worked
by  them,  and  that  the  harvest  of  the  lands  which  were  tilled
at  his  own  cost  was  the  tribute,  and  not  the  property  of  the
Indians.  Besides,  the  Ynca  gave  back  all  that  was  in  excess
of  the  requirements  of  his  court  and  army;  and  in  proof  of
what  they  said  it  was  only  necessary  to  look  dispassionately
at  the  improved  condition  of  the  Ynca’s  vassals,  who  were
more  prosperous,  richer,  and  more  contented  than  they  ever
had  been  before.  It  would  be  seen  that  the  dissensions
which,  in  former  times,  prevailed  amongst  themselves  for  the
most  trifling  causes,  had  now  ceased,  that  their  property  was
protected  from  robbers,  their  wives  and  daughters  were  safe,
and  neither  rich  nor  poor,  great  nor  small,  received  any
injury.

They  added  that  it  should  be  known  how  many  neigh-
bouring provinces,  on  hearing  of  these  blessings,  had  will-
ingly submitted  to  the  government  of  the  ATnca,  in  order  to
enjoy  them  ; and  that  it  would  be  well  if  they  did  the  same,
for  it  was  safer  to  appease  the  Ynca  by  submitting  to  his
demands  than  to  provoke  his  rage  and  anger  by  refusing  to
obey,  if  afterwards  they  were  obliged  to  yield  by  force  of
arms  and  thus  lose  the  Ynca’s  favour.  Far  better  would  it


334


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


be  to  obtain  his  grace  at  once,  for  this  would  be  the  safest
way  of  placing  their  lives  and  goods  in  security.  As  for
their  gods,  the  Ynca  had  declared  that  the  Sun  deserved  to
be  worshipped  more  than  idols.  Finally,  if  they  would  re-
ceive the  King  Ynca  as  their  lord,  and  the  Sun  as  their  god,
they  would  acquire  honour  and  profit.  The  elders  appeased
the  young  men  by  these  arguments,  and  wfith  one  consent
both  old  and  young  went  out  to  receive  the  Ynca;  the  youths
with  their  arms,  and  the  old  men  with  such  gifts  as  their
country  could  furnish,  saying  that  they  brought  the  fruits  of
their  land  in  token  that  they  delivered  it  up  to  the  Ynca.
The  youths,  on  the  other  hand,  said  that  they  brought  their
arms  to  serve  in  their  prince’s  army  as  loyal  vassals,  and  to
assist  in  conquering  other  new  provinces.

The  Ynca  received  them  with  much  kindness,  ordering
the  elders  to  be  given  new  clothes,  and,  as  a greater  favour,
the  principal  chiefs  were  presented  with  dresses  from  the
royal  wardrobe.  From  amongst  the  young  warriors,  as  a
reward  for  their  good  will,  he  ordered  five  hundred  to  be
chosen  to  serve  in  his  army,  not  selecting  them  by  favour
but  by  lot,  in  order  that  those  who  were  left  out  might  not
be  annoyed.  Fie  said  that  they  were  not  all  taken,  because
their  land  must  not  be  left  without  inhabitants.  The  Indians,
both  old  and  young,  were  so  well  satisfied  with  their  treat-
ment, that  they  began  to  raise  great  acclamations,  crying  out,
“ Thou  art  good,  O child  of  the  Sun  ! thou  alone  deservest
to  be  king.  With  good  reason  art  thou  called  a lover  of  the
poor,  for  scarcely  had  we  become  thy  vassals  before  we  were
covered  with  favours.  Blessed  be  the  Sun,  thy  father  ! and
may  the  people  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe  obey  and
serve  thee,  for  thou  art  well  named  Sapa  Ynca,  or  Sole  Lord.”
With  such  blessings  was  the  King  Ynca  Rocca  invoked  by
his  new  vassals.  Having  appointed  the  necessary  new
officers,  he  marched  onwards  to  reduce  the  neighbouring
provinces  of  Misqui,  Sacaca,  Machaca,  Caracara,  and  others


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


335


as  far  as  Chuquisaca,  which  is  the  place  now  called  the  city
of  La  Plata;*  they  are  all  within  the  limits  of  Charcas,
though  they  are  inhabited  by  various  nations  speaking  dif-
ferent languages.  The  King  Ynca  Rocca  reduced  them  all
to  obedience  with  as  much  ease  as  he  had  overcome  the  first
he  encountered.  In  this  campaign  he  extended  the  limits  of
his  empire  for  more  than  fifty  leagues  to  the  south,  and  as
many  from  east  to  west ; he  returned  to  Cuzco,  after  appoint-
ing the  necessary  officers  to  instruct  the  people  and  collect
the  revenue,  according  to  ancient  custom  ; the  soldiers  were
then  dismissed  to  their  respective  provinces,  and  the  captains
received  gifts  and  favours.

After  this  campaign  the  Ynca  rested  from  his  conquests,
and  attended  to  the  government  of  his  empire,  passing  the
remaining  years  of  his  life  in  this  employment,  but  we  do
not  know  how  many  they  were.  When  he  died  he  had  not
degenerated  in  any  respect  from  the  virtues  of  his  ancestors,
but  had  imitated  them  as  closely  as  it  was  possible,  both  in
extending  his  conquests  and  in  doing  good  to  his  vassals.  He
founded  schools  where  the  Amantas  were  appointed  to  teach
such  knowledge  as  they  had  attained  to ; and  built  his  own
royal  palace  near  them,  as  we  shall  see  in  its  proper  place. f
He  also  instituted  laws  and  uttered  several  notable  sayings.
The  father  Bias  Valera  wrote  several  of  these  in  his  papers,
and  presently  I will  repeat  the  sayings  which  his  paternity

* This  city  was  selected  as  the  capital  of  the  republic  of  Bolivia,  and
received  the  name  of  Sucré,  in  honour  of  one  of  Bolivar’s  ablest  generals,
who  was  the  first  president.

+ The  remains  of  the  palace  of  Ynca  Rocca  are  situated  in  the  pre-
sent Calle  del,  Triunfo,  near  the  great  square  of  Cuzco.  The  walls  are
constructed  of  huge  masses  of  rock,  of  various  shapes  and  sizes,  one  of
them  actually  having  twelve  sides,  but  fitting  into  each  other  with
astonishing  exactness,  though  their  exterior  faces  are  rough.  The  stone
is  a very  dark-coloured  limestone.  The  walls  of  the  Yacha-huasi,  or
schools  founded  by  this  Ynca,  are  still  standing,  and  form  part  of  the
church  of  San  Lazaro.  Many  serpents  are  carved  in  relief  on  the  stones.


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


oob

recorded,  and  which  are  well  worthy  of  remembrance.  This
Ynca  was  universally  lamented,  and  his  body  was  embalmed,
according  to  the  custom  of  these  kings.  He  left  his  son
Yahuar-huaccac  as  his  heir,  being  born  of  his  legitimate  wife
and  sister  Mama  Micay  ; he  also  left  many  other  children,
both  legitimate  and  illegitimate.


CHAPTER  XIX.

CONCERNING  SOME  LAWS  INSTITUTED  BY  THE  KING  YNCA

ROCCA,  OF  THE  SCHOOLS  HE  FOUNDED  IN  CUZCO,  AND
SOME  SAYINGS  WHICH  HE  UTTERED.

The  Father  Bias  Valera,  who  made  great  researches  into
the  history  of  the  A7ncas,  gives  the  following  particulars  re-
specting this  King.  He  reigned  for  more  than  fifty  years,
and  established  many  laws,  amongst  which  the  most  note-
worthy were  as  follows  : — He  ordered  that  the  children  of
the  common  people  should  not  learn  the  sciences,  which
should  be  known  only  by  the  nobles,  lest  the  lower  classes
should  become  proud  and  endanger  the  commonwealth.
The  common  people  were  ordered  to  be  taught  the  employ-
ments of  their  fathers,  which  was  enough  for  them.  All
thieves,  murderers,  adulterers,  and  incendiaries  were  to  be
put  to  death  without  mercy.  Children  were  to  serve  their
parents  until  the  age  of  twenty-five,  after  which  time  they
were  to  be  employed  in  the  service  of  the  state.  Bias
Valera  also  says  that  the  Ynca  Rocca  was  the  first  who
established  schools  in  the  city  of  Cuzco,  in  which  the
Amautas  imparted  their  learning  to  the  Vnca  princes  of  the
blood  royal,  and  to  the  nobles  of  the  empire.  The  schools
were  not  established  for  teaching  letters,  for  these  people
had  none ; but  to  instruct  the  pupils  concerning  the  rights,
precepts,  and  ceremonies  of  their  false  religion,  and  the


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


337


principles  of  their  laws  and  customs,  with  their  correct  in-
terpretation. It  was  intended  that  they  should  thus  attain
a knowledge  of  the  art  of  governing,  and  become  both  more
refined  and  more  assiduous  in  the  military  art.  The  pupils
were  also  taught  the  method  of  computing  time,  and  of  re-
cording events,  by  means  of  knots,  as  well  as  to  converse
with  elegance  and  grace,  and  how  to  bring  up  their  children
and  govern  their  households.  They  were  then  instructed
in  the  arts  of  poetry,  music,  philosophy,  and  astrology,  or
at  least  as  much  as  had  been  attained  to  in  those  sciences  by
the  Amautas,  who  were  their  philosophers  or  wise  men,  and
were  held  in  great  veneration.  Father  Bias  Valera  says
that  this  Prince  Ynca  Rocca  instituted  all  these  things  by  a
law,  and  that  afterwards  the  Ynca  Pachacutec,  his  great
grandson,  explained  them  more  at  large,  and  added  many
other  laws.  It  is  also  said  of  this  Ynca  Rocca  that,  after  re-
flecting on  the  grandeur,  splendour,  and  beauty  of  the
heavens,  he  often  exclaimed  that  it  might  be  concluded  that
the  Pachacamac  (that  is  God)  was  a most  powerful  king  in
the  heavens,  as  he  possessed  so  beautiful  a habitation.  It
was  also  a saying  of  Ynca  Rocca  that,  if  he  had  to  worship
anything  on  this  lower  earth,  it  would  certainly  be  a discreet
and  learned  man,  for  that  such  an  one  had  an  advantage
over  all  created  things.  But,  added  he,  the  man  who  is
born  and  brought  up,  dies  at  last ; he  who  yesterday  had  a
beginning,  to-day  meets  his  end  ; and  he  who  cannot  free
himself  from  death  ought  not  to  be  worshipped.  Thus  far  I
have  quoted  from  the  father  Bias  Valera.


v


338


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


CHAPTER  XX.

OF  THE  YNCA  “ WEEPING  BLOOD,”  SEVENTH  KING,  HIS
FEAKS  AND  CONQUESTS,  AND  OF  THE
DISGRACE  OF  THE  PRINCE.

On  the  death  of  the  King  ATica  Rocca  his  son  Yahuar-
huaccac  assumed  the  crown  of  the  kingdom,  and  ruled  with
justice,  piety,  and  gentleness,  doing  all  the  good  in  his  power
to  his  vassals.  He  wished  to  maintain  them  in  the  prosper-
ous state  in  which  they  had  been  left  by  his  ancestors,  with-
out pretending  to  make  conquests  or  take  any  thing  from
any  one.  For,  owing  to  the  evil  omen  of  his  name,  and  of
the  prognostics  that  were  made  over  him  every  day,  he  was
fearful  of  some  mischance  and  had  no  wish  to  tempt  fortune.
He'  hoped  that  if  he  did  nothing  to  excite  the  anger  of  his
father  the  Sun,  he  would  not  be  visited  with  any  heavy
chastisement,  as  the  soothsayers  threatened.  In  this  fear  he
lived  for  some  years,  only  desiring  peace  and  quiet  for  him-
self and  his  neighbours  ; but,  to  avoid  idleness,  he  visited  all
parts  of  his  dominions  three  times.  He  took  measures  to
adorn  the  provinces  with  magnificent  edifices,  gave  presents
to  his  vassals,  and  treated  them  with  greater  kindness  than
had  been  the  custom  with  any  of  his  ancestors.  All  this  was
a sign  and  effect  of  fear,  and  in  this  way  he  passed  nine  or
ten  years.  But,  in  order  not  to  appear  so  pusillanimous  as
to  be  held  up  as  a coward  among  the  AAicas,  in  that  he  had
not  increased  the  limits  of  the  empire,  he  resolved  to  send  an
army  of  twenty  thousand  warriors  to  the  south-west  of  Cuzco,
along  the  coast  beyond  Arequipa,  where  his  predecessors
had  refrained  from  annexing  a large  extent  of  country  be-
cause it  was  thinly  inhabited.  He  selected  his  brother  Ynca
Mayta  as  captain-general,  who,  ever  after  that  campaign,


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


£>£vr\

oov

was  called  Apu  Mayta,  that  is  to  say,  the  captain-general,
Mayta,  because  he  was  the  general  in  command.  Four
experienced  Yncas  were  nominated  as  masters  of  the  camp  ;
the  Ynca  did  not  venture  to  lead  the  invasion  in  person,
though  he  desired  much  to  do  so;  but  he  could  not  make
up  his  mind  to  go,  because  the  evil  auguries  (in  the  affairs  of
war)  were  amidst  such  doubtful  and  tempestuous  waves,
that  where  those  of  desire  rose  those  of  fear  sank  down.  In
consequence  of  these  apprehensions  he  named  his  brother
and  his  ministers  to  act  in  his  place.  These  officers  com-
pleted the  conquest  with  such  success  and  despatch  that  the
whole  country  from  Arequipa  to  Atacama  was  added  to  the
empire  of  the  Yncas ; this  is  the  extreme  point  of  the  pro-
vince called  Colla-suyu,  and  it  is  also  the  limit,  along  the  sea
coast,  of  what  is  now  called  Peru.  This  land  on  the  coast  is
long  and  narrow,  and  thinly  inhabited ; so  that  the  Yncas
took  more  time  in  marching  along  it  than  in  bringing  it
under  their  sway.

After  the  completion  of  this  conquest  they  returned  to
Cuzco,  and  gave  an  account  of  what  they  had  done  to  the
Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac.  The  success  of  this  campaign  in-
spired the  Ynca  with  fresh  vigour,  and  he  resolved  to  under-
dertake  another  more  honourable  and  famous  expedition  for
the  reduction  of  some  other  great  provinces  in  the  Colla-suyu,
called  Caranca,  Ullaca,  Llipi,  Chicha,  and  Ampara.  These
provinces,  besides  being  large,  were  thickly  inhabited  by  a
valiant  and  warlike  race.  The  former  Yncas  had  not  there-
fore attempted  their  conquest  by  force  of  arms,  but  had
endeavoured  to  civilize  them  little  by  little,  and  accustom
them  to  the  rule  of  the  Yncas  by  the  sight  of  the  neighbour-
ing districts,  where  the  vassals  had  obtained  so  many  benefits,
under  the  mild  and  just  government  of  the  children  of  the
Sun.

The  Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac  conducted  this  campaign  with
much  hesitation,  being  divided  between  hope  and  fear,  at

y 2


FOURTH  ROOK  OF  THE


.340

one  time  counting  upon  the  same  success  as  had  attended
the  campaign  of  his  brother  Apu  Mayta,  and  at  another  in
a state  of  despondency,  owing  to  some  bad  omen.  Thus  he
would  not  undertake  any  operation  of  war  by  reason  of  the
danger  that  might  attend  it.  While  he  was  proceeding  on
his  expedition,  in  the  midst  of  these  doubts  and  misgivings,
he  turned  his  attention  to  other  domestic  cares  that  arose
within  his  own  household.  These  were  caused  by  the  cha-
racter of  his  eldest  son  and  heir,  who  was  to  succeed  to  the
crown.  This  prince  had  shown  a bad  disposition  from  a
child,  for  he  had  ill-treated  the  boys  of  his  own  age  who  at-
tended upon  him,  and  displayed  a tendency  to  become  harsh
and  cruel.  Although  the  Ynca  was  careful  to  correct  his
son,  and  hoped  that  in  time  he  would  become  more  judicious,
and  lose  the  bad  points  of  his  character ; yet  these  anticipa-
tions were  not  realised,  for  the  prince’s  fierce  disposition  in-
creased with  his  years.  This  was  a source  of  extreme  anxiety
to  the  Ynca  his  father,  for  as  all  his  ancestors  had  been
remarkable  for  their  gentleness  and  urbanity,  it  was  very
grievous  to  see  the  prince  growing  up  with  a disposition  so
opposite.  The  Ynca  endeavoured  to  convert  his  son  by  per-
suasion, and  by  reminding  him  of  the  examples  of  his  an-
cestors, as  well  as  by  upbraiding  and  punishing  him  ; but  all
was  of  little  or  no  avail,  for  an  evil  disposition  in  the  great
and  powerful  seldom  or  ever  admits  of  correction.

Thus  it  fell  out  with  this  prince  that  every  remedy  ap-
plied to  his  evil  disposition  was  converted  into  some  poison.
At  last  the  Ynca,  his  father,  determined  to  disgrace  him,  and
banish  him  from  the  royal  presence,  and  if  this  punishment
did  not  cure  him,  to  disinherit  him  and  select  one  of  his
other  sons  as  his  heir.  He  intended,  in  this,  to  imitate  a
custom  which  prevailed  in  some  of  the  provinces,  of  select-
ing the  most  worthy  among  the  sons  as  the  heir.  The  Ynca
resolved  to  establish  this  law  with  his  son,  which  had  not
hitherto  been  adopted  by  the  Kings’  Yucas.  The  prince,


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


341


being  then  about  nineteen  years  of  age,  was  therefore  or-
dered to  be  banished  from  the  royal  court,  and  to  be  taken
to  a grand  and  beautiful  wilderness,  a little  more  than  a
league  to  the  eastward  of  the  city,  called  Chita,*  where  I
have  often  been.  There  were  large  flocks  belonging  to  the
Sun  on  those  plains,  and  the  prince  was  ordered  to  live  with
the  shepherds  who  had  charge  of  them.  The  prince,  having
no  means  of  avoiding  it,  submitted  to  this  banishment,  and
to  the  punishment  with  which  he  was  visited  for  his  head-
strong and  quarrelsome  temper.  He  freely  entered  upon
the  duties  of  a shepherd,  with  the  other  shepherds,  and  took
care  of  the  flocks  of  the  Sun  ; the  fact  that  they  belonged  to
the  Sun  being  some  consolation  to  the  sorrowful  Yuca.  He
performed  these  duties  for  three  years  or  more,  where  we
will  leave  him  until  his  time  comes,  for  he  will  give  us
notable  things  to  say  if  we  succeed  in  narrating  them  well.


CHAPTER  XXI.

CONCERNING  A NOTICE  GIVEN  TO  THE  PRINCE  BY  AN
APPARITION,  WHICH  HE  WAS  TO  DELIVER
TO  HIS  FATHER.

The  Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac  having  banished  his  eldest
son  (whose  name  while  he  was  prince  is  not  known,  because
it  was  entirely  superseded  by  the  one  which  he  afterwards
bore  ; for,  as  they  had  no  letters,  these  people  totally  forgot
all  that  was  not  preserved  in  their  memories  by  tradition)
altogether  desisted  from  wars  and  the  conquest  of  new  pro-
vinces, devoting  himself  exclusively  to  the  peaceful  govern-

* The  lofty  plateau  of  Chita,  to  the  eastward  of  Cuzco,  divides  the
valley  of  the  Vilcamayu  from  that  of  its  tributary  the  Huatanay,  ou
which  Cuzco  is  built.  It  is  a treeless  waste,  covered  with  grass,  and
huge  boulders  of  rock  are  scattered  over  its  surface.


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


312

ment  of  his  kingdom.  He  also  desired  not  to  lose  sight  of
his  son  entirely  by  going  far  away  from  him,  but  to  be  near
him,  and  watch  his  conduct;  for  all  the  remedies  for  this
evil,  such  as  perpetual  imprisonment  or  disinherison,  and
the  election  of  another  in  the  prince’s  place,  appeared  to  be
violent  and  unsafe,  owing  to  their  novelty,  and  to  the  im-
portance of  the  case ; for  it  would  be  equivalent  to  depriv-
ing the  Yncas  of  their  deified  position  as  the  divine  children
of  the  Sun ; and  the  vassals  would  not  consent  to  the  inflic-
tion of  such  a punishment,  nor  of  any  other  that  it  might  be
desired  to  visit  the  prince  with.

These  cares  and  anxieties  deprived  the  Ynca  of  all  rest
for  more  than  three  years,  during  which  time  nothing  oc-
curred worthy  of  record.  In  this  interval  he  twice  sent  four
of  his  relations  to  visit  his  empire,  directing  each  to  visit
certain  provinces,  and  to  construct  such  works  as  were
necessary  for  his  honour  and  the  good  of  his  vassals,  such  as
new  aqueducts,  depots,  royal  houses,  bridges,  paved  roads,
fountains,  and  the  like.  But  he  did  not  leave  the  court,  where
he  was  engaged  in  celebrating  the  festivals  of  the  Sun,  and
others,  and  in  administering  justice  to  his  vassals.  One  day,
at  the  end  of  this  long  period,  a little  after  noon,  the  prince
entered  the  house  of  his  father,  where  he  was  little  ex-
pected, alone  and  unattended,  as  a man  out  of  favour  with
his  King.  He  sent  to  the  Ynca  to  say  that  he  was  there,
and  that  he  was  bound  to  deliver  a certain  message.  The
Ynca  replied,  in  great  wrath,  that  the  prince  was  to  return
at  once  to  the  place  where  he  had  been  ordered  to  reside,
unless  he  desired  to  be  punished  with  death  for  disobeying
a royal  command,  for  he  must  know  that  it  was  unlawful  for
any  one  to  disobey  an  order  of  the  Ynca,  how  trivial  soever
its  nature  might  be.  The  prince  answered  that  he  had  not
come  there  to  break  his  father’s  commandment,  but  to  obey
another  Ynca  as  great  as  he,  who  had  sent  him  to  say  things
which  it  was  very  important  the  Ynca  should  know  : that  if


ROYAL  COM  MENTA  RI  KS.


343


the  Ynca  wished  to  hear  them  he  should  give  permission  for
him  to  enter  and  say  what  was  necessary,  and  if  not  he  would
return  to  him  who  had  sent  him,  and  give  an  account  of  the
reply  lie  had  received.

The  Ynca,  on  hearing  the  assertion  that  there  was  another
lord  as  great  as  himself,  gave  orders  for  his  son  to  enter,
that  he  might  learn  what  nonsense  this  was,  and  who  had
sent  his  banished  and  disgraced  son  with  these  new  mes-
sages, that  he  might  be  punished.  The  prince,  as  soon
as  he  had  been  brought  before  his  father,  said  : “You
must  know,  O sole  Lord,  that,  when  I was  lying  down  at
noon  today  (I  cannot  say  whether  I was  asleep  or  awake)
under  one  of  the  great  rocks  that  are  scattered  over  the
pastures  of  Chita,  where  I am  employed  by  your  order  in
watching  the  flocks  of  our  Father  the  Sun,  a strange  man
stood  before  me,  different  in  dress  and  appearance  from  our
people.  He  had  a beard  on  his  face  more  than  a hand’s
breadth  long  ; he  wore  a long  loose  robe  down  to  his  feet,
and  held  an  animal,  unknown  to  me,  fastened  by  its  neck.
He  said  to  me:  ‘Nephew,  I am  a child  of  the  Sun,  and  bro-
ther of  the  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  and  of  the  Coya  Mama
Ocllo  H uaco  his  wife  and  sister,  the  first  of  your  ancestors;
wherefore  I am  a brother  of  your  father  and  of  you  all.  I
am  called  Üira-ccocha  Ynca,*  I come  on  the  part  of  the  Sun
our  father  to  make  an  announcement  to  you,  that  you  may
deliver  it  to  the  Ynca  my  brother.  The  whole  of  that  part
of  the  provinces  of  Chincha-suyu,  which  is  subject  to  his
empire,  as  well  as  other  parts  still  unconquered,  are  in  re-
bellion, and  a great  multitude  has  assembled  to  drive  him

* Or  Viracocha,  according  to  the  corrupt  Spanish  way  of  spelling,
which,  in  this  instance,  is  adopted  by  the  Vnca.  Vira  means  grease.
Mossi  spells  it  Huirá.  Ccocha  is  a lake  or  the  sea.  But  our  author,  in
the  twenty-first  chapter  of  the  nest  book,  denies  that  the  name  is  com-
posed of  these  two  words,  which  would  simply  mean  “ a lake  of  grease.”
He  declares  that  it  is  not  composed  of  any  two  Quichua  words,  but  that
it  is  a name  of  itself,  the  derivation  of  which  is  unknown.


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


344

from  his  throne,  and  destroy  our  imperial  city  of  Cuzco.  Go,
therefore,  to  the  Ynca  my  brother,  and  tell  him  from  me  to
prepare  himself,  and  to  take  such  order  as  may  be  necessary
to  avert  this  danger.  And  to  you,  in  particular,  I say  that
in  whatever  disaster  you  may  find  yourself,  fear  not,  for  I
will  not  fail  you,  but  will  always  give  you  help,  as  to  my  own
flesh  and  blood.  Therefore,  do  not  hesitate  to  undertake
any  adventure,  how  great  soever  it  may  be,  if  it  conduces  to
the  glory  of  your  empire,  for  I will  always  be  at  your  side
to  give  you  such  aid  as  you  may  require/  Having  said
these  words,”  continued  the  prince,  “the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha
disappeared,  and  I saw  him  no  more.  Then  I set  out  to
deliver  his  message  to  you.”


CHAPTER  XXII.

THE  CONSULTATIONS  OF  THE  YNCA,  TOUCHING  THE  STORY
OF  THE  APPARITION.

The  Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac,  being  enraged  against  his
son,  would  not  believe  his  story,  but  said  that  he  was  an  in-
solent madman  for  asserting  that  his  own  nonsense  was  a
revelation  from  his  father  the  Sun  ; and  ordered  him  to  re-
turn to  Chita  at  once,  and  not  again  to  leave  it,  on  pain  of
the  royal  displeasure.  So  the  prince  returned  to  tend  his
sheep;  but  the  brothers  and  uncles  of  the  Ynca,  who  were
near  his  person,  being  superstitious,  and  believers  in  omens,
and  especially  in  dreams,  received  what  the  prince  had  said
in  another  spirit.  They  said  to  the  Ynca  that  he  should  not
despise  the  message  from  the  Ynca  Huira-ccocha  his  bro-
ther, seeing  that  he  had  said  he  was  a child  of  the  Sun,  and
that  he  came  on  the  part  of  his  father.  Nor  could  it  be  be-
lieved that  the  prince  would  invent  such  .things  concerning
the  Sun,  for  it  would  be  sacrilege  to  imagine  it,  much  more


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


345


to  say  it  before  his  father  the  Ynca.  They  urged  that  it
would  be  well  that  the  words  of  the  prince  should  be  ex-
amined one  by  one,  that  sacrifices  to  the  Sun  should  be
made,  and  auguries  taken  to  see  whether  what  they  pro-
gnosticated was  good  or  evil,  and  that  the  necessary  arrange-
ments should  be  made  at  once  for  so  important  a business;
for,  they  said,  to  leave  them  unexamined  would  not  only  be
hurtful,  but  would  also  show  disrespect  to  the  Sun,  their
common  father,  who  had  sent  the  message,  and  to  the  Ynca
Huira-ccocha,  his  son,  who  had  brought  it.  Such  a course
would  be  to  heap  error  upon  error.

The  Ynca,  influenced  by  the  anger  caused  by  his  son’s
misconduct,  was  disinclined  to  take  the  advice  of  his  refla-
tions, but  said  that  no  notice  should  be  taken  of  the  speech
of  a furious  madman,  and  that,  instead  of  mending  his  ways
and  correcting  his  evil  disposition,  so  as  to  deserve  the
favour  of  his  father,  he  would  be  emboldened  to  come  with
fresh  nonsense,  and  would  thus  merit  the  deprivation  of  his
inheritance,  and  the  substitution  of  one  of  his  brothers.  A
new  heir  would  imitate  the  example  of  his  ancestors  who,
for  their  clemency,  piety,  and  gentleness,  had  acquired  the
title  of  children  of  the  Sun.  It  was  unreasonable,  continued
the  Ynca,  that  a madman,  with  the  knife  of  cruelty,  should
destroy  all  that  the  former  Yncas  had  done  to  establish  the
empire  by  their  goodness.  The  Yncas  should  reflect  that  a
remedy  for  such  evils  was  of  more  consequence  than  the
wild  words  of  a furious  madman.  The  words  themselves
showed  whence  they  came,  and  if  the  prince  did  not  admit
that  the  embassy  was  not  from  a child  of  the  Sun,  his  head
should  be  cut  off  for  having  broken  out  of  the  place  of
banishment  that  had  been  assigned  to  him.  Finally  the
Ynca  ordered  them  not  to  proceed  in  this  affair,  but  to  pre-
serve silence  respecting  it ; for  that  any  remembrance  of  the
prince  caused  him  to  become  enraged,  as  he  had  resolved
what  he  would  do  concerning  him.


346


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  THE


By  order  of  the  King,  the  Yncas  were  silent,  and  spoke
no  more  on  the  subject;  but  they  did  not  cease  to  entertain
fears  of  some  misfortune  in  their  minds  ; for  these  Indians,
as  all  others  in  heathendom,  were  very  superstitious,  and
especially  so  in  the  matter  of  dreams,  more  particularly
when  such  dreams  were  related  by  the  king,  the  prince,  or
the  high  priest.  Those  three  personages  were  looked  upon
as  gods  and  great  oracles,  and  the  soothsayers  sought  an  ac-
count of  their  dreams  from  them,  in  order  to  divine  and  in-
terpret, if  the  Yncas  themselves  did  not  relate  what  they
had  dreamt.


CHAPTER  XXIII.

THE  REBELLION  OF  THE  CHANCAS,  AND  TOUCHING  THEIR
FORMER  DEEDS.

Three  months  after  the  dream  of  the  Prince  Uira-ccocha
Yhca  (for  so  he  was  called  by  his  people  from  that  time
forward,  because  of  the  apparition  he  had  seen),  an  uncer-
tain rumour  came  concerning  the  rebellion  of  the  provinces
of  Chincha-suyu,  from  Antahualla  onwards,  which  was  forty
leasrues  to  the  northward  of  Cuzco.  The  news  came  in  a

D

confused  way,  as  is  usually  the  case  on  similar  occasions  ; so
that,  although  the  Prince  Uira-ccocha  had  dreamt  it,  and
thus  confirmed  the  news  in  his  sleep,'  the  Ynca  took  no
notice  of  it,  because  the  rumour  appeared  to  him  to  be  no
more  than  roadside  gossip,  or  some  version  of  the  dream
which  should  have  been  forgotten.  But  a few  days  after-
wards the  same  news  again  reached  him,  though  still  doubt-
ful and  uncertain.  For  the  enemy  had  closed  the  roads
with  great  care,  that  their  rebellion  might  not  be  known,
and  that  they  might  be  in  sight  of  Cuzco  before  their  ap-
proach was  known.  The  third  notice  of  the  rebellion  that


ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


347


arrived  was  more  explicit,  and  it  announced  that  the  nations
called  Chanca,  Uramarca,  Yillca,  Utusullu,  Hancohuallu,
and  others,  had  rebelled,  slain  the  royal  governors  and
ministers,  and  were  marching  to  the  capital  with  an  army
of  more  than  40,000  warriors.

These  nations  were  reduced  to  obedience  by  the  King
Ynca  Rocca,  but  more  through  terror  of  his  arms  than  love
of  his  government ; and,  as  we  before  said,  they  remained
with  a feeling  of  rancour  and  hatred  against  the  Yncas,
which  would  break  out  when  occasion  should  arise.  Seeing
that  the  Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac  was  not  warlike,  and  that  he
was  intimidated  by  the  evil  augury  of  his  name,  and  embar-
rassed by  the  bad  disposition  of  his  son  the  Prince  Ynca-
Huira-ccocha,  and  having  heard  something  of  the  new  cause
of  anger  that  the  Ynca  had  against  his  son ; it  seemed  a suf-
ficiently favourable  time  to  show  the  hatred  they  felt  for  the
government  of  the  Ynca.  So  they  met  together  as  secretly
as  possible,  and  raised  amongst  themselves  a powerful  army
of  more  than  30,000  men  of  war,  with  which  they  marched
in  the  direction  of  the  imperial  city  of  Cuzco.  The  authors
of  this  rebellion,  who  incited  the  other  lords  of  vassals,  were
three  principal  Indian  Curacas  of  three  great  provinces  of
the  Chanca  nation  (under  which  name  other  nations  are  in-
cluded). One  of  these  was  named  Hancohuallu,*  a youth
aged  twenty-six, another  was  named  Tumay  Huaraca, f and  the
third  Astil  Huaraca. The  two  last  were  brothers,  and  rela-
tions of  Hancohuallu.  The  ancestors  of  these  three  petty  kings
waged  perpetual  war,  before  the  time  of  the  Yncas,  with  the
neighbouring  nations,  especially  with  a people  called  Que-
chua, under  which  name  are  included  the  inhabitants  of  five

* The  meaning  of  this  name  is  not  clear.  Banco  or  Hanccn  is  any-
thing unripe  or  raw.  Huattuni  is  a verb  meaning  to  cut  off  the  ears.

t Tumay  huaraca  means  “ He  who  whirls  a sling  round.”

+ Possibly  Astay-huaraca,  which  would  mean  “ He  who  carries  a
sling.”


348


i


FOURTH  BOOK.  OF  THE


large  provinces.  They  had  brought  these  Quechuas  under
subjection,  and  treated  them  very  tyrannically.  The  Que-
chuas, therefore,  had  rejoiced  to  become  vassals  of  the
Yncas,  and  had  submitted  very  readily,  as  we  have  already
seen,  for  they  were  glad  to  be  released  from  the  insolence
of  the  Chancas.  But  the  Chancas  felt  their  subjection  very
deeply,  and  were  indignant  that,  from  being  lords  over  others,
they  should  themselves  be  made  tributary.  So  they  pre-
served the  hatred  they  had  inherited  from  their  fathers,  and
rose  in  rebellion,  expecting  that  they  would  easily  conquer
the  Yuca  by  reason  of  the  rapidity  with  which  they  intended
to  move,  and  of  the  want  of  preparation  on  his  part.  They
calculated  that  a single  victory  would  make  them  lords  not
only  over  their  ancient  enemies,  but  over  the  whole  empire
of  the  Yncas.

With  this  hope  they  called  their  people  together,  as  well
those  subject  to  the  Ynca  as  those  who  were  independent,
and  promised  them  a large  share  of  the  conquest.  It  was
not  difficult  to  persuade  them,  as  well  by  reason  of  the  great
prize  that  was  offered,  as  because  there  was  an  ancient
opinion  that  the  Chancas  were  brave  warriors.  They  elected
H anco-huallu,  who  was  a valiant  Indian,  as  their  captain-
general,  his  two  brothers  as  masters  of  the  camp,  and  the
other  Curacas  were  chiefs  and  captains  of  their  followers.
Thus,  with  all  diligence,  they  began  their  march  to  Cuzco.


ROYAL  COMMENT  A RIFS.


349


CHAPTER  XXIV.

THE  YNCA  FLIES  FROM  THE  CAPITAL,  WHICH  IS  SAVED
BY  THE  PRINCE.

The  Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac  was  confused  at  the  certainty
of  the  news  that  the  enemy  was  approaching  ; for  he  had
never  believed  that  this  could  be  possible,  judging  from  his
former  experience.  No  province,  out  of  the  great  number
that  had  been  conquered,  had  ever  before  rebelled,  from
the  time  of  the  first  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac.  Yahuar-huaccac
had  refused  to  believe  the  reports,  because  nothing  of  the
sort  had  ever  happened  before,  and  also  because  he  was  in-
fluenced by  anger  caused  by  the  Prince’s  prophecy  con-
cerning the  rebellion,  nor  would  he  take  the  advice  of  his
relations.  Passion  had  blinded  his  understanding,  and  now
he  was  unprepared,  and  had  no  time  to  assemble  his  people
either  to  advance  against  the  enemy  or  to  garrison  the  city.
Instead  of  waiting  for  assistance,  it  seemed  better  to  fall
back  before  the  traitors,  and  retire  to  Colla-suyu,  where  the
Ynca  trusted  his  life  would  be  safe,  owing  to  the  honour  and
loyalty  of  his  vassals.  With  this  intention,  he  retreated  in
company  with  the  few  Aureas  who  could  follow  him,  as  far
as  Angostura,  in  the  district  of  Muyna,*  which  is  five  leagues
south  of  the  city.  Here  he  halted  to  obtain  news  of  the
movements  of  the  rebels.

The  city  of  Cuzco,  deserted  by  its  king,  was  in  confusion,

* The  Angostura  is  a pleasant  maize  farm  which  formerly  belonged
to  the  Astete  family,  near  the  village  of  Muyna,  about  ten  miles  south
of  Cuzco.  Near  it  the  valley  becomes  narrower,  and  there  are  some
massive  ruins  of  the  Yncarial  period,  which  tradition  points  to  as  the
station  at  which  Yahuar-huaccac  took  refuge  on  this  occasion.  Muyna
is  said  to  have  been  founded  by  the  first  Ynca  Manco  Ccapac  (see  pages
80,  86,  and  190).


350


FOURTH  ROOK  OF  THE


without  captain  or  chief  to  give  orders,  much  more  to  de-
fend it,  for  all  were  seeking  safety  in  flight.  The  principal
people  were  escaping  in  the  directions  which  they  thought
best,  with  a view  to  saving  their  lives.  Some  of  the  fugi-
tives went  to  the  Prince  Uira-ccocha  Ynca,  and  gave  him
news  of  the  rebellion  in  Chincha-suyu,  and  how  the  King
his  father  had  retreated  towards  Colla-suyu  because  it  seemed
impossible  to  resist  the  enemy,  owing  to  the  suddenness  of
the  rising.

The  Prince  felt  very  deeply  the  disgrace  of  his  father
having  fled  and  deserted  the  city.  He  ordered  those  who
had  brought  the  news,  with  a few  of  the  shepherds  who  were
with  him,  to  go  to  the  Indians  on  the  roads  and  in  the  city,
and  tell  them  to  follow  the  Ynca,  their  lord,  with  their  arms,
because  he  intended  to  do  the  same,  and  to  pass  the  word
from  one  to  the  other.  Having  given  this  order,  the  Prince
Uira-ccocha  Ynca  followed  his  father,  without  entering  the
city;  and,  owing  to  the  rapidity  of  his  march,  overtook  him
at  Angostura  de  Muyna,  for  he  had  not  yet  set  out  from
that  station.  Covered  with  dust  and  sweat,  with  a lance  in
his  hand,  which  he  had  obtained  on  the  road,  the  Prince  pre-
sented himself  before  the  King,  and,  with  a sad  and  grave
countenance,  said  : —

“ O Ynca!  how  is  it  permitted  that,  owing  to  news  con-
cerning a few  rebellious  vassals,  whether  true  or  false,  you
should  desert  your  city  and  court,  and  turn  your  back  on
the  enemy  before  he  is  in  sight?  Plow  can  it  be  endured
that  the  house  of  the  Sun,  your  Father,  should  be  delivered
over  for  the  enemy  to  tread  with  shod  feet,  and  to  per-
form abominations  within  its  precincts  ? Did  not  your
ancestors  abolish  the  sacrifices  of  men,  women,  and  children,
and  all  other  bestialities  and  sacrileges  ? What  account  shall
we  give  of  the  virgins  dedicated  to  the  Sun  by  the  observ-
ance of  perpetual  chastity,  if  we  leave  them  for  the  bestial
rebels  to  do  what  they  please  with  ? What  honour  shall  we


KOYAL  COMMENTARIES.


351


have  left  if  we  permit  all  these  evils,  in  order  to  save  our
own  lives  ? I like  it  not,  and  I shall  return  to  face  the
enemy  before  they  can  enter  Cuzco,  for  I desire  not  to  wit-
ness these  abominations  which  the  rebels  will  commit  in  that
imperial  city,  founded  by  the  Sun  and  his  children.  Those
that  will  follow  me  let  them  do  so,  and  I will  show  them
how  to  choose  between  a disgraced  life  and  an  honoured
death.”

Having  said  this  with  every  sign  of  grief  and  sorrow,  he
turned  back  along  the  road  to  Cuzco,  without  taking  any
refreshment,  either  of  food  or  drink.  The  Yncas  of  the
blood  royal,  who  had  set  out  with  the  King,  and  among
them  his  nephews,  brothers,  and  cousins,  in  number  more
than  four  thousand  men,  returned  with  the  Prince,  leaving
the  father  alone  with  the  useless  old  men.  On  the  road  they
were  met  by  many  who  were  flying  from  the  city.  They
called  to  these  fugitives  to  turn  back,  telling  them  that  the
Prince  Ynca  Uira-ccocha  was  coming  to  defend  the  city,
and  the  house  of  his  Father  the  Sun.  The  Indians  were
reassured  by  this  news,  and  all  those  that  were  running
away  turned  back,  calling  to  each  other  over  the  fields,  and
passing  the  word  from  one  to  the  other  that  the  Prince  was
returning  to  defend  the  city,  and  that  this  undertaking  was
so  agreeable  to  them  that,  with  the  greatest  joy,  they  would
go  back  to  die  with  the  Prince.  The  Prince  displayed  so
much  resolution  and  bravery,  that  he  imparted  new  courage
to  all  his  followers.

In  this  way  he  entered  the  city,  and  ordered  that  the
assembled  people  should  presently  take  the  road  of  Chincha-
suyu,  along  which  the  rebels  were  marching,  so  as  to  interpose
between  them  and  the  city.  His  intention  was  not  to  resist
them,  for  he  well  knew  that  his  forces  were  not  sufficient,  but
to  die  fighting  before  they  could  enter  the  city  and  pillage  it  as
barbarous  and  victorious  enemies,  without  respect  to  the  Sun,
which  was  what  he  felt  most.  As  the  Ynca  Yahuar-huaccac,


352


FOURTH  BOOK  OF  COMMENTARIES.


whose  life  we  now  write,  did  not  reign  after  this,  as  we  shall
see  presently,  it  seems  better  to  cut  the  thread  of  the  history
at  this  point,  so  as  to  divide  his  acts  from  those  of  his  son,
the  Ynca  Uira-ccocha.  We  will,  therefore,  insert  some
further  account  of  the  government  of  the  empire  at  this
point,  so  as  to  vary  the  narrative,  and  avoid  too  long  a con-
tinuance of  one  part  of  the  subject.  Afterwards,  we  shall
return  to  the  deeds  of  the  Prince  Uira-ccocha,  which  were
very  glorious.


END  OF  THE  FOURTH  BOOK.


I N D E X.


NAMES  OF  PLACES

in  the  1 .si,  2nd,  3rd,  and  Ath  Books  of  the

FIRST  PART  OF  THE  ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


Abancay  ( see  Amancay)

Acari,  valley  on  the  sea  coast,  244,
267

Aecha,  234

Allca,  a province  conquered  by  the
Ynca  Mayta  Ccapac,  231
Amancay  river,  provinces  on  its
banks  inhabited  by  Quechuas,  241,
266,  323
Ampara,  339

Ancasmayu  river,  north  boundary
of  Peru,  40,  136
Angostara  de  Muyna,  349
Antahualla,  323,  325
Antis,  their  idolatry,  51,  116,  330;
conquests  in  the  direction  of  the,
160,  329

Anti-suyu,  eastern  division  of  the
empire  of  the  Yncas,  79,  143 ;
expedition  sent  into  by  Ynca
Rocca,  327-29
Apireara,  267

Apurimac  river,  69;  bridge,  227,
234,  322

Arequipa,  232,  267
Arica,  41

Aruni,  province  of,  232

Asancata,  159

Asillu,  159

Atacama,  339

Atequipa,  267

Atico,  267

Ayamarca,  80

Ayaviri,  164-5

Aymara,  province,  235,  237


Cacha,  159
Cac-yaviri,  213


Callamarca,  225
Callavaya  (see  Collahuaya)

Camana,  267

Canac-huay  mountain,  330
Canas,  163
Cancalla,  159
Canchi  nation,  158
Cancu  tribe,  80;  privilege  granted
to,  86

Caracara,  334
Caracollo,  225
Caranca,  339

Caravaya  ( see  Collahuaya)
Cauquicura,  217
Cavina  tribe,  80
Ccocha-casa,  266
Chachapoyas,  41
Challapampa,  330
Chamuru,  263
Chancas,  242,  323,  325,  347
Chaqui,  263,  265
Chacas,  35,  40
Chayanta,  255,  257
Cherca,  263
Chicas,  17,  40
Chile,  40,  136,  143
Chilqui,  80
Cliimpa,  233
Chincha-pucyu,  80
Chincha-suyu.SO,  143
Chirihuanas,  50,  54
Chirirqui,  240
Chita,  341
Chucuitu,  170,  211
Chumpi-uillca,  229
Chuncara,  159, 163
Chuncuri,  332
Chuqui-apu,  225
Chuquinca,  243


Z


354


INDEX.


Chuquisaca,  355
Cocha-pampa,  235
Collahuaya  ( Caravaya),  160,  265
Collas,  35,  71,  167-69,  216
Colla-suyu,  71,  142,  166-67
Collcampata  terrace,  at  Cuzco,  179
Copacavana,  286
Coro-puna  peak,  232
Cota-huasi,  23  L
Cotanera,  242
Cota-pampa,  241,  242
Cuchuna,  219

Cunti-suyu,  71,  80,  143,  226
Cura-huasi,  266
Curampa,  323

Cuzco  founded,  65;  Hanan  Cuzco,
Hurin  Cuzco,  67;  Temple  of  the
Sun  at,  270 ; great  respect  for,  ib. ;
Topography  of  part  of,  279

Desaguadero  river,  171,  210

Elena  ( see  Santa  Elena)

Gorgona,  Isle  of,  37
Guayaquil  (see  Huayaquil)

Hanan  Cuzco  ( see  Cuzco)
Hancohualla,  242,  324,  326
Hatun-colla,  167,  170
Hatun-pacasa,  212,  217
Hatun-puna,  217
Hatun-rucana,  267
Havisca,  330
Huaca-chaca,  234,  241
Huamanpalla,  242
Huana-cauti  hill,  south  of  Cuzco,
65,  66

Huancané,  159
Huaquirca,  237
Huarina,  217
Huarue,  80
Huarac-chillqui,  86
Huayaquil,  34
Huaychu,  222,  223
Hurin  Cuzco  (see  Cuzco)

Juli,  171

Llaricasa  province,  41,  221
Llipi,  339

Machaca,  334
Malloma,  217
Masca,  80

Maulé  river,  south  boundary  of  the
empire  of  the  Tncas,  40, 136
Mayu  tribe,  80
Misqui,  334


Moquehua,  219
Mucansa  hill,  435
Muyna,  80,  86,  190,  349
Muyu-muyu,  332
Muya-pampa,  41

Hanasca  (or  Nasca),  267

Ocoña,  on  the  coast,  267
Orcosuyu  (see  Urcosuyu).

Paccari-tampu,  65

Papri,  80

Paria  lake,  225

Parihuana-ccocha,  23 1

Passao  or  Pasan,  Cape,  1 7, 41,  50,  54

Pastu,  40

Paucar-colla,  167

Paucar-tampu,  69,  72,  73,  79,  265,
327,  330

Peru,  1,  33-36,  40

Pillcu-pata,  330

Piti,  235

Pomata,  171

Poqués  nation,  79,  86

Potosí,  play  acted  at,  204

Pucara,  159,  166

Puehina,  158

Pucuna,  332

Puerto  Viejo,  37

Puma-tampu,  232

Quechuas,  34,  112,  241,  243,  325
Quehuar  tribe,  80
Quequesana,  69
Quespi-cancha,  80
Quilca,  on  the  sea  coast,  267
Quiiiualla  tribe,  320
Quitu,  143,  180

Eimac-tampu,  80

Eiti-suyu,  snowy  region  of  the  Andes,
40

Encana,  267
Eurucachi,  159

Sacaca,  334
Sacsahuana  valley,  80
Sanca va,  221
Santa  Elena,  37
Sucahuaya  (Socabaya),  233
Sullu,  326,  327
Sulli,  204

Surcunca,  village  near  Cuzco,  312

Tacmana  tribe,  323
Tampu,  86
Taurisma,  231
Tiahuanacu,  71,  75,  210-12
Titicaca  lake,  64,  163,  285


INDEX.


ÓOÓ


Titicaca  island,  considered  sacred,
286-88
Truxillo,  41

Ttahuantin-suyu,  name  of  the  em-
pire of  the  Yncas,  72
Tumpez,  111
Tunu,  330
Tutyra,  265


Ullaca,  339
Umasuyu,  159,  237


I Uramarea,  325
| Urcos,  80,  86,  287
| Urcosuyu,  159
I Ctunsullu,  324

I Yilca,  324,  326
1 Villilli,  229

| Yana-huara,  235
Ylave,  171
Yucay,  86

Zepita,  171


QUICHUA  WORDS

in  the  lit,  2 nil,  3rd , and  4th  Books  of  the
FIRST  PART  OF  THE  ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


Aca,  dirt,  121,  298
Acatanca,  a beetle,  121
Acca,  fermented  liquor  (chicha),  298
Aclla-huasi,  “ House  of  the  chosen
ones,”  292
Allpa,  earth,  126

Allpa-camasca,  “animated  earth,”
a name  for  the  human  body,  126
Amaru,  a serpent,  330
Amauta,  philosopher,  wise  man,  114,
174, 194,  286 ; teach  in  the  schools,
336

Ancas,  blue,  40

Apachecta,  meaning  of  the  word,  117
Apu,  chief,  225
Auca,  traitor,  156
Auqui,  unmarried  prince,  97
Ayar,nomeaningin  Quichua,  though
it  probably  has  in  the  special
idiom  of  the  Yncas,  74
Ayllu,  lineage,  family,  67
Ayusca,  a sickly  child,  316


Caca,  uncle  (brother  of  the  mother),
285

Cachi,  salt,  74

Cam,  you,  197

Cama,  the  soul,  106

Camac,  created,  101

Camayu,  “he  who  has  charge,”  152

Cancha,  place,  court,  283

Cancu,  sacrificial  bread,  298


Capa  (See  Sapa),  alone,  sole,  91
Cay,  this,  198
Cayan,  now,  198
Ccaca,  rock,  hill,  285
Ccapac,  rich,  95
Ccocha,  lake,  49
Ccoya,  queen,  68,  96,  293,  296
Ccuri,  gold,  283

Ccuri-cancha,  temple  of  the  sun,  283
Chahuar,  aloe  fibre,  58,  227
Chaqui,  foot,  121
— dry,  122

Chasca,  the  planet  Venus,  176,  275;

meaning  of  the  word,  176  (note)
Chaupi,  middle,  195
Chichi,  hail,  198

Chillca,  a tree  ( Baccharis  scandens),
187

China,  female,  servant  girl,  197
Chiri,  cold,  50
Chuechu,  fever,  187
Chuchau,  Agave  Americana,  86
Chunca,  ten,  152

a game,  152

Chunca-camayu,  Decurión,  152

Chuncasun,  “ We  play,”  153

Chuqui,  lance,  225

Chura,  put,  198

Churi,  son,  91,  314

Chuspa,  a bag  for  holding  coca,  296

Chuy,  a seed,  204

Chuychu,  rainbow,  276

Cuca,  coca  leaf,  296,  330


INDEX.


Paccari,  morning,  65,  182
Paclia,  meanings  of  the  word,  119
Pachacamae,  Creator  of  the  world,
106

Pacha  rurac,  maker,  109

Pacha  yachachi,  109

Palla,  lady  of  the  blood  royal,  96,  97

Pampa,  plain  (passim).

Pana,  a sister,  when  addressed  by
her  brother,  314
Para,  rain,  198
Parihuana,  flamingo,  231
Pata,  hill  ( passim ) .

Pataca,  basket,  254
Paycha,  fringe  and  tassels  worn  by
princes  of  the  blood  royal,  296
Pirua,  granary,  36
Pucara,  fortress,  160
Puma,  lion,  232
Punchau,  day,  182
Puflunqui,  “you  will  sleep,”  195
Puyña,  vase,  197

Quechua,  first  occasion  on  which
the  word  is  used,  34
Quilla,  moon  month,  176,  181
Quillay,  iron,  201,  262
Quipus,  first  mention  of  the  system
of  knot  writing,  150,  191


356

Cuna,  plural  particle,  293
Cunuñunan,  it  thunders,  197
Cuntur,  condor,  48,  75
Curaca,  chief,  82
Cuzco,  a navel  or  centre,  in  the
peculiar  language  of  the  Yucas,  73,
142

Hamusac,  I will  come,  195
Hanan,  upper,  67
Harauec,  bard,  195
Hatun,  great,  167-267
Hihuaya,  black  pebble,  202
Hina,  so,  197

Huaca,  a sacred  thing,  107,  115,  119
Huaccac,  weeping,  328
Huaecanqui,  162

Huaccha-cuyac,  “lover  of  the  poor,”
90,  97

Huahua  ( see  Uaua).

Huasi,  a house,  29 1
Huata,  year,  177
Huatani,  I seize,  177
Huauque,  brother  addressing
brother,  314
Huirá  ( see  TJira).

Hurin,  lower,  67

Llama,  beast  (passim).

Llamanchec,  shepherd,  320
Llapi,  song,  1 95
Llautu,  royal  fringe,  85,  296
Lloque,  left-handed,  161

Mama,  mother,  293
Mama-cuna,  matrons,  293,  294,  300,
302

Mama-ccocha,  the  sea,  49
Mamanchic,  “ our  mother,”  97
Mama-quilla,  Mother  Moon,  274
Manco,  a proper  name,  with  no  spe-
cial meaning,  70  (note)

Mantara,  for  this,  197
Maqui,  hand,  arm,  121
Matecllu,  plant  for  sore  eyes,  1 88
May,  where,  198

Mayta,  a proper  name,  with  no  spe-
cial meaning,  209
Mayu,  river  (passim).

Mitrnac,  colonists,  269-286
Mulli,  a tree  (Schinus  Molle),  187
Munquini,  I drop,  198

Naha,  sister  addressing  her  sister,
314

Nanani,  I hurt,  267

Nimpiri,  sometimes,  198

Ñusta,  princess  (unmarried),  96, 197


| Raymi,  festival,  279,  298
Riti,  snow,  40

Bocea,  a proper  name,  with  no  spe-
cial meaning,  92,  157
Buna,  man,  35
Eurac,  maker,  109
Russa,  remittent  fever,  187

Sara,  maize,  49,  189
Sapa,  sole,  only,  91
Sapa-Ynca,  sole  lord,  95,  324
Sauca,  joy,  pleasure,  74
Sayri,  tobacco,  188
Sinchi,  strong,  92
Sitúa,  festival,  298
Situa-Raymi,  festival,  179
Sucanca,  solstitial  pillar,  178  (note)
Sumac,  beautiful,  197
Sunqui,  second  transition  ending  of
a verb,  198
Supay,  the  devil,  108
Suyu,  province  (passim).

Tancani,  I push,  121
Tanga-tanga,  an  idol  in  Chuquisaca,
120

Tazqui,  a girl,  maiden,  197
Ticiviracocha,  a mistaken  name  for
God,  given  by  Spanish  writers,  1 09


Ocllo,  305


INDliX.


357


Titi,  lead,  285

Tora,  brother,  when  addressed  by
his  sister,  314

Ttaliuantin-suyu,  “four  parts  of  the
empire,”  35,  142

Tucuyricoc,  an  overseer  who  re-
ported the  shortcomings  of  offi-
cials to  their  superiors,  154

Tuta,  night,  182

Tutura,  reed,  86


Uaua,  a child,  314
Uchu,  Aji  pepper,  74
Uira,  grease,  343  (note)

Uncu,  tunic,  part  of  the  Ynca’s
dress,  296
Unu,  water,  198

Uruya,  basket,  travelling  on  a cable,
for  crossing  a river,  261
Usuta,  sandals,  82


Villac  Vmu,  high  priest  of  the  Sun,
277

Villani,  I say,  277
Vmu,  a soothsayer,  277

Yacha,  school,  335  (note)

Yachani,  I learn,  110
Yachachi,  I teach,  110
Yacolla,  mantle,  296
Yahuar,  blood,  328
Ychu,  a long  coarse  grass,  254
Yllapa,  thunder  and  lightning,  105,
182,  275

Yllapantac,  it  thunders,  197
Ynca,  sovereign  lord  (passim).
Yncap  runan,  vassal,  35
Ynti,  the  sun  (passim).

Yntip-churi,  “ child  of  the  sun,”  95
Yqui,  second  possessive  pronoun,  197
Yupanqui,  a title,  literally  “ you
may  count,”  161


NAMES  OF  INDIANS

in  the  1 st,  2nd , 3rd,  and  4 ih  Books  of  the

FIRST  PART  OF  THE  ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


Apu  Mayta,  339

Ata-hualpa,  his  attempted  exter-
mination of  the  Ynca  family,  62,
81;  speech  of  Val  verde  to,  107;
indignation  against  Filipillo,  300;
seizes  Huasca,  328

Astu-huaraca,  347

Ayar-cachi  j Legen¿ary  brothers  of

Ayar-uchu  Manco  Ccapac,  73

Ayar  sauca  )

Auqui-Titu,  brother  of  the  Ynca
Ccapac  Yupanqui,  his  campaign,
241

Ccapac  Yupanqui,  fifth  Ynca,  his
reign,  234;  his  death,  269;  con-
quests, 331

Ccoya  Mama  Curiyllpay,  wife  of  the
Ynca  Ccapac  Yupanqui,  270

Colla,  name  of  one  of  the  brothers
of  Manco  Ccapac,  according  to
one  legend,  71

Cora  (see  Mama  Cora).

Felipe  Ynca,  an  apt  scholar  at
Cuzco,  205


Garcia,  chief  of  Surcunca,  his  last
will,  312

Huayna  Ccapac,  104,  271 ; his  body
found,  273

Huascar  Ynca  seized  by  Atahualpa,
388

Hanco-huallu,  347

Huira-ccocha  Ynca,  his  body  found,
273,  note  (see  Uira-ccocha).

Lloque  Yupanqui,  third  Ynca,  161  ;
his  death,  173

Mama  Cava,  wife  of  Lloque  Yupan-
qui, third  Ynca,  173

Mama  Cora,  wife  of  Sinchi  Rocca,
second  Ynca,  93,  161

Mama  Curiyllpay,  270

Mama  Cuca,  234

Mama  Micay,  336

Mama  Ocllo  Huaco,  wife  of  the  first
Ynca,  70

Manco  Ccapac,  first  Ynca,  70;  fabu-
lous accounts  of  his  origin,  71-75;
an  Ynca’s  account,  63;  instructs


358


INDEX.


Lis  vassals,  81 ; fashions  intro-
duced by,  85 ; his  death,  9 1 ; at
lake  Titicaca,  285

Mayta  Ccapac,  fourth  Ynca,  173;
his  reign,  210  ; his  death,  233

Mayta  ( see  Apu-Mayta).

Pinahua,  legendary  companion  of
Manco  Ccapac,  71

Pachacutec,  337

Eocca  (see  Ynca  Eocca).

Sinchi  Eocca,  second  Ynca,  92 ; his
death,  1(30


Tocay,  legendary  companion  of
Manco  Ccapac,  71

Tumay  Huaraca,  347

Uira-ceocha  Ynca,  his  body  found,
273  (note)  ; his  banishment,  341

Yahuar-huaccac,  his  expedition  into
Anti-suyu,  327 ; meaning  of  his
name,  328 ; his  flight,  349

Ynca  Eocca,  his  campaigns  as  prince,
266;  meaning  of  his  name,  322;
his  conquests,  323-27,  332;  his
schools,  335

Ynca  Yupanqui,  completed  the  tem-
ple of  the  Sun,  271


NAMES  OF  SPANIARDS

in  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  and  Ath  Books  of  the

FIRST  PART  OF  THE  ROYAL  COMMENTARIES.


Acosta,  Father,  his  History  of  the
Indies  quoted  by  the  author ;
mention  of  the  story  of  Huelva,
23 ; as  to  name  of  Peru,  35 ; re-
specting the  Trinity,  120;  praise
of  the  Yncas,  142-199;  his  account
of  the  solstitial  pillars,  178  (note);
origin  of  the  saying  “ He  plays
away  the  sun  before  dawn,”  272
Alcobasa,  Diego  de,  a schoolfellow
of  the  author ; his  account  of  the
ruins  of  Tiahuanaco,  211
Almagro,  Diego  de,  defeat  of  Alva-
rado by,  243;  defeated  by  Her-
nando Pizarro,  80

Altamirano,  Antonio;  part  of  the
palace  of  Huayna  Ccapac  his  share
of  the  spoil  at  Cuzco,  104

. — Pedro,  the  author’s

schoolfellow,  104  (note)

Alvarado,  Alonzo  de,  his  defeats,  243
Andagoya,  Pascual  de,  on  the  name
of  Peru,  29  (note)

Avila,  Pedro  Arias  de,  kills  Yasco
Nunez,  27

Balboa,  Yasco  Núñez  de,  his  disco-
very of  the  South  Sea,  27,  36
Bandera,  Damian  de  la,  a map  made
by  the  Indians  for,  190


Barco,  Pedro  del,  295

Belalcazar,  Sebastian  de,  he  de-
stroys the  equinoctial  columns  at
Quito,  181

Benzoni  on  human  sacrifices,  140
(note)

Cabrera,  Pedro  Luis  de,  his  repar-
timiento at  Cotapampa,  242

Candía,  Pedro  de.  111 ; his  son  the
author’s  schoolfellow,  ih.

Castilla,  Sebastian  de,  his  rebellion,
205

Colon,  Christoval,  discovery  of
America,  22

Centeno,  Diego,  battle  with  Gon-
zalo Pizarro  at  Huarina,  217

Cuellar,  Juan  de.the  author’s  school-
master at  Cuzco,  205

Drake,  Sir  Francis,  his  improved
method  of  navigating,  37

Ercilla,  Alonzo  de,  author  of  the
Araucana,  his  mistaken  deriva-
tion of  the  word  Palla,  97

Fernandez,  Diego  de,  of  Palencia,
an  author  quoted  as  to  the  mean-
ing of  the  word  Peru,  29

Figueroa,  Garcia  Sanchez  de,  a


INDEX.


35  U


cousin  of  the  author ; he  relates
the  story  of  Pedro  Serrano,  40

Giron,  Francisco  Hernandez  de,  de-
feat at  Pucara,  166;  his  rebellion,
confusion  caused  by,  205;  defeats
Alvarado  at  Chuquinca,  243

Gomara,  Francisco  Lopez  de,  as  to
discovery  of  America,  22 ; name
of  Peru,  32;  his  history  quoted  by
the  author,  36,  39;  his  account  of
the  mode  of  interment,  128;  origin
of  the  Yncas,  191

Guzman,  Diego  Orton  de,  295

Huelva,  Alonzo  Sanchez  de,  a pilot
said  to  have  discovered  America,
21-22

Herrera,  his  version  of  the  origin  of
the  Yncas,  73  (note)

Lequesano,  Marcio  Serra  de,  plays
away  the  sun,  272 ; account  of
him,  272  (note)

Juan  Serra  de,  the  au-
thor’s schoolfellow,  272  (note)

Leon,  Pedro  de  Cieza  de,  quoted  by
the  author — as  to  the  name  of
Peru,  29-30 ; cannibalism,  55  ; on
Indian  immorality,  59 ; meaning
of  Pachacamac,  1 08 ; Indian  be-
lief in  immortality,  128 ; account
of  his  work,  134;  as  to  human
sacrifices,  138;  conquered  chiefs
not  disinherited,  146;  justice  of
the  Yncas,  156 ; mentions  solsti-
tial pillars,  178;  praise  of  the
Yncas,  199 ; his  account  of  Tia-
huanaco,  211;  allusion  to  events
in  the  Collao,  248 ; his  mention
of  temples  and  convents,  283

Martyr,  Peter,  122

Montesinos,  the  licentiate  Fernando,
his  version  of  the  origin  of  the
Yncas,  73  (note)

Ondegardo,  Polo  de,  on  human
sacrifices,  139  (note) ; discovers
bodies  of  Yncas,  273

Padilla,  Miguel  Vasquez  de,  inter-
ference with  the  plan  of  the
author’s  work,  129

Pizarro,  Hernando,  defeats  Almagro,
80

the  Marquis  Francisco,  111

Gonzalo,  217,  242


Polo  (see  Ondegardo).

Prado,  Gerónimo  de,  129

Roman,  Friar  Gerónimo,  as  to  the
name  of  Peru,  29;  as  to  the  name
of  Pachacamac,  108

Saavedra,  Father  Maldonado,  from
whom  the  author  obtained  the
papers  of  Bias  Valera  ( whom  see),
33

Sanchez,  Pedro,  a schoolmaster  at
Cuzco,  205

Serrano,  Pedro  de,  narrative  of  his
adventures,  41

Valera,  Father  Bias,  a missionary,
his  learning  and  writings,  33 ; as
to  the  name  of  Peru,  33,  35;  same
design  as  the  author  in  the
arrangement  of  his  work,  51 ; his
account  of  idolatries,  51  ; his
estimate  of  the  Yncarial  period,
101  ; on  the  religion  of  the  Mexi-
cans, 122;  meaning  of  the  word
Roca,  157;  his  Quichua  poem,  196;
his  reason  why  ships  cannot  sail
on  lake  Titicaca,  285;  his  account
of  the  riches  at  Titicaca,  286;
his  account  of  Ynca  Rocca,  his
schools  and  sayings,  335-36

Valverde,  Father  Vicente  de,  what
he  said  to  Atahualpa,  107 ; his
evidence  on  human  sacrifices,
141  (note)

Vega,  Garcilasso  Ynca  de  la,  the
extent  of  his  travels,  17;  at  Car-
thagena,  on  his  way  to  Spain,  57;
his  uncle’s  narrative,  62;  his  pro-
test concerning  his  history,  76;
cures  a boy’s  eyes,  189;  crosses
a river  in  a balsa,  when  quite  a
boy,  259

Garcilasso  de  la,  the  author’s

father,  his  repartimiento  at  Muyna,
191 ; his  other  repartimientos,  242,
330

Villalobos,  Juan  Rodriguez  de,  a
rich  citizen  of  Cuzco,  193

Zarate,  Agustin  de,  his  work  quoted
by  the  author  as  to  the  name  of
Peru,  29;  as  to  what  Valverde
said  to  Atahualpa,  107 ; his  ac-
count of  the  origin  of  the  Yncas,
73  (note),  142;  his  account  of  the
mode  of  interment,  128 ; law
against  those  who  violate  the
women  of  the  Ynca,  300


/ (o  Ü o


k^r
