=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
All of the sacrifices of living animals comes from five species alone: a) cattle, b) sheep, c) goats, d) turtle doves, and e) small doves.1See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:2 with regard to the differences between these species. In this chapter, the Rambam outlines the different types of animal sacrifices and which animals are offered for each one.
All of the sacrifices - whether those brought by the community or by individuals - are of four types: a) burnt-offerings, b) sin-offerings, c) guilt-offerings, and d) peace-offerings.
There are also three other types of individual sacrifices: a) the Paschal sacrifice, b) the sacrifice of the firstborn,2The sacrifice of the firstborn of one's cattle or flocks. and d) the tithe3I.e., the tithing of one's cattle or flocks. sacrifice.4In his Commentary to the Mishnah, in the introduction to the order of Kodshim, the Rambam speaks of "peace-offerings and [offerings] that resemble peace-offerings." He later explains that the term "[offerings] that resemble peace-offerings" refers to the three types of sacrifices mentioned here, because they resemble peace-offerings." He elaborates on that theme in his commentary to Zevachim 5:5, explaining that the procedure in which these three sacrifices are offered resembles that of the peace-offerings with only minor differences. For that reason and because they are offerings which a person is required to bring only on specific and infrequent occasions, he does not consider them as a separate category of sacrifices.
All of the communal offerings are burnt-offerings or sin-offerings. There are no communal peace-offerings except the two sheep offered with the bread that is waved on Shavuot.5I.e., the two loaves offered that day. The Rambam is borrowing the wording of Leviticus 23:17. They are called "the sacrifices of communal peace offerings." The community never offers a guilt offering, nor a fowl.
The communal offerings are the two temidim6Literally "continuous offerings." offered every day,7See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 1:1-3. the additional offerings of the Sabbaths,8See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:9. Rashei Chodashim, and the festivals,9See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim, chs. 7-10. and the sin-offering of a goat brought on Yom Kippur.10See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:2. Similarly, if [the High] Court11The Sanhedrin of 71 judges who would hold their sessions in the Chamber of Hewn Stone. inadvertently gave an erroneous ruling with regard to the worship of false deities, every tribe is required to bring a bull and a goat. The bull is brought as a burnt-offering and the goat as a sin-offering. These goats are called "the goats of false deities." If they inadvertently gave an erroneous ruling with regard to other mitzvot, they bring a bull as a sin-offering. It is called "the bull associated with the overlooking of a matter by the community."12Both of these sacrifices are described in Hilchot Shegagot 12:1.
The sacrifices [brought by] individuals include: a) the firstborn offerings,13See Hilchot Bechorot, ch. 1.b) the tithe offerings,14See Hilchot Bechorot, ch. 6.c) the Paschal offerings,15See Hilchot Korban Pesach, ch. 1.d) the chagigah offerings, i.e., the peace offerings [brought in association with the pilgrimage festivals],e) the pilgrimage offering which is a burnt-offering,16Both of these sacrifices are described in Hilchot Chagigah, ch. 1.f) the sacrifice brought by a convert, that involves a burnt-offering from a domesticated animal, two small doves or two turtle doves; both of them are burnt-offerings, or two domesticated animals, one as a burnt-offering and one as a peace-offering,17See Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah, ch. 1.g) one who vows18A person vows to bring either a burnt-offering or a peace-offering. or pledges19A person pledges to bring a particular animal as a burnt-offering or a peace-offering. a burnt-offering or a peace offering,20See Chapter 14 of these halachot (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot) which describes these sacrifices.h) peace-offerings that are accompanied by bread; they are called thanksgiving offerings,21See Chapter 9, Halachah 5, and onward which describe this sacrifice.i) the sacrifices of a nazirite,22One who took a vow not to drink wine. which are a burnt-offering, a sin-offering, and a peace-offering,23See Hilchot Nizirut, ch. 8.j) the sacrifices of a metzora,24A person afflicted with tzara'at a skin ailment, similar, but not identical, to leprosy. which are a sin-offering, and a guilt-offering, and a burnt-offering,25See Hilchot Mechusrei Kaparah, ch. 4.k) the sacrifices of a zav26A male who has emissions from his sexual organ similar to those resulting from a gonorrheal infection. a zavah,27A woman who experiences vaginal bleeding outside her menstrual cycle. and a women after childbirth; they are a sin-offering and a burnt-offering,28See Hilchot Mechusrei Kaparah 1:3.l) the sacrifice brought by a person who inadvertently violated a negative commandment punishable by karet;29Premature death at the hand of heaven and the soul being cut off in the World to Come. it is a sin-offering,30See Hilchot Shegagot, ch. 1.m) if a person was unsure of whether he transgressed or not, that transgressor brings a guilt-offering; it is called a conditional guilt-offering,31See Chapter 9 which describes both these types of sacrifices.n) there are certain sins32When he engaged in relations with a maid-servant who was married, robbed, made mundane use of consecrated property. Similarly, a nazirite who became impure and a person afflicted with tzara'at must bring this offering. for which one brings a guilt-offering [to atone for their transgression]; this is called a definite guilt-offering,33See Chapter 9 which describes both these types of sacrifices.o) similarly, the ram brought as a burnt-offering and the bull the High Priest brings from his own resources as a sin-offering on Yom Kippur,34See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim, ch. 4, which describes the offering of these sacrifices. are individual offerings; the bull is called "the bull of Yom Kippur."All of these sacrifices are explicitly mentioned in the Torah and the laws governing each of them are explained in the appropriate places.
[The person bringing] any of the individual offerings is responsible for them and for their accompanying offerings35I.e., if the animal he designated as a sacrifice dies or the meal or wine offering designated for the sacrifices was spoiled, he must bring another one in its place. with the exception of an animal pledged as sacrifice.36As will be explained in ch. 14, in that instance, the person is not vowing to bring a sacrifice, he designated a particular animal as a sacrifice. Hence if that animal is lost, he is not obligated to replace it. [The community at large] is not responsible for sacrifices or their accompanying offerings.37We are speaking about sacrifices that are required to be brought at a specific time. If for some reason, the community was unable to bring them at that time, they are not required to bring them afterwards. As Berachot 26a states: "If the time passes, the sacrifice is nullified." If a sacrifice was offered, they are responsible for its additional offerings.38For these additional offerings may be brought even at a later date, as will be explained in Chapter 2, Halachah 12. When an individual's sacrifice was required to be offered at a fixed time,39Like the Paschal or festive offerings. it is like a communal offering and the person is not responsible for it.40In this instance as well, since the time passed, the sacrifice cannot be brought. In truth, the matter is not at all dependent on whether an individual's sacrifice or a communal offering is involved. The determining factor is whether there is a specific time associated with the sacrifice or not (Radbaz).
All of the animals brought as burnt-offerings must only be male.41Leviticus 22:18-19 speaks of bringing the three species mentioned as burnt offerings and specifies that they must be male. It may be brought from sheep, goats, or cattle, whether large or small.42Provided they are eight days old, as explained in Halachah 11. They may also be brought from turtle doves and small doves, whether male or female.43The Torah does not make any specification with regard to fowl.
A sin-offering may be brought from these five species, from both males and females, from small ones and large ones.
A guilt-offering may be brought only from male sheep. There are guilt-offerings that come from large members of this species44Those brought for the sins mentioned in note 32. and others which come from small members of this species.45The guilt offering brought by a nazirite.
Peace offerings may be brought from sheep, goats, or cattle, from males and females, whether large or small. A fowl may not be brought as a peace offering.[When describing an animal as] small, [the intent] is one between the eighth day46Before eight days, it is forbidden to bring an animal as a sacrifice, as stated in Hilchot Isssurei Mizbeiach 3:4. and a full year, from day to day. If the year was declared a leap year, [the extra month is included]. "Large" implies until three full years from day to day for cattle, for flocks,47Both sheep and goats. until two full years from day to day. From this age onward, [the animal] is considered as "old" and it should not be brought as an offering.
Although all of the sacrifices are acceptable if they are brought from the eighth day onward, as an initial preference, we do not bring [an animal] as a sacrifice until it is 30 days old or older48If it was brought earlier, it is acceptable after the fact (Radbaz). with the exception of a firstborn offering,49Since Exodus 22:29 explicitly states that a firstborn animal may be offered on its eighth day of life, our Sages did not desire to place any restrictions on the offering. It may be offered on the eighth day even as an initial preference. a Paschal offering, and a tithe offering.50The tithe offering and the Paschal sacrifice are, like the firstborn offering, sacrifices of lesser sanctity and the laws governing the pouring of their blood on the altar are the same. Hence, our Sages considered them the same in this instance as well [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Parah 1:4)].The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that the mishnah cited also states that the same laws apply to offerings that were vowed or pledged and question why the Rambam does not mention them in this halachah. The Radbaz notes that the Rambam does not mention pledges and vows in his Commentary to the Mishnah and maintains that he possessed a different version of the mishnah. If one desires to offer these sacrifices from the eighth day onward, he may.
Hours are counted with regard to consecrated animals,51Generally, years are counted from day to day and not from hour to hour. For example, with regard to a child becoming Bar Mitzvah at age 13, if he was born at 3 PM on the sixteenth of Elul, he reaches Bar Mitzvah at nightfall on the sixteenth of Elul. He need not wait until 3 in the afternoon. With regard to sacrifices, however, Zevachim 18b uses Biblical exegesis to teach that we count from the hour of an animal's birth. i.e., if their [lives] were an hour longer52As the Rambam describes in the following clause. or an hour was subtracted from their [lives],53This refers to an animal like a ram that is not acceptable for sacrifice until it is a year and 30 days old. It is not acceptable until the hour of its birth passes on the thirty-first day. they are unacceptable.What is implied? When it is required that a sacrifice be less than a year old, if an hour was added to its year, it is invalidated. Even if it was merely a year old when it was slaughtered and additional time was added before its blood was sprinkled [on the altar], it is invalidated. It must be less than a year until the time the blood is sprinkled [on the altar]. Similar [laws] apply with regard to all the sacrifices.
Whenever the Torah uses the expressions, "a male sheep," "a female sheep," "sheep," the intent is [an animal] in its first year [of life]. "A ram" or "rams"54The term, ayil, Hebrew for ram, is identified with strength. Implied is that the animal must reach a stage of maturity that endows it with strength and power. implies males in their second year [of life]. When is an animal called a ram? When 31 days of its second year of life pass. On the thirtieth day, however, it is not acceptable, neither as a sheep, nor as a ram. [At this stage,] it is called a pilgas.55This is a Greek term. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Parah 1:3), the Rambam explains that the term carries an allusion to the Hebrew phrase peleg gas, implying that it has passed its limits exceedingly. Similarly, this animal is in an intermediate state, having left one category, but not entered another.Whenever the expression "a calf" is used, the intent is [an animal] in its first year [of life]. The term "bull" implies that the animal is in its second year of life. The term "a goat kid" implies that it is in its first year, "a goat," that it is in its second year. Throughout the second year, it is called a goat.56Perhaps the Rambam's intent is that there is no concept of a pilgas with regard to goats.
All of the communal offerings are male. All57Our translation is based on early printing and authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text has a slightly different version. of the communal sin offerings58Brought on Rosh Chodesh or the festivals and those mentioned in the following halachot. come from goats or from cattle, none are brought from sheep. All of the communal burnt offerings are from sheep or cattle; there are no burnt-offerings brought from goats.All of the sin-offerings brought by individuals are female. They may be eaten by the priests and they do not come from cattle except three: a) the sin-offering of a nasi59I.e., a king as stated in Hilchot Shegagot 15:6. which is a goat60I.e., as opposed to ordinary sin-offerings which can be either a goat or a sheep, the prince's offering must be a goat and it must be male in contrast to those offerings which are female. and is eaten, b) the sin-offering of the anointed priest which is a bull,61I.e. the High Priest, but only one who was anointed. If he assumed his office through wearing the garments of the High Priest (as did the High Priests of the Second Temple), he is not required to bring this sacrifice (Hilchot Shegagot, loc. cit.). which is burnt;62I.e., and not eaten. it is called "the bull that comes because of [the violation of] any mitzvah;" c) the bull brought by the High Priest on Yom Kippur;63See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 1:1; 4:1. it is a sin-offering that is burnt.
All of the communal sin-offerings are eaten with the exception of the goat offered on Yom Kippur whose partner is sent [to Azazel],64See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 1:1; 4:1. the goats brought [because of the violation65By people at large due to a erroneous ruling by the High Court. of the prohibition against] idol worship,66See Hilchot Shegagot 12:1. and the bull [brought because of the violation of] a law forgotten [by the High Court].67By people at large due to a erroneous ruling by the High Court. "The bull that comes because of [the violation of] any mitzvah"68I.e. the High Priest, but only one who was anointed. If he assumed his office through wearing the garments of the High Priest (as did the High Priests of the Second Temple), he is not required to bring this sacrifice (Hilchot Shegagot, loc. cit.). and the bull [brought because of] a law forgotten [by the High Court] are called "the bulls that are burnt." The goats brought [because of the violation of the prohibition against] idol worship are called "the goats that are burnt."Thus there are five sin-offerings that are burnt: two are individual offerings69The two bulls brought by the High Priest mentioned in the previous halachah. and three are communal offerings.70The bulls and the goats brought because of transgressions performed due to a erroneous ruling by the High Court and the goat offered as a sin offered on Yom Kippur [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 12:5)]. Significantly, in his Commentary to Parah 8:3, the Rambam does not mention the goat offered on Yom Kippur among the goats that are burnt.
All of these offerings are called zevachim.71The Radbaz notes that this appellation is found in Zevachim 47a. He questions the reason for the Rambam's inclusion of this point and explains that it can resolve a question that might arise if a person made a particular pledge. All of the burnt-offerings, sin-offerings, guilt-offerings, and the two sheep brought as peace-offerings on Shavuos are called "sacrifices of the highest order of sanctity."72See Chapter 5, Halachot 2-3. Peace offerings brought by an individual, the firstborn offerings, the tithe offerings, and the Paschal offerings, are called "sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity."73See Chapter 5, Halachah 4.
The limbs and organs that are burnt on the altar from the sin-offerings that are eaten, from the guilt-offerings, and from the peace-offerings74The Rambam does not mention the burnt offering, because then the entire animal is burnt. are called eimorim.75In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Introduction to the Order of Kodshim), the Rambam explains that this term is derived from the term emar, "spoke," i.e., these are the organs spoken about, i.e., specified by God to be burnt. These are the eimorim of an ox or a goat: the fat that is on the inner organs,76The Biblical term kerev (Leviticus 3:3, et al) refers to the inner digestive organs. That verse speaks of "the fat that covers the inner organs" and "all the fat on the inner organs." The first term refers to a large membrane that covers all of these organs like a sack. The second term refers to the fat on the organs themselves. included with that is the fat that is on the maw,77I.e., one of the animals four stomachs. Since the verse uses the term kol, "all," our Sages understood that additional fat was to be brought. the two kidneys and the fat that is on them, together with the fat that is on the flanks, the lobe of the liver, and a small portion of the liver should also be taken with its lobe.78These are also mentioned explicitly in Leviticus 3:10, et al. If the sacrifice is from sheep, he should add to these the fat tail79The tails of goat and cattle do not collect fat. Hence the term alyah, "fat tail" is not appropriate with regard to them and their tails are not offered (Radbaz). in its entirety80Leviticus 3:9 speaks of haalyah temimah. In this context, temimah means "entire." together with the vertebrae from the spine until the place of the kidneys, as [Levitcus 3:9] states: "he shall remove it opposite the kidneys." All of the eimorim are burnt on the outer altar.81The inner altar is used only for incense and the blood sprinkled on it on Yom Kippur. See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 2:11.
If a [sacrificial] animal was pregnant, even though the fetus had been carried for a full term, and even if it was discovered to be alive [after the mother was slaughtered],82In which instance, its fat is forbidden to be eaten, as stated in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 7:3. its fat should not be offered together with the fat of its mother. Instead, only the fat of the mother is offered. The fetus is considered as one of its limbs.83We do not consider it as if two animals were offered as this sacrifice and the eimorim from each must be offered on the altar. Instead, only the mother is considered as the sacrifice and the fetus is considered as an appendage to it. If the sacrifice is a sin offering, it is given to the priests to partake of. If it is a peace offering, it is given to the owner. Females are not sacrificed as guilt offerings.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The wine and the fine flour that are brought together with an offering are called accompanying offerings.1The term nesachim is used continually throughout the Torah, e.g., Numbers, ch. 15. Literally, it means "libations." We have not used that term, because it is not appropriate with regard to the meal offerings. In his introduction to the tractate of Menachot, the Rambam states that the Torah uses the term in a general sense without attention to its particular meaning.Since every sacrifice is accompanied by such offerings, before delineating the details of the sacrifices, the Rambam describes these accompanying offerings. The fine flour alone is called the accompanying meal-offering. The accompanying meal-offering need not be waved, brought [to the corner of the altar], nor [offered with] frankincense.2As stated in Chapter 12, Halachot 6-7, all of the meal offerings brought independently must be brought to the corner of the altar and frankincense must be offered with them. Some also must be waved. It requires salt3For Leviticus 2:13 states that salt must be brought on all sacrifices. and it is burnt on the outer altar in its entirety.4In contrast, there are other meal offerings which are fit to be eaten.The wine is poured over the altar. It is not poured over the fire. Instead, the priest should lift up his hands5The Kessef Mishneh notes that Sukkah 48b gives that instruction with regard to the water libation brought on Sukkot. Nevertheless, that text questions why this instruction is mentioned here with regard to the wine libation, for seemingly, there would be no reason to do so. and pour it on [the altar's] base6The Ra'avad notes that Sukkah 48a,b speaks of two cups on the southwest corner of the altar, i.e., on the upper level around which the priests would walk. The wine and water libations would be poured into these cups and they would extend to the shittin. The Radbaz notes that the Rambam himself (Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 6:5; see also Chapter 7, Halachah 11) speaks of bringing the wine to the top of the altar. Hence, he maintains that the Rambam agrees with the Ra'avad concerning this issue. The Kessef Mishneh differs and maintains that these cups were only used during Sukkot. Otherwise, the wine was poured on the altar's base and from there, it flowed into the shittin. and from there, it descends to the shittin.7See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:11 which explains that these were two cavities in the southwest corner of the altar.
Accompanying offerings are required only for an animal brought as a burnt-offering or as a peace-offering. Whether it was a communal sacrifice, an individual sacrifice, a sheep brought by a woman who gave birth, or the ram brought by the High Priest,8These two offerings are singled out because they are individual burnt-offerings that are not dependent on an individual's pledge or vow. Menachot 91b cites an explicit verse that teaches that accompanying offerings are required for these sacrifices. since it was a burnt-offering, it requires the accompanying offerings. Accompanying offerings are not brought for [sacrifices of] fowl,9Even those brought as burnt offerings. guilt-offerings, sin-offerings, with the exception of the sin-offering and guilt-offering of a person who had been afflicted with tzara'at, for those accompanying offerings are explicitly mentioned in the Torah.10Menachot 91a derives the need for such accompanying offerings from a juxtaposing Leviticus 14:10 and Numbers 15:5. In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that accompanying offerings are brought for these sacrifices, because they do not come because of a sin.
What is the source that teaches that accompanying offerings should not be brought together with sin-offerings and guilt-offerings? [When speaking about the accompanying offerings, Numbers 15:3] states: "to utter a vow or pledge," [implying that these offerings are necessary only for sacrifices] brought because of a vow or pledge. [This] excludes a sin-offering, guilt-offering, firstborn offering, tithe offering, and Paschal sacrifice. Since [these offerings] are not brought because of a vow or a pledge, they do not require accompanying offerings.Which is the source that teaches to include the festive peace-offerings and the pilgrimage burnt-offerings?11Which are obligations and not dependent on a person's volition. [The above verse] states: "Or on your festivals."
What is the measure of the accompanying offerings? The accompanying offering for a male or female sheep is an isaron12An isaron is equivalent to the size of 43.2 eggs. In modern measure, the size of an egg is 57.6 cc according to Shiurei Torah, and 99.5 cc according to Chazon Ish. of fine flour mixed with a quarter of a hin13As stated in Halachah 7, a hin is equivalent to twelve log. Each log comprises four revi'iot. In modern measure, a revi'it is 86 cc according to Shiurei Torah and approximately 150 cc according to Chazon Ish. Thus a hin is 48 times this amount. of oil and a quarter of a hin of wine as a wine libation. These are also [the accompanying offerings] for a goat whether small14In its first year of life, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 11. or large15In its second year of life (ibid.). and whether male or female and for a ewe, even if she is large. The accompanying offerings of a ram, however, are two esronim mixed with a third of a hin of oil and a third of a hin of wine as a libation. The accompanying offerings of a cow or a calf, whether male or female, are three esronim mixed with a half of a hin of oil and a half of a hin of wine as a libation.
These measures are applicable for the accompanying offerings for burnt-offerings and peace-offerings for each animal offered,16I.e., even if a person pledged to bring several sacrifices of a given type, he must bring the required accompanying offerings for each animal. as [implied by ibid.:12]: "According to the number that you offer, so shall you do for [each] one according to their number." We may not increase these measures, nor may we decrease them. [Indeed,] if one increases or decreases [the measure by] even the slightest amount, one disqualifies [the accompanying offering]. The only exception is the sheep offered as a burnt offering on the day of the waving of the omer.17See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:3 where this sacrifice is mentioned. The accompanying offering for it is two esronim mixed with a third of a hin of oil.18The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that only a quarter of a hin of oil should be used. The Radbaz notes that Menachot 89b appears to support the Ra'avad's position. Although he explains that the Rambam's position could be justified, he admits that it is somewhat difficult. The Kessef Mishneh also suggests that a printing error crept into the text of the Mishneh Torah. Although the measure of flour was doubled,19Usually, only one isaron of flour was brought for a burnt-offering of a sheep, as stated in the previous halachah. the measure of wine was not and [only] a quarter of a hin is brought as a libation.
A person who had been afflicted with tzara'at must bring three esronim of flour [as accompanying offerings] for the three sheep which he brings as a sin-offering, a guilt-offering, and a burnt-offering.20See Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:3. Bringing accompanying offerings for these sacrifices is an exception to the general rule, as stated in Halachah 2. The obligation to bring these three esronim is explicitly stated in Leviticus 14:10. The Oral Tradition (Menachot 91a) teaches that each one is designated for a different sacrifice. According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that they come because of the sacrifices he brings,21This version is found in some of the authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah and is also suggested by the Or Sameach. The standard published text follows a slightly different version. an isaron for each sheep mixed with a quarter of a hin of oil. A revi'it of wine should be brought with each of the esronim as is the rule for the accompanying offering for all sheep. When one brings a pilgas,22A ram that is between one year and one year and a month old (Chapter 1, Halachah 14). he should bring with it the accompanying offerings for a ram, [nevertheless,] it is not considered as if he brought [the appropriate] sacrifice.23I.e., regardless of whether he pledged a ram or a male sheep, he is not considered to have fulfilled his obligation by bringing a pilgas, for it is too old for the latter type sacrifice and not old enough for the former.
A hin comprises twelve log. We have already stated the measure of a log together with other measures in Hilchot Eruvin.24Hilchot Eruvin 1:13. An isaron is an omer which is the measure [of dough from which] challah must be separated. We have already explained this measure with regard to [the mitzvah of] challah.25Hilchot Bikkurim 6:15.
When the accompanying offerings or the meal offerings are measured, whether for an individual offering or a communal offering, they should not be measured in a measure of three esronim for a bull or two esronim for a ram. Instead, everything should be measured with the measure of one isaron that existed in the Temple.26See Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 1:16 which describes the various measures that existed in the Temple. Similarly, the oil for the accompanying offerings should be measured with the appropriate measure in the Temple.27As stated (ibid.:17), there were measures of a half a hin, a third of a hin, and a quarter of a hin in the Temple. The oil for a meal offering brought by an individual is measured in the measure of a log that existed in the Temple;28I.e., a person should not measure out the flour in a private measure he has outside the Temple. Instead, the measurement should be made with the Temple's measure (Radbaz). the number of lugim [of oil] is determined by the number of esronim [of flour].29See Chapter 12, Halachah 7 and Chapter 13, Halachah 5.
The overflow of the measures of flour are considered to be ordinary flour,30I.e., they are not consecrated. because the outer side of the isaron measure is not consecrated.31Flour, wine, and oil that come in contact with sacred utensils become consecrated. Nevertheless, only the inside of the dry measures were consecrated. The outside remained unconsecrated. Hence, the fact that the flour came in contact with it does not change its status. See Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 1:19. The overflow of the wine and oil, by contrast, is consecrated, because it flows down the back of the utensil and both the inside and the outside of the liquid measures were anointed.Why were the overflows consecrated even though the person measuring only intended to sanctify what was within the utensil?32As stated in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:20, an object placed in a sacred utensil does not become consecrated unless the person placing it there did so intentionally. Hence, even though the overflows came in contact with a sacred utensil, seemingly, there was no intent for them to become consecrated. So that it would not be said that [substances] are used for ordinary purposes after having been in a sacred utensil.33I.e., a safeguard instituted by our Sages lest a mistaken impression be created.The Kessef Mishneh notes that even though this rationale is advanced by Menachot 90a in support of a minority opinion, it would still be accepted by the majority.
What would they do with the overflows? If there was another sacrifice, they would sacrifice them with it. [In that instance,] if they remained overnight,34I.e., there was another offering and it was thought they would be offered with it, but for some reason they were not and remained overnight. they became disqualified accordingly.35For once they were placed in a sacred utensil, remaining overnight would disqualify them, as stated in Halachah 12. If not, they were [redeemed36It is permitted to redeem them, because when consecrating them, there was the intent that they would be redeemed in such an eventuality (Radbaz). and the proceeds] used to provide "dessert for the altar."37Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 4:4), where he explains that the term kayitz refers to the time of the fig and grape harvest. These fruits are served as dessert, after a person has eaten his major meal. Similarly, these offerings do not represent the fundamental "food" of the altar, but instead, are offered only when the altar is free.
What is implied? Burnt offerings are purchased [with the proceeds of] their [sale]. The meat is offered to God and the hides are given to the priests.
The flour mixed with oil38The flour and the oil are, however, absolute requirements. One cannot be offered without the other (Radbaz). of the accompanying offerings are not indispensable requirements preventing [the offering of] the wine libation, nor is the wine libation an indispensable requirement preventing their offering, nor are the accompanying offerings an indispensable requirement preventing the offering of the sacrifices.39I.e., the person is required to bring both of these elements of the accompanying offering. Nevertheless, the offering of one is not dependent on the other as the Rambam continues to explain. Instead, a person may bring his sacrifice one day and his accompanying offerings after ten days. [This applies to] both individual offerings and communal sacrifices, provided the accompanying offerings were not consecrated in a sacred utensil. If, however, they were consecrated in a sacred utensil, they are disqualified if they remain overnight.
The accompanying offerings may only be brought from ordinary produce. They may not be brought from terumah, the second tithes, or the first fruits.40All of these have a certain dimension of holiness and are not considered as ordinary property. It is forbidden to use them for any purpose other than partaking of them in the ordinary manner. Hence they may not be used for these offerings. Even for the thanksgiving offering whose bread may be brought from the [second] tithe, its accompanying offerings should only be brought from ordinary produce.41The bread from the thanksgiving offering may be eaten by an ordinary person. Hence, it is permitted for it to be brought from the second tithes. The accompanying offerings, as stated above, are offered on the altar entirely. Hence, they may not be brought from the second tithes (Radbaz).
All of the measures of the accompanying offerings mentioned in the Book of Ezekiel,42These differ greatly for the measures usually employed. the listing of the sacrifices, and the order of service written there are all inauguration offerings and will not be practiced in generations to follow.43The Radbaz explains that since we are speaking about a directive for a specific time and not an ongoing practice, as a prophet, Ezekiel had the right to speak of offerings not prescribed by the Torah. This does not constitute a violation of the prohibition to add to the Torah's commandments. See Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah, ch. 9. Instead, the prophet commanded and outlined how the inauguration offerings will be brought at the time of the dedication of the altar at the time of the coming of the King Mashiach when the Third Temple will be built.44All authorities agree that Ezekiel's prophecy referred to special sacrifices and was not to be followed continuously. Rashi (Menachot 45b) interprets it as referring to the Second Temple, while the Rambam understands it as applying to the era of Mashiach.
Just as the princes45The leaders of the tribes as related in Numbers, ch. 7. offered sacrifices at the dedication of the altar [of the Sanctuary in the desert], bringing offerings that were not brought in coming generations, and they brought them on the Sabbath, so too, a prince will bring a dedication offering on the Sabbath in the Ultimate Future, as stated explicitly there.46Ezekiel 46:4. Similarly, the sacrifices which the people who returned [to Zion] from the [Babylonian] captivity in the days of Ezra,47See Ezra 8:35. were inaugural offerings and will not be practiced in generations to come. The practices to be followed in generations to come are the words of the Torah that we have explained as they were copied from Moses our teacher.48I.e., from the Torah scrolls which he wrote. We may not add to them49Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 313) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 454) count the prohibition against adding to the Torah as one of its 613 mitzvot. or subtract from them.50Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 314) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 455) count the prohibition against adding to the Torah as one of its 613 mitzvot.The above is not merely a point of law, but a fundamental issue of Jewish faith. As the Rambam states in the ninth of his Thirteen Principles of Faith (Commentary to the Mishnah, Sanhedrin, ch. 10) declaring:The ninth principle is that the Torah of Moses will never be nullified.... There can be no additions to it, nor any deletions from it - neither in its text nor in its explanation. And thus we are commanded: "Do not add to it and do not detract it from it."(Our translation is taken from the original manuscript versions of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah. The standard published text varies slightly.)

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
When two people desired to bring a peace-offering or a burnt-offering in partnership,1See Halachah 9. they may whether it was pledged or vowed.2See Chapter 1, Halachah 6, with regard to the distinction between these types of offerings. Even a fowl3I.e., an entity of seemingly little value. One might think that bringing such an offering in partnership is not becoming to the altar. Even so, if one's intent is desirable, the offering is accepted (Radbaz, based on Menachot 110a). may be brought in partnership.
Men, women, and, servants may bring all of these types of sacrifices.4In this chapter, the Rambam outlines the types of individuals who may bring a sacrifice and the rite of semichah because that is an obligation on the person bringing the sacrifice. From gentiles, by contrast, we accept only burnt offerings, as [derived from Leviticus 22:28]: "From the hand of an alien, you shall not offer the food of your God [from all of these]."5The Jerusalem Talmud (Avodah Zarah 2:1) notes that the prooftext states that it is forbidden to accept an offering from a gentile from a blemished animal. One can infer that if the animal is unblemished, the offering may be accepted.The verse uses the term lechem, "food." That term is understood as referring only to a burnt-offering, as Numbers 28:2 states: "My food for my fires."And the burnt-offering is the only type of offering, consumed entirely by the fire of the altar (Radbaz). Even a burnt offering of fowl may be accepted from a gentile,6Although the prooftext speaks only of animals, our Sages understood that the leniency applies to fowl as well (Radbaz). even if he worships false deities.7As mentioned in Halachah 4, burnt offerings are not accepted from a Jew who worships false deities. Nevertheless, such restrictions are not placed upon gentiles.We do not, however, accept peace-offerings,8To offer them as peace-offerings. They are, however, brought as burnt-offerings, as stated in the following halachah. meal-offerings, sin-offerings, or guilt-offerings9For the concept of atonement applies only with regard to the Jews' relationship with God. from a gentile. Similarly, burnt-offerings that do not come as vows or pledges are not accepted from gentiles, e.g., a burnt-offering from a women who gave birth or the like or other burnt-offerings that do not come as vows or pledges.
When a gentile brings peace-offerings, they should be sacrificed as burnt-offerings, for [the intention of] a gentile's heart is [for the sake] of heaven.10Rashi (Menachot 73b) interprets this as meaning that the gentile desires that his sacrifices be offered entirely to God and not have mortals partake of them. If he gives them to a Jew with the intent that a Jew receive atonement,11The Radbaz notes that peace-offerings are not intended to bring atonement and explains that this is referring to an instance where a Jew vowed to bring a peace offering and the gentile offered to bring it for him. One might think that since the gentile is bringing them they would be offered as burnt-offerings. Hence it is necessary to explain that they are peace offerings. the Jew may partake of them like the peace-offerings of the Jewish people. Similarly, if he gives them to a priest, the priest may partake of them.
When a Jew is an apostate who worships false deities or who desecrates the Sabbath in public,12See the conclusion of Hilchot Shabbat where the Rambam explains that the public desecration of the Sabbath is equivalent to idol worship, because they are both cornerstones of the Jewish faith. "Public" refers to a matter known about by ten people.The Radbaz adds that we do not accept the sacrifices of a Jew who has abandoned Judaism and accepted a faith like Islam which does not involve idol worship. Such a person is included in the category (Hilchot Teshuvah 3:9) of an apostate with regard to the entire Torah. we do not accept any sacrifices from him at all. Even a burnt-offering that is accepted from a gentile is not accepted from this apostate. [This is derived from Leviticus 1:2 which] states: "A man from you who will sacrifice." According to the Oral Tradition,13Chulin 5a-b. we learned: "From you," i.e., not all of you, excluding an apostate.If, however, one was a heretic with regard to other transgressions, any sacrifice [he brings] is accepted so that he will repent. If, however, he was a heretic with regard to a transgression and it is public knowledge that he commits it and he has become accustomed to doing so, a sacrifice [that he brings atoning for] that transgression - whether committed to anger [God]14I.e., he had two cuts of meat before him of equal quality, one kosher and one non-kosher and he ate the non-kosher one solely for the intent of angering God (Gittin 47a). or out of desire15Similarly, in Hilchot Edut 10:3, a distinction is not made with regard to the motivations for the transgression. There are other instances - see Hilchot Teshuvah, loc. cit., Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 8;14, Hilchot Gezeilah ViAveidah 11:2, and Hilchot Rotzeach 4:10 - where the Rambam does make such a distinction. -is not accepted.16Since he frequently violates this transgression, we assume that he is not sincere in his desire for atonement for it, because a request for atonement must be accompanied by sincere regret. Sacrifices brought for other transgressions are, however, accepted from him. See Hilchot Shegagot 3:7. What is implied? If a person was accustomed to eat fat - whether committed to anger [God] or out of desire - and then he inadvertently partook of fat and brought a sin-offering [for this transgression], it is not accepted.
Gentiles do not bring accompanying offerings17A meal offering and a wine libation. for the burnt-offerings they bring, as [can be inferred from Numbers 15:13]: "Every native among you shall do this."18This verse concludes the passage commanding the offering of the accompanying offers, implying that it is only a native - i.e., a member of the Jewish people - who is required to bring them. The accompanying offerings for their sacrifices are, however, brought from communal funds,19I.e., the Temple treasury. as [ibid.:12] states: "So shall you do for each one according to their number."20Implying that the sacrifices themselves require that the accompanying offerings be brought. [These burnt offerings] do not require semichah,21Leaning on the animal with all one's strength, as the Rambam proceeds to explain in the concluding halachot of the chapter. for semichah is performed only by a Jew, and by a male and not a female.22The prooftext for the obligation to perform semichah speaks of "the children of Israel," and uses the male form. Menachot 93b understands this to exclude gentiles and Chagigah 16b understands it as excluding women. See also Halachah 8.
All of the offerings from domesticated animals that an individual brings23This also includes offerings brought in partnership. The exclusion is only of communal offerings. See Halachah 10.- whether those in which he is obligated or those promised through a vow - [require] semichah while they are alive with the exception of the firstborn offering, the tithe offering, and the Paschal sacrifice. [This is derived from Leviticus 3:2]: "And he shall lean his hand on the head of his offering." According to the Oral Tradition,24Sifra to the verse; Menachot 92b. we learned that this refers to all the sacrifices with the exception of the firstborn offering, the tithe offering, and the Paschal sacrifice.
[A sacrifice of] a fowl does not require semichah.25The Sifra derives this concept from the exegesis of Leviticus 1:4: "And he will lean his hand on the head of the burnt-offering." "The" implies that there are some burnt-offerings to which this does not apply.We already explained in Hilchot Shekalim26Hilchot Shekalim 2:3; 3:14. that the law is that all the money concerning which it was decided that it should be given to the chest for freewill offerings27Money that was found between the chest of the freewill offerings and the chest of the shekalim that was closer to the chest of the freewill offerings. should be used to purchase burnt-offerings. The person to which this money belonged does not perform semichah on that animal, nor does he bring the accompanying offerings.28Since the money was placed in the chest for the freewill offering, it is no longer considered as his personal property, but as the property of the community. Hence, he is not the owner of the sacrifices and may not perform semichah on them. For that same reason, the community brings the accompanying offerings. Instead, the accompanying offerings are brought from communal funds.29A meal offering and a wine libation. Even if he was a priest, the service [of offering the sacrifice] and its hide belong to the men of the watch.30The priests designated to serve in the Temple that week. Even though the person whose money was used is a priest and he has the right to offer sacrifices that he brings (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:7), in this instance, he cannot demand the right to offer the sacrifice.
All people may perform semichah with the exception of a deafmute, a mentally and/or emotionally unstable individual, a minor,31These three individuals are not considered as responsible for their actions and are free of the responsibility for all mitzvot. a servant, a woman,32See Halachah 5. a blind man, and a gentile.33Gentiles are not obligated in any of the mitzvot. Hence the obligation of semichah does not apply to them. An agent does not perform semichah, for semichah is performed only by the owners, as [implied by the prooftext]: "And he shall lean his hand." "His hand" and not the hand of his wife, his servant, or his agent.
When five individuals bring a sacrifice [in partnership], they all perform semichah, one after the other. They should not perform semichah at the same time. 34The Radbaz states that this concept is derived from the fact that the prooftext uses the term "his hand" in the singular.When a person died and left a sacrifice of a burnt offering or a peace offering, his heir should have it offered, perform semichah on it, and bring its accompanying offerings.35For he is acting in the place of the original owner.
Semichah is not performed with regard to communal offerings except with regard to two sacrifices: the goat sent to Azazel36During the Yom Kippur services. The High Priest performs semichah on it. and the bull brought because of a law being forgotten.37In both these instances, there is an explicit verse (Leviticus 16:21; 4:15) requiring semichah for the sacrifice. Three members of the Sanhedrin perform semichah on it. This is a law conveyed by Moses our teacher that semichah is not performed on communal offerings other than these two.38I.e., were it not for that tradition, we might have derived the need for semichah for communal offerings from these two instances using Biblical exegesis [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 9:7)].
Semichah is performed only in the Temple Courtyard.39Zevachim 32b explains that just as the slaughter of the animal must be performed "before God," in the Temple Courtyard, so too, semichah must be performed "before God," in that same place. If one performed semichah outside the Temple Courtyard, he should perform it again inside. If the one bringing the sacrifice was standing outside [the Temple Courtyard] and he extended his hands into [the Courtyard] and performed semichah, his semichah is valid,40This is indeed what is done when the atonement process of the people bringing the sacrifice has not been completed and they are not allowed to enter the Temple Courtyard until the sacrifice is offered. provided he performed semichah with all his strength.41As required by Halachah 13.Only a person who is ritually pure may perform semichah. If a person who is ritually impure performed semichah, the semichah [is acceptable].42After the fact.
The animal should be slaughtered in the place where semichah is performed.43Menachot 93b derives this concept from the subsequent law: that slaughter must be performed directly after semichah. It thus follows that one must slaughter the animal in the same place where semichah was performed, for otherwise, this is not considered as directly afterwards. The animal must be slaughtered directly after semichah. If one slaughtered it in a different place or waited [before slaughtering it], the slaughter is acceptable.Semichah is an incremental aspect of the mitzvah. Accordingly, if one did not perform semichah, the sacrifice [still] brings atonement; [the semichah] is not an indispensable requirement. Nevertheless, it is considered as if the sacrifice did not bring atonement.44Tosafot Yesheinim, Yoma 5a, explains that the intent is that although the person is not obligated to bring another sacrifice, in G‑d's eyes, his atonement is lacking.
The person performing semichah must do so with all his power, [placing] both hands45This is derived from Leviticus 16:21 which states such a requirement with regard to the goat sent to Azazel. on the head of the animal, as [Leviticus 1:4] states: "on the head of the burnt-offering." [Implied is his hands must be placed on the head] and not on the [animal's] neck or the side of its face,46Its cheeks (Rashi, Menachot 93b). and that there should not be any intervening substance between his hands and the animal.
How is semichah performed? If the sacrifice was one of the offerings of the most sacred order, he should have the animal stand in the northern portion of the Temple Courtyard,47The sacrifices of the most sacred order must be slaughtered in this portion of the Temple Courtyard, as stated in Chapter 5, Halachot 2-3. See also Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:16. facing the west. The person performing semichah stands to the east with his face to the west. He should place both his hands between its two horns and recite [the appropriate] confession, for a sin-offering, the sin which warrants a sin-offering and for a guilt-offering, the sin which warrants a guilt offering. For a burnt offering, he confesses the sin of [negating the observance of] a positive commandment or of a negative commandment that can be corrected by the observance of] a positive commandment.
How does he confess? He says: "I sinned, I transgressed, I committed iniquity, and I did this-and-this,48See Hilchot Teshuvah 2:5 which states that a person seeking to repent must mention the particular sins that he violated. and I have repented before You and this is my atonement.49This is necessary, for without teshuvah, a sacrifice will not bring the person atonement (Hilchot Shegagot 3:10).If he is bringing a peace-offering, he should perform semichah with all of his strength anywhere he desires within the Temple Courtyard,50For as stated in Chapter 5, Halachot 2-3, sacrifices of lesser sanctity (of which the peace offering is one) may be slaughtered anywhere in the Temple Courtyard. where [the animal] will be slaughtered. It appears to me that one does not confess on a peace-offering.51For a peace-offering is not offered to atone for a sin. Instead, he says words of praise.52As an example, the Or Sameach cites Psalm 100. The popular translation of II Chronicles 30:22 speaks of the people reciting confessions on their peace-offerings. Rashi and Metzudot, however, render the verb as meaning "offer thanks."

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
All of the sacrifices may be offered only during the day,1In this chapter, the Rambam lists the time limits associated with bringing the sacrifices and describes the intent with which the sacrifices must be offered. as [can be inferred from Leviticus 7:38]: "On the day when He commanded the children of Israel to offer their sacrifices." [Implied is] during the day and not at night. Therefore sacrifices are slaughtered only during the day and their blood is sprinkled [on the altar] on the day of the slaughter, as [can be inferred from ibid.:16]: "On the day he offers his sacrifice." Implied is that on the day the sacrifice is slaughtered, it should be offered.2I.e., its blood should be sprinkled on the altar. When the sun sets [on that day], the blood is disqualified.3As is the entire sacrifice (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 1:37).
As long as the elements that cause a sacrifice to be permitted were offered4I.e., the blood of the sacrifice was sprinkled on the altar (Radbaz). during the day, [the other elements of] the sacrifice may be offered on the altar throughout the night.What is implied? When the blood of sacrifices was sprinkled during the day, their eimorim5The fats and inner organs of the animal that are offered on the altar. may be offered on the fire of the altar at night until dawn.6The appearance of the first glimmerings of the light of the sun on the horizon more than an hour before sunrise. Similarly, the limbs of the burnt-offerings may be offered on the fire of the altar until dawn.7As Leviticus 6:2 speaks of "the burnt-offering... on the altar, the entire night until the morning." In order to distance [a person] from inadvertent transgression,8I.e., "lest time become pressing and they would not be offered until the following day" [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Berachot 1:3)]. Rashi (at the beginning of his commentary to Berachot) and other authorities differ and maintain that such a safeguard was not instituted. our Sages declared that the eimorim and the limbs of the burnt-offerings should only be offered on the fire of the altar until midnight.
Even though the eimorim and the limbs [of the sacrifices] may be offered on the fire of the altar at night, they may not be willingly delayed. Instead, an attempt should be made to offer everything during the day, for it is desirable that a mitzvah be performed at its designated time. [The importance of this can be seen from the fact that] the offering of the eimorim and the limbs [of the sacrifices] on the fire of the altar supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions on that day. We do not delay this until Saturday night.9When there would be no prohibition involved in offering them.
Any element of a sacrifice that may be offered only during the day, e.g., the handful [of flour from the meal-offering], the frankincense [from the meal-offering], the incense offering, and the meal-offerings that are burnt [on the altar],10For example, the meal-offerings brought by the priests. See Chapter 12. may be offered [on the altar] at sunset.11Provided certain conditions are met, these may be offered on the altar even after the afternoon daily sacrifice has been offered. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 1:6 and notes. They then continue to be consumed [by the altar's fire] the entire night like the limbs of the burnt offerings.
The libations that are offered with sacrifices12As accompanying offerings. See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. are only offered during the day,13They need not be offered on the day the sacrifice is offered, but they must be offered during the day. as [Numbers 29:39] states: "And for their libations and for their peace-offerings." An association is established between the peace-offerings and the libations. Just as the peace-offerings [are offered only] during the day, so too, the libations must be offered during the day. Nevertheless, the libations that are offered independently may be sanctified at night and offered at night.14Since they were not associated with a particular sacrifice, there are no limits as to when they may be offered. Therefore if it happens that a person obtains libations that are brought independently, he should15Our translation follows the gloss of the Radbaz who maintains that it is preferable for him to offer them at night, for the libations should be consecrated and offered at the earliest possible opportunity. Hence, if it is possible for him to do so by day, he should do so by day. If that option becomes available at night, he should not wait for the next day. sanctify them at night and offer them at night.16This is acceptable even as an initial preference. Dawn disqualifies [these libations], as it disqualifies the limbs of the burnt-offering.17I.e., one might think that since they were sanctified at night, they would not be disqualified until the end of the next day. Hence, it is necessary to state that this is not so.
The entire day is acceptable for semichah, slaughter, severing a fowl's head,18See Chapter 7, Halachah 6. offering objects on the altar's fire, bringing [meal] offerings to the altar,19See Chapter 12, Halachah 6. sprinkling [blood on the altar], waving [sacrificial offerings],20See, for example, Chapter 9, Halachah 7. taking a handful of the meal offering,21See Chapter 13, Halachot 12-13. and bringing the Musaf offering.22The word "day" is mentioned in either the verse commanding the ritual acts mentioned or in a verse associated with them. Our Sages inferred that these ritual acts could only be performed during the day (see Megilah 20b). The entire night is acceptable to offer the eimorim and the limbs on the altar's fire.23I.e., according to Scriptural Law. See Halachot 2-3 above.This is the general principle: When the mitzvah is to perform a particular act during the day, it is acceptable throughout the day. If the mitzvah is to perform the act at night, it is acceptable throughout the night. Nevertheless, the eager hasten to perform the mitzvot.24I.e., one should endeavor to perform them at the earliest possible opportunity.
As an initial preference, all of the sacrificial animals may be slaughtered only with a knife that is a sacred utensil. Nevertheless, if one slaughtered it with any article [fit] to slaughter an ordinary animal - even the edge of a bulrush25See Hilchot Shechitah 1:14 and notes. - it is acceptable.26The Radbaz explains that the rationale is that slaughter is not considered part of the sacrificial service, as evidenced by the fact that it may be performed by a non-priest.
Whenever one received less than the amount of blood need to sprinkle it on the altar27The laws governing the sprinkling of the blood are described in the following chapter. from any of the sacrifices, the blood does not become consecrated. [As an initial preference,] one should have the intent of receiving all the [animal's] blood.What should be done? One should hold the windpipe and the gullet28The Rambam refers to these with the term siman, "signs," for they are the organs which, when slit in the desired manner, indicate that ritual slaughter is acceptable. in his hand, and together with the jugular vein, place them inside a basin29The Rambam is quoting Zevachim 25a-b. As indicated by the conclusion of the halachah, it appears that the intent is not that the animal's neck should be held inside the sacred basin - for then, it would be difficult to perform the slaughter - but rather, above it (see Radbaz). and slit both of them - or their majority30In Hilchot Shechitah 1:9, the Rambam states: "Superior slaughter involves cutting both [the windpipe and the gullet], whether for an animal or a fowl, and a slaughterer should have this intent. [After the fact,] if one cut the majority of one of them for a fowl and the majority of both of them for an animal or a beast, the slaughter is acceptable." - so that all of the blood will be received in the basin. [After the slaughter,] the knife should be lifted up, so that the blood does not flow down along it, but rather from the neck. He should wipe off the blood that is on the knife on the [outer] edge of the basin.31So that the blood will not flow into the basin (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh).
The space above the basin is considered as if it is inside the basin.32Our division of the halachot is based on the authentic manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. The standard published text has a slightly different version. If one was receiving the blood [of a sacrificial animal] and the bottom of the basin opened before the blood reached the open space of the bottomless basin, the blood is not consecrated. [The rationale is that when the blood enters] space in which it will ultimately not come to rest, it is not considered as if it came to rest.33The question is whether the blood is considered as if it came to rest in the basin and then spilled out (in which instance, it would be acceptable to be gathered from the floor) or whether it spilled directly on the floor and was hence, disqualified (Rashi, Zevachim 25b). The Rambam is stating that since the blood is not going to come to rest in the bottomless basin, it is not considered as if it was spilled out and is therefore not consecrated.Note the Radbaz who maintains that even if the utensil has a hole in it, if the blood is able to be collected, it is acceptable.
With regard to all of the sacrifices, the person performing the service34His intent is significant and not the intent of the person who donated the sacrifice [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 4:6); Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 14:1]. must have the intent of offering the proper type of sacrifice for the sake of the person bringing it at the time of slaughter, at the time the blood is received, at the time it is brought to the altar, and at the time that it is sprinkeled on the altar,35Although there are many activities connected with a sacrifice being offered, these four activities are considered the ones that are significant with regard to whether or not the sacrifice is disqualified. as [indicated by Leviticus 7:15]: "And the meat of his thanksgiving, peace-offering." [Implied is that] the slaughter together with the [three other] services must be for the sake of his peace-offering.36The process of Biblical exegesis through which these concepts are derived is explained in Zevachim 4a-b. Similar concepts apply with regard to other sacrifices.If one slaughtered [an animal] and performed [these] other services without any intent, without thinking at all,37If, however, they were sacrificed with a different intent, the sacrifice is acceptable, but the person is not considered to have fulfilled his obligation (Zevachim 2a). this is acceptable for a burnt-offering and a peace-offering and the owner is considered to have fulfilled his obligation.38From the Rambam's words, it appears that this is not true with regard to a sin-offering or a guilt-offering or the Paschal sacrifice. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that from Zevachim 46b, it would appear that even those sacrifices are acceptable as long as one does not have a wrong intent. It is only when one has a wrong intent that they are disqualified. The Radbaz maintains that even though those sacrifices are not disqualified, the person bringing them is not considered to have fulfilled his obligation. The Kessef Mishneh does not accept this explanation and leaves his question of the Rambam's ruling unresolved.
At the time of the slaughter of [an animal designated as] a burnt-offering,39The commentaries discuss whether these concepts apply with regard to the peace offerings as well. From the Rambam's words, it would appear that the general intent applies to the peace-offerings, some of the particulars the Rambam mentions obviously do not. [the person offering it] must have six things in mind, [that the animal be slaughtered]: for the sake of the [desired] sacrifice,40I.e., he must know the type of offering for which he is slaughtering an animal (Rashi, Zevachim 46b). for the sake of the person bringing it,41I.e., and not for someone else (ibid.). that it be sacrificed unto God, blessed be He, that it be consumed by fire,42Rather than roasted for human consumption (ibid.). that its consumption by fire be for the sake of generating a [pleasing] fragrance,43That they be burnt on the altar and not elsewhere and then brought to the altar (ibid.). and that the fragrance be pleasing before God. If he slaughtered [the animal] without any intent, it is acceptable, as explained.44In the previous halachah.One who slaughters [an animal as] a sin-offering or a guilt-offering should have the intent that [the sacrifice atone] for the sin which he committed.45See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 15:6.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
We have already explained1See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:6.In this chapter, the Rambam explains the place where sacrifices are offered and the manner in which the blood and fats from the sacrifices is presented to God. that the slaughter of consecrated animals is acceptable even when performed by non-priests.2Indeed, a non-priest may slaughter a sacrificial animal as an initial preference (Radbaz). From the receiving of the blood and onward, the mitzvah is that of the priests.3Leviticus 1:5 states: "The sons of Aaron will offer it." Implied is that all the acts involved in offering the animal should be performed by the priests (Zevachim 32a). The blood of all the sacrifices must be received in a sacred utensil4Zevachim 97b notes that Exodus 24:5-6 speaks of the blood of peace-offerings being received in sacred vessels. Now if this is a requirement for peace-offerings which are sacrifices of lesser sanctity, it certainly holds true for sacrifices of the most sacred order. held by a priest's hand.5I.e., the receptacle may not be resting on the ground (Radbaz). Nevertheless, the place where they are slaughtered and their blood is received is not the same in all instances.
What is implied? Sacrifices of the most sacred order may be slaughtered and their blood may be received6Since, as implied by Chapter 4, Halachah 8, one must receive the blood immediately after slaughter, this is seemingly obvious. It could be explained that the Rambam is implying that even after the fact, receiving the blood elsewhere disqualifies the sacrifice. Moreover, even if he received only part of the blood outside the northern portion of the Temple Courtyard, the sacrifice is disqualified (Radbaz). in the any portion of [the area designated as] north of the altar whose boundaries we defined in the beginning of this book.7See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:16 states:[The area] from the northern wall of the Temple Courtyard until the wall of the Altar, was sixty and a half [cubits] wide. The length of this area, from the wall of the Entrance Hall until the eastern wall of the Courtyard, was 76 [cubits].The rectangle [described above] is called "the northern portion." The sacrifices of the most sacred order were slaughtered there.The 60 and a half cubit width can be broken down as follows:the space between the pillars and the northern wall, 8 cubits,the area of the pillars 12.5 cubits,the area of the tables, 8 cubits,the area of the rings, 24 cubits,the space between the rings and the Altar, 8 cubits. It was also called beit hamitbachayim, the butchering area, because here the large majority of sacrifices were slaughtered and prepared to be offered on the altar. Sacrifices of lesser sanctity may be slaughtered and their blood received in every place in the Temple Courtyard.
What is the source that teaches the sacrifices of the most holy order may be slaughtered only in the northern portion of the Temple Courtyard. With regard to a burnt-offering, [Leviticus 1:11] states: "And it shall be slaughtered on the northern flank of the altar." And with regard to the sin-offering, [ibid. 6:18] states: "In the place where the burnt-offering is slaughtered, you shall slaughter the sin-offering." And just as a sin-offering is called a sacrifice of the most sacred order,8In the verse cited. so too, the burnt-offering is called, a sacrifice of the most sacred order.9In the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 5:1), he explains that although there is no specific verse referring to a burnt-offering as a sacrifice of the most sacred order, since an equivalence is established between it and a sin-offering and a guilt-offering, we can assume that it is included in that category. With regard to the guilt-offering, [ibid. 7:2] states: "In the place where the burnt-offering is slaughtered, you shall slaughter the guilt-offering." And an association was established between communal peace-offerings10This refers to the sheep offered on Shavuot. Different laws apply to individual peace-offerings, as stated below. and sin-offerings, as [ibid. 23:19] states: "You shall offer one he-goat as a sin-offering and two sheep a year old as a peace-offering." Therefore, they are considered sacrifices of the most sacred order like a sin-offering and are slaughtered in the place where it is slaughtered.11The Kessef Mishneh notes that based on Numbers 10:10, Zevachim 55a establishes an association between communal peace-offerings and burnt-offerings and asks why the Rambam prefers the association with the sin-offerings. Seemingly, deriving the concept from the burnt-offering would be more direct. In resolution, he explains that since the Torah states that the sin-offering should be slaughtered in the same place as the burnt-offering, it is as if it is explicitly stated that the sin-offering should be slaughtered in the north. Hence, the derivation is not indirect. In the place where [these sacrificial animals] are slaughtered, their blood should be received.
What is the source that teaches that sacrifices of lesser sanctity may be slaughtered in any place in the Temple Courtyard, even behind the Temple building?12Zevachim 54b explains that there was a small opening at the rear of the Holy of Holies. Since the area behind the Temple building could see the Holy of Holies, it was considered as if it saw "the entrance to the Tent of Meeting." With regard to the peace-offerings, [Leviticus] 3:2] states: "And you shall slaughter it at the opening to the Tent of Meeting," this indicates that all directions are acceptable,13In addition to the verse cited, Zevachim 55a states that there is another verse (Leviticus 3:8  which mentions the slaughtering a sacrifice "before the Tent of Meeting." It explains that both verses are necessary, for from the verse cited by the Rambam, one would not know that it is permissible to slaughter an animal in the side portions of the Temple Courtyard. Indeed, the Kessef Mishneh suggests that a printing error crept into the Mishneh Torah and the Rambam indeed desired to cite Leviticus 3:8. for a particular direction was not specified. The same applies to other sacrifices of lesser sanctity. If they were slaughtered in the Temple building itself, they are acceptable.14For if seeing the entrance to the Temple Building makes a sacrifice acceptable, certainly, being inside the Temple building itself does (Zevachim 63a). If, however, they slaughtered them on the roof of the Temple building,15Needless to say, this applies with regard to the roofs of the chambers in the Temple Courtyard (Radbaz). For the roofs of the structures in the Temple complex were not consecrated (Pesachim 85b). they are not acceptable, for the roofs are not fit for ritual slaughter at all. It must be performed on the earth of the Temple Courtyard.
Peace offerings16Tosafot, Yoma 29a, maintains that this also applies to any other sacrificial animals that must be slaughtered. This view is not, however, accepted by all authorities (see the commentaries to Zevachim 61a). that were slaughtered before the gates to the Temple building were opened are unacceptable,17This law also applies if the gates to the Temple were closed during the day, but that generally did not take place (Radbaz). as [indicated by the prooftext,] "at the opening to the Tent of Meeting," i.e., when it is open. Even if the doors were closed, [but not locked,] they are considered as locked. However, the curtain that is over [the entrance]18See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 7:17. does not disqualify [the offering].
The manner in which the blood of a burnt-offering, a guilt-offering, and a peace offering, whether communal or individual, is cast on the altar is the same for all three types of sacrifices at all times.What does [the priest] do? The priest takes the blood which is in a receptacle and casts it from the receptacle19I.e., unlike the sin-offering mentioned in Halachah 9, he need not sprinkle it with his hand. twice, [once] on each of two of the corners of the altar on a diagonal, on the bottom half of the altar.20Beneath the scarlet band that was tied around the middle of the Altar. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:9. If he cast the blood above that band, the sacrifice is disqualified. [The corners were] the northeast and the southwest.21The priest would cast the blood on the northeast corner and then the southwest in that order (Tamid 4:1), so that when walking, he would be circling the altar to the right (Yoma 15b). These corners were chosen because there was no base on the altar's northwest corner (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:10). When casting the blood on the corners, he should have the intent that the blood will surround the corners like a gamma.22A Greek letter whose shape resembles an upside-down "L." In this way, the blood from these two castings will be found on the four walls of the altar.23Hence our Sages (Zevachim 53b, et al) uses the expression: "Two presentations of blood that constitute four." For with regard to the burnt-offering and the peace-offering, [the Torah] uses24Leviticus 1:11, 3:2. the term "surrounding."25And in the manner described above, the blood will be cast on all four sides of the altar. This also applies to the guilt offering.26Leviticus 7:2 which describes the guilt offering also uses the term "surrounding." Nevertheless, its wording is slightly different. The remainder of the blood is poured on the foundation on the southern side of the altar.
The sin offerings from which [the priests] partake require four presentations [of blood], [one] on each of the four corners of the outer altar, on its upper half,27If the blood is placed below the midway point of the altar, the sacrifice is disqualified. for concerning it, [Leviticus 4:25] states: "On the corners of the altar.28Implying that it must be placed on all four corners.What should [the priest] do? When the priest takes the blood in the receptacle, he carries it to the altar. He dips the index finger of his right hand29For all service is performed with the right hand. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:18. into the blood. He then places his thumb [on one side of the altar] and his middle finger [on the other side] and applies30The verb used by the Rambam (and his source, Zevachim 53a) refers to the wording employed by Leviticus 6:19, which means "performs the service of the sin-offering." [the blood] on the point of the corner of the altar, descending until he finishes [bestowing] all the blood on his finger. He does this on each corner. If he placed the blood near the corner, within a cubit on either side, he achieves atonement [for the owner of the sacrifice].31I.e., after the fact, the sacrifice is acceptable.
He must dip his finger [in the blood] before applying it to each corner. When he finishes applying it to the corner, he should clean his finger on the [outer] edge of the container.32So that it does not become mixed with the blood remaining in the container (Zevachim 93b). He then dips it in a second time, for the blood on his finger is unacceptable to place on another corner.
None of the other sacrifices require the application of the blood on the altar with one's finger aside from the sin-offering,33See Halachah 6. for with regard to it [Leviticus 4:6] states: "And he shall dip his finger into the blood." There must be enough blood so that he can dip his finger into it. He should not collect the blood with his finger.
From [which] corner should he begin? He should ascend on the ramp and turn to his right, walking on the surrounding ledge. He should apply the blood to the southeast corner first and then to the second corner that is close to it, the northeast corner.34For he is circling to the right, as required (Zevachim 62b). Afterwards, he should proceed to the third corner, [the one] next to it, the northwest corner, and afterwards, to the fourth corner next to it, which is the southwest. On the base of the altar at the corner which he completed the applications of the blood, he pours out the remaining blood,35If he fails to do this, the sacrifice is not disqualified (see Chapter 19, Halachah 4). as [Leviticus 4:17] states: "And all of the [remaining] blood he should pour on the base of the altar of the burnt-offerings."36The Kessef Mishneh suggests amending the prooftext to Leviticus 30:34 for that verse refers to the sin-offerings brought on the outer altar, while the verse cited by the Rambam refers to the sin-offerings whose blood is sprinkled within the Temple itself. This refers to the base on the southern side [of the altar].
The blood of all of the sin-offerings that are burnt37See Chapter 1, Halachah 16, for a definition of this term. is taken in the Temple building, and it is sprinkled there as described in the Torah.38See the following halachah for an actual description. The remainder of the blood should be poured on the western base of the outer altar, [the one] that he encounters first when he leaves the Temple building.
How is their blood sprinkled and how many sprinklings are made? The blood of both the bull39The sin-offering of the High Priest and his priestly brethren. and the goat40The goat whose pair was sent to Azazel. offered on Yom Kippur require eight sprinklings between the staves [of the ark] and eight sprinklings on the curtain [before the Holy of Holies]. He then mixes together the blood of the bull and that of the goat and sprinkles it four times, one on each of the four corners of the golden altar in the Temple building and seven sprinklings on the center of this altar, as will be explained in Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim.41Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 4:2. [Even] if he did not carefully direct the sprinklings42The sprinklings had to be directed, one upward and seven downward, as will be explained in Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim. If the High Priest was not careful about directing the sprinklings in this manner, they are still acceptable.This is the interpretation offered by Rav Yosef Corcus and also suggested as an alternative by the Kessef Mishneh. The Kessef Mishneh, however, also offers another interpretation: that the Hebrew should be translated as "he did not have the intent," i.e., he performed the act without the intent of it being a mitzvah. This can be connected to a question of a much larger scope: Must a person who performs a mitzvah have the intention of doing so or not? From Rosh Hashanah 32b, it would appear that such intention is necessary. However, other Talmudic sources imply that there is no need for such intention. Whenever a person performs the deed of a mitzvah, he fulfills his obligation, regardless of his intention.On the surface, the Rambam's own decisions regarding this question appear paradoxical. Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 6:3 states: "A person who eats matzah without the intention [of fulfilling the mitzvah]... fulfills his obligation." By contrast, Hilchot Shofar 2:4 states that a person who hears the sounding of the shofar from one who blows it casually, without the intent of performing a mitzvah, does not fulfill his obligation. There is extensive debate about this issue among the commentaries. The general consensus is that one must have the intent of performing a mitzvah. The situation involving matzah is unique for various reasons, each authority explaining the rationale for the exception in his own way. See the discussion of the rulings cited for more details. performed in the innermost [chamber], they are acceptable.
The blood of the bulls that are burnt43These include a bull brought by a High Priest as a sin-offering and the bull brought as atonement for a law forgotten by the High Court (Chapter 1, Halachot 15-16). and the goats that are burnt44As atonement for the prohibition against idol worship (ibid.). should both be cast [in the following manner]. They should be sprinkled seven times on the curtain that separates between the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies and four times on the four corners of the golden altar.45This is stated explicitly with regard to the sin-offering brought by the High Priest in Leviticus 4:6-7 and the bull brought because of the error of the High Court (ibid.:17). The sprinkling of the blood of the goats is derived from the laws regarding these offerings as stated in Halachah 16.
With regard to the blood placed on the golden altar: When he enters [the Sanctuary],46With regard to the sprinkling of the blood on Yom Kippur, this refers to the entry of the High Priest from the Holy of Holies. With regard to the other sacrifices, it refers to the entry into the Sanctuary from the Entrance Hall. The commentaries see a difficulty between the Rambam's words here and his statements in Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 4:2. he stands between the altar and the Menorah47The Menorah was on the southern side of the Sanctuary (to the left of the priest as he faces the Holy of Holies). with the altar in front of him. He should [sprinkle the blood] on the outer side of the horns of the altar. He should begin with the northeast corner and [proceed] to the northwest and then to the southwest and then to the southeast.
With regard to the bull brought by the anointed priest48The High Priest. for the violation of any of the mitzvot, the anointed priest himself receives its blood and sprinkles it in the Sanctuary.49As related by Leviticus 4:6, he sprinkles the blood toward the curtain separating the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies. If an ordinary priest received this blood and sprinkled it, it is acceptable.
The goats [offered in atonement for] idol worship are called the goats which are burnt. The Torah does not explicitly state how their blood was sprinkled [on the altar]. Nevertheless, since they are communal sin offerings, the laws applying to them should be the same in their particulars as those applying to the bull brought because of a forgotten law, for it is also a communal sin-offering. [This applies to] the sprinkling of the blood, burning [the sacrifices], and the impurity they impart to the one who has them burnt.
The blood of each [of the following], the firstborn offering, the tithe offering, and the Paschal sacrifice is required to be presented to the altar through one pouring at its base, in any direction one desires on the three corners of the altar that have a base. For, as we explained,50Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:10. the southeastern corner did not have a base.What is the source that teaches that all that is required is one present? For with regard to the first born sacrifice, [Numbers 18:17] states: "You shall cast its blood on the altar." According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this also applies to the tithe offering and the Paschal sacrifice. Their blood is presented once like that of the firstborn offering.
The eimorim51The fats and the inner organs that are offered on the altar. of all the sacrifices are the first [elements of the sacrifice] offered on the pyre of the altar after the blood is cast [on the altar].52This order is explicitly stated in the Torah's description of the manner in which several sacrifices are offered, e.g., Numbers 18:17: "Their blood shall the cast upon the altar and their fats they shall offer on the altar's pyre." All of the sacrificial [animals] are skinned and then the eimorim are removed. They are not skinned until the blood is cast. [This applies] with the exception of the sin-offerings, for they are not skinned at all,53See Chapter 7, Halachah 2. as [Leviticus 16:27] states: "You shall burn with fire their hide and their flesh." Thus, [the order of sacrifice is] first the blood is cast [on the altar].54For otherwise there would be an interruption between receiving the blood and casting it upon the altar (Rashi, Zevachim103b). This, however, is not an absolute requirement. If the animal is skinned first, the sacrifice is not disqualified (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:9). Then the sacrificial [animals] are skinned and then their [bellies] are ripped open, the eimorim are removed and offered [on the pyre of the altar].
All of the hides of the sacrifices of the most sacred order - whether communal offerings or individual offerings - are given to the priests, as [Leviticus 7:8] states: "The hide of the burnt-offering55And from the burnt-offering, we derive that this law applies to other sacrifices of the most sacred order (Zevachim 103a). he offered [shall belong to that priest]." The hides of sacrifices of lesser sanctity, by contrast, are given to the owners. Whenever the flesh of a burnt-offering did not merit to be offered on the altar,56I.e., the sacrifice was disqualified before its blood was cast on the altar in which instance, it was never required that its flesh would be offered on the altar. the priests do not acquire its hide, as [implied by the above verse which] states: "the burnt-offering of a man." [We can infer that it refers only to] a burnt-offering that was acceptable for a man.
In all instances that a disqualifying factor was caused in one of the sacrifices of the most sacred order before they were skinned, their hides are not granted to the priests.57Instead, they are burnt together with the meat of the sacrifice (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:9). [If they are disqualified] after they are skinned, their hides are granted to the priests. All of the hides should be divided among the members of the priestly watch from Friday to Friday.58The Tosefta, Zevachim, ch. 11, states that originally, the hides were divided daily among the members of the clan who served in the Temple that day. Nevertheless, under these circumstances, strong-armed priests would seize the hides from others. Hence, they organized a larger division where seizing the hides in that manner would not be possible.
When a person consecrates a burnt-offering to the Temple treasury59It is offered on the altar, but it is not considered as his personal sacrifice. or one consecrates his property [to the Temple treasury] and among [his possessions] were male animals concerning which the law is that they should be sacrificed as burnt-offerings,60Rambam LeAm notes that there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in the Mishnah (Shekalim 4:7), one opinion states - as the Rambam states here - that the male animals should be offered as burnt-offerings. Rabbi Eliezer maintains that the males should be sold to others to be offered as burnt-offerings. Significantly, when referring to this law in Hilchot Arachin and in his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam follows Rabbi Eliezer's position. the hides are not given to the priests, for [the prooftext] states: "the burnt-offering of a man." This excludes the burnt-offering of the Temple treasury. Instead, the hides should be sold and the money given to the Temple treasury.The hide of a burnt-offering brought by] a man or a woman, a gentile61The Kessef Mishneh notes that the standard published texts for Zevachim 103a speak about a convert rather than a gentile. He favors the Rambam's version of the text, because seemingly there is no reason to separate between a convert and another Jew in this regard. or a servant, is given to the priests. The term "man" was used only to exclude the Temple treasury.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
It is a positive commandment to offer the burnt-offering1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 63) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 115) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This refers both to the burnt-offerings brought by individuals and those brought by the Jewish people as a whole. according to its statutes as they are written in the Torah.2Having described the general principles that apply with regard to all the sacrifices, the Rambam begins to focus on each one individually, describing its laws in a particular chapter or set of halachot. Here the Rambam focuses on the manner in which the sacrifices are brought. In later sets of halachot, he speaks of the obligations of individuals and of the Jewish people as a whole to bring these sacrifices. How is the burnt-offering brought? One slaughters [the animal] and casts its blood in the manner described,3See Chapter 5, Halachot 1-3, with regard to the slaughter of the animal and Halachah 6 of that chapter with regard to casting its blood on the altar. skins it, cuts it into pieces and offers all the pieces on the pyre of the altar, as [Leviticus 1:9] states: "The priest shall offer the entire [sacrifice] on the pyre of the altar."
The wool on the heads of the sheep, the hair of the beards of the goats, and the bones, sinews, horns, and hoofs of the [sacrificial animals]4All of these are not fundamental parts of the animal's body. Hence while they are connected to the body, they are considered as part of it and must be offered on the altar's pyre. The implication is that ordinarily, they would not be separated and the animal would be offered on the altar while they were attached. Nevertheless, if they had been separated and they had descended from the altar, they are considered as distinct and there is no longer any obligation to offer them. should be offered on the pyre of the altar5If, however, they flew off the pyre, but remained on the altar, they should be placed back on the pyre (Meilah 9b). if they are still connected [naturally6This addition is made on the basis of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 9:5). to the animal's body]. If they have been separated, they should not be brought up [to the altar].7Indeed, if they were brought up to the altar as separate entities, they should be taken down again, rather than offered (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:16). Nevertheless, if they were separated on the altar itself before they were offered, they should not be taken down, but instead should be offered on its pyre (Radbaz, Rav Yosef Corcus). [This is derived from Deuteronomy 12:27 which mentions]: "Your burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood."8The prooftext is defining the meat and the blood as the fundamental elements of a burnt offering. The implication is that it is necessary for them to be consumed by the altar's fire and hence, they must be returned to the altar if they flew off. There is, by contrast, no fundamental necessity for the secondary elements of the animal's body to be consumed by fire. Hence there is no obligation to return them to the altar if they flew off. All parts of the sacrificial animal which flew off9In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 9:6), the Rambam explains that often we see that when entities that contain moisture are placed on a fire, the moisture will vaporize. At times, the process will be powerful enough to lift up that entity and propel it upward. the altar should not be returned to it. Similarly, a coal which flew off the altar should not be returned to it.
[The following rules apply when] the limbs [of a sacrificial animal] flew off the altar. If they still have substance, even if they flew off after midnight,10When at times a distinction is made, as the Rambam explains in the second portion of the halachah. they should be returned to the altar,11To be consumed by its fire, as the mitzvah requires. [for Leviticus 6:2] speaks of [the burnt-offering remaining] "on its fire, on the altar, the entire night." If they do not have substance, even if they flew off before midnight, they should not be returned.12For the mitzvah of having them consumed by fire has been completed. If the meat became charred and dried up upon them like wood13I.e., they did not become like ash. and they flew off before midnight, they should be returned. After midnight, they should not be returned.14Zevachim 86a notes that the prooftext cited speaks of the burnt offering being on the altar's fire "the entire night, until the morning." From the redundancy, our Sages derive that within the night, a distinction should be made. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.).
After one cuts up the limbs of the burnt-offering, all of the different portions should be brought to the altar's ramp15See Halachot 10-18 which describes the manner in which the limbs are brought to the altar. and salted there.16For salt must be applied to all offerings (see Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:11-12). Afterwards, all of the limbs should be brought up to the top of the altar.17Different priests would perform this service, i.e., one priest would bring a limb to the ramp and salt it and another one would bring it to the top of the altar (Radbaz, Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:6,8). The gid hanesheh18The Rabbis identified the gid hanesheh as the sciatic nerve, the large main nerve running down the back of an animal's hind leg. This nerve must be separated before the meat of an animal is eaten or offered on the altar. See Hilchot Ma'achaolot Assurot 8:1 for more details. should be removed at the top of the altar19It should not be removed beforehand, because the limb will not look attractive as it is being carried to the altar (Chulin 90b). and tossed on the pile of ash in the midst of the altar. All of the limbs should be cast on the altar, as [implied by the prooftext cited above], "the flesh and the blood." Just as the blood is cast [on the altar],20As described in Chapter 5, Halachah 6. so too, all of the flesh must be cast [on the pyre].21Indeed, the altar's ramp was separated slightly from the altar itself to insure that the limbs were thrown on the fire rather than merely placed there (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:13). After they were tossed [on the altar, the priest] should come and arrange them on the pyre, as [Leviticus 1:12] states: "And the priest shall arrange them." If limbs [of sacrificial animals] were roasted and then brought up to the altar, they are not considered as a pleasing fragrance.
How is the burnt-offering cut up? One would not break the animal's leg. Instead, a hole was made in it.22As obvious from the continuation of the halachah, the hole is not made in the animal's foot, but on its thigh above its knee. Thus it will remain hanging after its legs were cut off. It was hung from [the hole]23There were pillars in the Temple Courtyard with hooks to serve this purpose (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:13). and skinned. If [the burnt-offering] was an ox, it should be skinned without being hung.24Perhaps because of its weight, hanging it up would present a difficulty.The person25In Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:6, the Rambam states that the skinning of the animal and its division into portions need not be performed by a priest. continues skinning, until he gets to the breast, When he gets to the breast, he should cut off the head26If he would skin the breast before cutting off the head, the skin would hang from the neck and it would be difficult to cut off the head precisely (Tifferet Yisrael, Tamid 4:2). Alternatively, since the head is offered first, it is appropriate that it be cut off first (Radbaz). and give it to a priest. He then cuts off the feet27The portion below the knees. and gives them to others. He then completes skinning the animal. He rips open the heart and takes out its blood. He then proceeds to the forelegs and cuts them off.28I.e., the portion from the knee until the shoulder joint. He proceeds to the right hindleg and gives it to [the priest] who merited [to carry] the head. The two testicles should be taken with it.Afterwards, he rips open the animal's [belly] until he reveals the intestines. He takes the fat29I.e., the fat that is on the digestive organs. and places it on the head, to cover the place of slaughter.30So that when the head is carried to the altar, the opening where it was severed will not be seen. This is a gesture of respect for the Divine Presence. He takes the inner organs and gives them to another [priest].
[The latter] goes and washes them with water, as [Leviticus 1:13] states: "The inner organs and the feet should be washed with water." [This excludes] wine, a mixture of wine and water, and other liquids. All types of water are, [however,] acceptable.31I.e., even water that is collected is acceptable (Kessef Mishneh).To what extent should he wash them? The stomach should be washed in the Washing Chamber32This chamber is described in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:17. The stomach was washed there, because it would not be respectful to wash out its filth in the Temple Courtyard. to whatever degree necessary. The intestines should be washed at least three times.33Since they are narrow, it is difficult to clean them thoroughly. At least three washings are necessary. If more are required to clean them, they should be washed more [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 4:2)]. They should be washed on the marble table located between the pillars.
He then takes the knife and separates the lung from the liver and [also] the lobe of the liver from the liver.34For it is sacrificed with the tail as stated in Halachot 9 and 13. He should not move the liver from its place. He hollows out the chest and gives it to another [priest]. He then proceeds upward to the right flank and cuts if off and descends to the backbone. He does not touch the backbone35For the backbone is offered with the left flank. until he reaches the two soft ribs. He cuts it off and gives it to another [priest] while the liver is attached to it.
He then reaches the neck and leaves it with two ribs on either side. He cuts it off and gives it to another priest with the windpipe, the heart, and the lungs attached to it. He proceeds to the left flank and leaves two soft ribs above and two soft ribs below and, as he had left in the other one. Thus on the two sides, he leaves four ribs on either side. He then cuts it off and gives it to another person together with the backbone36The Radbaz explains that the backbone is left intact so that the vertebrae will not separate into individual units. with the spleen attached to it.
He then comes to the tail and severs it and gives it to another [priest] together with the fat-tail, the lobe of the liver, and the two kidneys with it.37The ribs that were left are also taken with it (Radbaz). He should take the left foot and give it to another [priest]. This order should be followed when skinning and cutting up a burnt-offering of an animal. These are the portions referred to by the Torah [in Leviticus 1:6]: "You shall cut it into its portions."38Rav Yosef Corcus states that there is no Scriptural source for the division of the animal in this manner. Instead, this was simply the most practical and logical way of dividing it.
How many priests bring the limbs to the ramp? If the burnt-offering is from sheep, six priests should carry it.
The first [priest] carries the head and the [right] foot.39In this way, a portion of the animal with many bones (the head) and much meat (the leg) will have been offered. The head is also given priority, because it has been mentioned explicitly in the Torah (Radbaz). [He carries] the head in his right hand40For the offering of the head is most important. with its nose facing his forearm and its horns between his fingers. The place where [the animal] was slaughtered is held upward with the fat upon it. The right foot is in his left hand41Since carrying the limbs to the altar is not part of the atonement process, there is no difficulty in it being performed with one's left hand (Rabbenu Asher). with the side from which the skin was removed42I.e., the outer side. Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 4:4). facing outward.
The second [priest carries] the two forelegs, the right one in his right hand and the left one in his left hand.43These limbs are the largest and hence, receive priority. The side from which the skin was removed should face outward.
The third [priest carries] the tail and the hindleg, the tail in his right hand with the fat-tail that hangs between his fingers. Together with it should be the lobe of the liver and the two kidneys. The left hindleg should be in his left hand with the side from which the skin was removed facing outward.
The fourth [priest carries] the breast and the neck, the breast in his right hand and the neck in his left hand with the ribs between his fingers.
The fifth [priest carries] the two flanks, the right flank in his right hand and the left flank in his left hand. The side from which the skin was removed should face outward.
The sixth [priest carries] the intestines in a bowl.44Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (op. cit.). Others interpret the term bezech differently. The feet should be placed above them.45To cover them, for their appearance is not appealing (Radbaz). [This applies] if the burnt-offering was a sheep or a goat. If, however, it was a ram, two priests should bring the intestines.46Since a ram is much larger than a sheep, it would be difficult for one priest to carry the intestines alone. The Radbaz explains that the intent is that the intestines are cut in half and part given to one priest and part to another. The Tifferet Yisrael (Yoma 2:6) differs and maintains that two priests carry them together.Similarly, [if it was a sheep,] the flour of the accompanying offering should be brought by one priest and the wine by another. If it was a ram, the flour should be brought by two priests47Here too, because it is a larger amount, it would be difficult for one priest to carry it. Here too, the Radbaz explains that the intent is that each priest carries a container with half of the meal offering, while the Tifferet Yisrael maintains that it is placed in a large container and that container is carried by two priests together. and the wine, by two priests.
Thus eight [priests] bring [a burnt offering of] a sheep or a goat to the altar.48The Rambam is speaking about any burnt-offering. Therefore he does not mention the chavitin offering which is brought together with the daily burnt-offering. That of a ram is brought by eleven [and that of an ox is brought by twenty-four].
There are 24 [priests] who bring [a burnt offering of] an ox to the altar. The first brings the head. The second and the third bring the right foot.49For the foot of an ox is large and requires two priests to bring it. Similar concepts apply with regard to the other limbs. The fourth and the fifth bring the tail. The sixth and the seventh bring the left foot. The eighth brings the breast. The neck is brought by three [priests], the ninth, tenth, and eleventh. The two forelegs are brought by two priests, the two flanks, by two, and the intestines, the flour, and the wine in sets of three.50Here also the Radbaz explains that the portions would be divided, with each priest receiving a separate portion. This, he maintained, is a greater expression of honor and respect than to have the priests carry the burdens together. Thus there are 24.
Why was a large limb of an ox not divided into portions? Because it is written: "You shall cut it into its portions." [Implied is that] its portions should not be cut into portions.When are the above [number of priests] required [to bring the limbs to the altar]?51The bracketed additions are made on the basis of the gloss of the Radbaz. He explains that the animal may not be cut into smaller portions, as implied by the first clause of this halachah. (Indeed, the prooftext cited refers to an individual burnt-offering.) For a communal burnt-offering. If it was desired that the portions of an individual burnt-offering be brought to the altar with less than this [number of priests] or more, it is possible.
How was the burnt-offering of a fowl brought? [The priest] would ascend upon the ramp52Holding the fowl. He would turn [right] to the surrounding ledge and approach the southeast corner.53Zevachim 65a states that this corner is chosen, because it is close to the ash pile where the skin and the intestines would be cast. There he would sever the head [of the fowl] at the nape of its neck, severing [the head]54The Lechem Mishneh (gloss to Chapter 7, Halachah 6) quotes authorities who maintain that he need not sever the head entirely from the body entirely. What must be severed are the gullet and the windpipe organs. Just as ritual slaughter requires that they be severed, so too, they must be severed in the rite of melikah. The Kessef Mishneh (to that halachah) however, understand the Rambam's words simply. The head must be separated from the body entirely. entirely. If he does not sever it entirely, [the sacrifice] is invalid. He then squeezes out the blood of the head and the blood of the body on the wall of the altar above the [scarlet] band in the middle of the altar.If he squeezed out the blood of the head, but did not squeeze out the blood of the body, [the sacrifice] is invalid. If he squeezed out the blood of the body, but did not squeeze out the blood of the head, [the sacrifice] is valid.55The rationale for both these rulings is that the majority of the blood is lodged in the body.
He should take the head and bring the opening where it was severed close to the altar, dip it into salt,56For all offerings must be salted. and cast it on the pyre. He then focuses his attention on the body. He removes the crop,57One of the stomaches of the fowl. the skin that is upon it with its feathers,58Our translation follows the Rambam's Commentary of the Mishnah (Zevachim 6:5). The Radbaz interprets the term notzah as feces rather than as feathers and explains that this enables us to understand why these organs are not burnt together with the rest of the fowl. The intestines of an animal are washed out before being offered. Hence they are fit to be offered on the altar. Those of the fowl are not. and the intestines that are removed with it59As required by Leviticus 1:16. and casts them on the ash pile.60The ash pile on the floor of the Temple Courtyard, between the ramp and the altar, near the southeastern corner of the altar. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 2:12. The term ash-pile has several meanings; see Chapter 7, Halachah 4.
[Leviticus 1:17 states:] "He shall split it with its wings" - [this is performed] by hand,61As evident from Judges 14:6 (Zevachim 65b). not with a knife. He need not separate [one part of the body from the other], as [that verse] states: "He [need] not separate it." If he separates it, it is valid. He then spreads salt upon it and casts it upon the altar.If he did not remove the craw, the feathers, or the intestines or spread salt upon it, it is valid. As long as the change that one makes comes after squeezing out the blood, [the sacrifice] is acceptable.62Because the primary element of the sacrifice was completed (Rav Yosef Corcus).
How is melikah performed? [The priest] cuts and descends with his nail at the nape of the neck.63See Chapter 7, Halachah 8, which describes the manner in which the priest would hold the fowl. As stated there, this was one of the difficult tasks performed in the Sanctuary. If he desires to move his nail back and forth,64As one does when performing ritual slaughter (Hilchot Shechitah 2:7). he may. If he wishes to chop and descend with his nail,65Such a motion is unacceptable for ritual slaughter (ibid. 3:7). he may. If the organs necessary for ritual slaughter slip from their place,66This would disqualify an animal for ritual slaughter (ibid. 3:14). he need not be concerned.He must cut through the spine, i.e., the neckbone, without cutting through the majority of the meat surrounding it, for if he would cut through the majority of the meat, [the sacrificial animal] would be considered as dead67I.e., that would make the animal. trefe. before he reached the organs necessary for ritual slaughter. With regard to a burnt offering, as he descends he must cut both the organs68Cutting the majority of them is, however, acceptable. They need not be severed entirely. necessary for ritual slaughter.When one performs melikah with a knife or does so from the side, it is not considered as melika. Instead, it is like strangling or decapitating the fowl. The entire [width of] the nape of the neck is acceptable for melikah.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
It is a positive commandment to offer the sin-offerings1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 64) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 138) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Even though there are several different types of sin-offerings, since they are all offered in the same manner, they are considered only as one mitzvah (Radbaz). according to its statutes as they are written in the Torah. How are the sin-offerings which are eaten2In Chapter 1, Halachot 15-16, the Rambam mentions which sin-offerings are eaten and which are burnt. brought? One slaughters [the animal] and sprinkles its blood in the manner described,3See Chapter 5, Halachot 1-3, with regard to the slaughter of the animal and Halachot 7-10 of that chapter with regard to casting its blood on the altar. skins it, and separates the eimorim.4The fats and inner organs offered on the altar. See Leviticus 4:8-10. He salts them and casts them on the pyre. If he desires to place the eimorim in a container while they are being carried to the altar, he may. The remainder of the meat is eaten by male priests in the Temple Courtyard.5Leviticus 6:19 speaks of the priests partaking of the sin-offerings in the Courtyard of the Tent of Meeting. See Chapter 10.
How are the sin-offerings which are burnt brought? One slaughters [the animal] and sprinkles its blood in the manner described. Afterwards, one rips open [its belly] and removes the eimorim. He places them into a container, salts them, and casts them on the pyre. The remainder [of the animal] should be taken outside the city6Leviticus 2:12 speaks of these sacrifices being burnt outside the camp. See also Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 3:7. and cut up there as the burnt offering is cut up7Chapter 6, Halachot 5-9. with its hide.8They are not skinned before being burnt, as related in Chapter 5, Halachah 18. [The pieces] are burnt there in the ash pile.9See Halachah 4.
There are three places [where sacrifices] are burnt: The first is in the midst of the Temple Courtyard.10It was to the east of the ramp ascending to the altar (Sifra, Vayikra 9:3). [The following are] burnt there: sacrifices [of the highest order of sanctity] that have been disqualified,11Rashi (Zevachim 104b) explains that since these sacrifices are eaten in the Temple Courtyard, they should also be burnt there. the eimorim of sacrifices of lesser sanctity which were disqualified,12Since these eimorim should have been burnt on the altar, they are burnt in the Temple Courtyard if they became impure (Radbaz). The sacrifices of lesser sanctity themselves should be burnt in Jerusalem (the place where they are eaten). We can assume that they were burnt on the Temple Mount, at the birah (ibid., gloss to Halachah 4). the bulls and goats that are burnt if they are disqualified, whether before their blood was sprinkled or after their blood was sprinkled,13Although they had reached a stage where they were to be taken out of the Temple Courtyard, since in fact they had not been removed from the Temple Courtyard before they were disqualified, they should be burnt there (Radbaz). e.g., they became impure, they were taken outside the Temple Courtyard before the time they were supposed to be taken out arrived, or their meat or their eimorim remained overnight [without being burnt].14See more details in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:3.
The second place is on the Temple Mount. It is called the birah.15The term birah means "tower" or "large building." At times, it is used to refer to the Temple complex as a whole. There we burn sin-offerings that are to be burnt if they were disqualified16Because of impurity or because they remained overnight. These factors can still disqualify these sacrifices even though they have been taken out of the Temple Courtyard (Radbaz). after they departed from the Temple Courtyard.The third place is outside Jerusalem. It is called the ash-pile. There we burn the sin-offerings that are burnt when they are burnt according to their commandment.17I.e., when they have not been disqualified. The Biblical commandment is to burn them "outside the camp." In later times, that meant "outside Jerusalem" as stated in Halachah 2. The term ash-pile has several meanings; see Chapter 6, Halachah 21.
It is acceptable for the burning of all of [the sacrifices] that must be burnt18I.e., those sacrifices which must be burnt outside Jerusalem. Those that must be burnt in the Temple Courtyard must be burnt with wood fit to be used for the altar (Sifra). to be performed by a non-priest19This indicates that burning them is not a fundamental element of the sacrificial service (Radbaz). and at night.20There are some exceptions to this as stated in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:5. Any type of wood, even straw and stubble, is acceptable21I.e., the wood need not meet the criteria for wood required for the altar. for the burning of all of the sacrifices that must be burnt outside the Temple Courtyard, as [Leviticus 4:12] states: "On wood with fire," any type of fire. Why is wood mentioned? To exclude lime or hot ash.
How is a sin-offering from fowl brought? Melikah should be performed on the southwest corner [of the altar],22From Zevachim 63a,b, it is apparent that, after the fact, a sin-offering is acceptable if melikah is performed at any place in the Temple Courtyard. (See also Halachah 9.) This corner is mentioned as an initial preference, because the blood must be sprinkled there (Radbaz). as we explained.23Rav Yosef Corcus states that the reference is to the order of melikah described at the conclusion of ch. 6. Melikah at the southwestern corner of the altar is not mentioned elsewhere. He should descend with his nail until he cuts the organs [required for ritual slaughter]24The windpipe and the gullet. or [at least] the majority of one of them. He should not separate the head from the body.25In contrast to the requirement for the burnt-offering mentioned in Chapter 6, Halachah 20. If he does, he disqualifies [the sacrifice] and is liable for lashes,26Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 112) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 124) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.The Lechem Mishneh quotes authorities who understand this as meaning that one may not separate both the gullet and the windpipe entirely. The Kessef Mishneh, however, maintains that the Rambam's words should be explained simply: the head may not be severed from the body. If it is attached, even if these two organs are severed, the prohibition is not violated. as [Leviticus 5:8] states: "He shall nip off its head at the nape [of the neck], but should not separate it."He then sprinkles its blood on the wall of the altar, below its midpoint.27In contrast to the requirement for the burnt-offering mentioned in Chapter 6, Halachah 20. The remainder of the blood should be squeezed out on the altar's base,28Hence when performing melikah, the priest does not ascend on the ramp, but rather stands on the ground (Radbaz). as stated [ibid.: 9]: "And the remainder of the blood, he shall squeeze out on the altar's base." One can conclude from this that when one presents the blood on the wall [of the altar], [the fact that] the remainder [of the blood] is squeezed out toward the base [indicates that] "the wall" refers to the lower [portion] of the wall.29The Rambam is explaining why the obligation is to present the blood of a sin-offering from fowl on the lower half of the altar in contrast to the blood of a sin-offering from an animal which is presented on the upper half.
Squeezing out the blood of a fowl brought as a sin-offering is an absolute requirement.30Although there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in the Talmud and there are passages which appear to follow the other view, the Rambam's approach represents the consensus, as indicated by Me'ilah 9b (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). All the altar receives from this offering is its blood. The remainder is eaten by males of the priestly family like the meat of an animal brought as a sin-offering.31See Chapter 10.
How should the fowl brought as a sin-offering be held at the time of melikah? He should hold its two feet between two of his fingers32The pinky and the finger next to it on his left hand. and its two wings between his other two fingers,33The index finger and the middle finger. extending its neck over [the thumb for]34The bracketed additions are made on the basis of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 6:4). a width of two fingers and then snip off its head.35With his right hand.This was one of the difficult tasks performed in the Temple. If one deviated and held the fowl in any other manner, it is acceptable.
Every part of the altar is acceptable for melikah, provided he sprinkles its blood below the midpoint of the altar. If he sprinkles it anywhere [on the altar], it is acceptable provided he presents [at least] a small amount of the blood of the soul36As indicated in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 6:3, this term refers to the blood that flows out when the fowl is slaughtered. below [the midpoint of the altar].
The upper half of southwest corner of the altar would serve three purposes and the lower half would serve three purposes. The lower half was used for the melikah of a fowl brought as a sin-offering, approaching the altar with the meal-offering,37See Chapter 12, Halachah 6; Chapter 13, Halachah 12. and pouring the remainder of the blood of the burnt-offerings, the sin-offerings that are eaten, the guilt-offerings, and the peace-offerings upon its [base].38See Chapter 5, Halachot 6, 10.The three purposes for which the upper portion was used are: the water libation on Sukkos,39See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:6. the wine libation of the accompanying offering [of Sukkot],40I.e., in contrast to the wine libations offered throughout the year which are offered on the lower portion of the altar. See Chapter 2, Halachah 1, and notes. and the burnt offerings of fowl if there are many of them. If the southeast corner41Which was the preferential place for them to be offered, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 20. does not have the capacity for all of them,42I.e., if many fowl were being offered and it was difficult to approach that corner of the altar. [the priests would] turn to the southwest corner and perform melikah there.43For this is close to the place where portions of the sacrifices are discarded.
All of those who ascend the altar on the right [side of the ramp],44I.e., they should turn to the southeastern corner. The rationale is that, at the outset, one should always turn to the right. circle it, and descend on the left [side] except for one who ascends for one of the latter three purposes mentioned above which are performed on the upper portion45Those who perform the tasks on the lower portion of this corner do not ascend the ramp at all, but instead, approach the altar from the ground. of this corner. [Those involved in these services] ascend on the left side, turn to the left, to that corner, perform their task, and retrace their steps.Why do they turn to the left? So that they will encounter the southwest corner first. For if they would turn to the right and circle the entire altar until they reached the southwest corner, the water or the wine might become smoky46Wine that became smoky is unacceptable for a libation (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 6:9). We can assume that the same law applies with regard to water. or perhaps the fowl would die because of the altar's smoke.
Therefore when someone who performs a water or wine libation circles the altar,47There is no necessity - or even preference - that the priest circle the altar. The matter is solely dependent on his choice. The Mishnah (Tamid 6:6) that is the source for this teaching speaks about a High Priest, but as the Rambam states in his Commentary to the Mishnah, the concept applies to any priest. If he desires, he may circle the altar before performing this service. he should not have anything in his hands. He begins circling from the southeast corner, [proceeding] to the northeast and then to the northwest and the southwest. He should not be holding anything. When he reaches the southwest corner, the water or the wine is placed in his hand and he performs the libation. If he does not [desire to] circle [the altar], he may ascend [the ramp], turn to the left, perform his service, and descend.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
There is a stringency that applies with regard to an animal1But not a fowl (Halachah 2). brought as a sin-offering that does not apply [even] to other sacrifices of the most sacred order. If blood from an animal brought as a sin-offering will spew from the container in which the blood was received2If, however, it spewed forth from the animal at the time of slaughter, spluttered from the blood sprinkled to the altar, or spilled to the floor and was collected from there, these laws do not apply (Halachah 6). onto a garment before [the blood] was sprinkled [on the altar],3Similarly, once the blood was sprinkled this stringency does not apply (Halachah 7). that garment is obligated to by washed with water4See Halachah 10. in the Temple Courtyard, as [Leviticus 6:20] states: "If its blood is spewed on a garment, that which it has been spewed upon must be washed in a holy place."
A garment made from wool or linen,5This is the meaning of the term beged (Rashi, Zevachim 93b). a soft hide,6See Halachah 5. or a garment from goat's hair7Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Keilim 27:1). is required to be washed. A firm hide, however, is considered as wood8See Halachah 4. and one should scrape the blood from it.[The above applies to] the blood of sin-offerings that are eaten or those which are burnt,9See Chapter 1, Halachot 15-16. but not to sin-offerings from fowl, as implied by [ibid.:18]: "the sin-offering will be slaughtered," i.e., the Torah is speaking about [an offering] that is slaughtered and not one that is killed by melikah.10Although melikah is equivalent to ritual slaughter in certain contexts, since the verse specifies "slaughter," it is excluded in this instance (Radbaz).
When a sin-offering was disqualified, its blood need not be washed [from garments]. This applies whether there was a time when it could have been acceptable or there was never a time when it could have been acceptable.What is meant by [an offering] that had a time when it could have been acceptable? One which was left overnight, that became impure, or that was taken outside of the Temple Courtyard.11I.e., in all these instances, the ritual slaughter and the sprinkling were performed in an appropriate manner and thus the meat could have been consumed in an acceptable manner. What is meant by [an offering] that never had a time when it could have been acceptable? One that was disqualified because of [the manner in which] it was slaughtered12See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 15:1 which mentions several ways in which ritual slaughter can be disqualified. or the manner in which its blood was sprinkled.
Only the place where the blood [was absorbed] must be washed.13And not the entire garment (Zevachim 93b). [The above applies provided the garment or] utensil14I.e., this requirement applies not only to garments, but also other objects made from these materials. is susceptible to contract ritual impurity and is fit to be washed. If, however, the blood spews on a wooden utensil or a metal utensil, it need not be washed because it is not fit to be washed. Instead, one should merely scrape the blood off.
If [the blood] spewed onto the skin of a fish, it is not necessary to wash it, for [the skin of a fish] is not susceptible to ritual impurity.15See Hilchot Keilim 1:3-4; 10:1. Zevachim 93b states that only an article that is susceptible to ritual impurity must be washed. If it was spewed onto the hide of an animal that was not skinned, it need not be washed. If, however, [the hide] was skinned [from the animal], it must be washed. Even though it is not susceptible to ritual impurity in its present state,16For it is not considered as a k'li, a useful article, in its present state. it will be susceptible to ritual impurity after it has been treated.
If blood spewed from [the animal's] neck onto a garment, it sputtered from the corner of the altar [to a garment],17Since it has already been sprinkled on the altar, these laws no longer apply to it (Zevachim 92b). or the blood spilled to the floor [of the Temple Courtyard],18Without first being received in a sacred utensil. In such an instance, it is not fit to be sprinkled on the altar (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 1:25). If, however, it was first received in a sacred utensil and then spilled, it is fit to be sprinkled on the altar. Hence, if it spewed onto a garment, the garment must be washed. it was gathered and then it spewed on to a garment, there is no requirement that [the garment] be washed, as [the prooftext] states: "If its blood is spewed...."19The same Hebrew root haza'ah is used both for the sprinkling of the blood on the altar and the spewing of the blood on a garment, leading to the inference stated by the Rambam. [Implied is that the requirement] was stated only with regard to blood that was received in a sacred utensil and is fit to be sprinkled [on the altar], [because it is] of sufficient measure [to be sprinkled].20Our translation is based on the gloss of the Radbaz.
If the four presentations of blood21As prescribed in Chapter 5, Halachah 7. were made and then some of the remainder of the blood spewed from the container onto a garment, it need not be washed even though the remainder of the blood was not yet poured out on the base [of the altar].22Because pouring out the remainder of the blood is not an essential element of the sacrifice. Similar principles apply with regard to the sin-offerings that are burnt.23I.e., once the priest has completed the sprinkling of their blood that is required as explained in Chapter 5, Halachot 12-18, the remaining blood does not require that it be washed.
[If the blood of a sin-offering] sputtered from [a priest's] finger after he performed its sprinkling with his hand, [the garment onto which it sputtered] need not be washed, because the remainder of the blood on his finger is not acceptable for sprinkling.24As evident from Chapter 5, Halachah 8.
If [the blood] spewed from one garment to another, the second garment need not be washed.25Zevachim 92b compares this to the situation described in Halachah 6 when blood was spilled onto the floor and then sputtered onto a garment. If [blood] spewed on an impure garment, it need not be washed.26For it is considered as if the blood became impure beforehand and thus would have been unacceptable for sprinkling. Zevachim 93a associates this situation with the question whether water set aside to be used for the sprinkling of the ashes of the red heifer that became impure can be purified or not. Based on that discussion, Rav Yosef Corcus suggests that there is a printing error in the text of the Mishneh Torah and the ruling is that the garment must be washed. This conclusion is supported by the Rambam's ruling in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 1:36 which states that blood from consecrated animals can never contract ritual impurity.If blood from a sin-offering sputtered onto a garment and then ordinary blood27I.e., blood from an animal that was not consecrated. As evident from the following clause, seemingly, the same law would apply with regard to blood from a burnt offering. Indeed, Zevachim 98a-b states this explicitly. sputtered onto the blood from the sin-offering, it must be washed.28For the blood from the sin-offering is absorbed into it and is not washed away by the other blood. If, however, ordinary blood - or even blood from a burnt-offering - sputtered onto a garment and then blood from a sin-offering sputtered on to it, it is not required to be washed, because [the blood from the sin-offering] is not absorbed in [the garment].29For it had already absorbed the other blood.
When the place [stained by] the blood is washed, it should be washed very thoroughly with water until no trace [of the blood] remains. All of the seven detergents30The saliva of a person who has not eaten, beans that have been chewed, urine that has become sour, marsh mallow, natron, glasswort, and soapwort. [The names of these detergents were taken from Rav Kappach's translation of the Arabic terms used in the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Niddah 9:6).] that are used [to determine whether] a stain is blood or not31If the stain is removed when these seven detergents are applied to it, we conclude that it was blood. If it is not removed, we assume that it is paint or another type of dye. should be used to [wash away] the blood of a sin-offering with the exception of urine, for urine should not be brought into the Temple.32For it is not respectful to bring such a substance into a place where the Divine Presence is overtly revealed.The commentaries have noted that Zevachim 95a (the source for this halachah) mentions that urine was brought into the Temple, except that it was first mixed with the saliva so that it was not taken in as an independent entity.
An earthernware vessel in which a sin-offering that is to be eaten33As opposed to those which are burnt. was cooked must be broken34The rationale is that the flavor of the meat of the sin-offering can never be totally purged from an earthenware vessel. in the Temple Courtyard. A metal vessel in which [a sin-offering] was cooked must be cleansed35In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 11:8), the Rambam defines this term as meaning "thoroughly washing a utensil until everything attached to it is removed." and rinsed in water36There the Rambam interprets this as meaning "pouring water over the utensil without scraping the filth off by hand." The Radbaz elaborates on the difference between the Rambam's approach (who appears to require only the thorough cleaning of the vessels) and that of Rashi who interprets Zevachim 95b as requiring that these utensils must be purged in the same manner as one purges non-kosher food from a vessel into which it was absorbed.According to this conception of the Rambam's approach, the problem is not that the fat absorbed in the utensil becomes notar, "sacrificial food that remained overnight," and must be destroyed. Instead, the question involves merely the thorough cleaning of the utensil. This interpretation is borne out by the continuation of the Rambam's statements in his Commentary to the Mishnah where he speaks about the issue of notar with regard to the food attached to the utensil, but does not mention the food absorbed within it. in the Temple Courtyard, as [Leviticus 6:21] states: "An earthenware vessel in which it is cooked shall be broken."Although this verse does not state "in a holy place,"37As does the preceding verse which mentions washing the blood from a garment. the same laws that apply to washing [a garment] apply. Just as the washing must be performed in a sacred place, so too, the breaking of an earthenware vessel and the cleansing and the rinsing of a metal utensil must be performed in a holy place. [These laws apply equally to] a utensil in which [the sin-offering] was cooked and one into which it was poured while it was boiling.38Since the stew including the meat of the sin-offering was boiling while it was poured into the vessel, it is considered as if it was cooked there.
"Cleansing" is performed with hot water and "rinsing" with cold water.39This represents the Rambam's version of Zevachim, loc. cit. There are, however, other versions of that Mishnah. The prooftext mentions "water," [excluding] wine, wine mixed with water, or other liquids. The thorough cleansing and rinsing [of the vessel] should resemble the thorough cleansing and rinsing of a cup.40In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that the intent of this comparison is to imply that the container must be washed until there is no trace of the previous substance, as one would a cup from which he would drink.A spit and a grill [used to cook the meat of a sin-offering] must be purged41To remove the fat absorbed in the container (ibid.). in water that is heated by fire and then washed [in cold water].42In the above source, the Rambam explains that this purging follows the same process in which non-kosher food is purged from cooking utensils. Significantly, however, when he mentions the process of purging non-kosher cooking utensils (Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 17:3-4), he does not mention the need to rinse them in cold water although he does mention that requirement in Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 5:23.
When does the above apply? When one cooked [sacrificial meat] in these utensils after their blood was sprinkled as required by law. If, however, he cooked in [these utensils] before the sprinkling [of the blood]43This would disqualify the sacrifice. or he cooked meat from sin-offerings that were to be burnt in such utensils,44See Halachah 11. it is not necessary that they be washed thoroughly and rinsed.45The Radbaz questions this ruling, because seemingly, the fat absorbed in the utensil, becomes notar, "sacrificial food that remained overnight," and it must be destroyed. He offers three possible resolutions:a) the Rambam is speaking about an instance when the utensil was used on the same day. Hence, the problem does not arise.b) the issue does not concern notar at all, as explained in the notes to Halachah 12.c) since the absorbed fat is more than a day old when it becomes notar, its flavor is impaired (notain taam lifgam). Hence, since the prohibition against the absorbed food is merely a Rabbinic safeguard, our Sages did not apply it in this instance, because the situation involves the Temple service.If one cooked [the meat of a sin-offering] in [only] a portion of a utensil, the entire utensil must be washed thoroughly and rinsed.46The Radbaz uses this law as a further support for his idea that the fat need not be purged from the utensil. For the concept that cooked food which is absorbed in part of a utensil is considered as if it were absorbed in the entire utensil is an established principle.
There is an unresolved doubt [concerning the ruling] when meat [from a sacrificial offering] was roasted in the space of an earthenware oven:47Similar laws apply with regard to sacrifices cooked in a metal oven, except that the question involves the requirement to be thoroughly washed and rinsed. Must [the oven] be destroyed48As required by Halachah 11. since [the meat] was cooked inside of it49For the Torah mentions the necessity of washing out or destroying the utensil after sacrificial meat was cooked in it. It does not state that for the requirement to apply, the flavor of the meat must be absorbed in the utensil. or need it not be destroyed, since it did not touch it?50I.e., the above question is discussed by Zevachim 95b and is left unresolved by our Sages. [The above] does not apply only with regard to a sin-offering. Instead, all utensils that were used for [meat] from sacrificial offerings with hot water,51I.e., sacrificial meat was either cooked in it or poured in it while warm [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 11:8)]. whether sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity or sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity, are required to be washed thoroughly and rinsed after52Our translation is based on the glosses of the Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh. the time for eating from them.53In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam quotes Zevachim, loc. cit., explaining that this concept is derived as follows. Leviticus 6:21-22 states: "All of the priestly males shall partake of it" and directly afterwards states: "and it shall be washed thoroughly and rinsed in water," implying that the two activities should be performed in direct sequence. Similarly, a spit and a grill should be purged after eating [from the sacrifice which they were used to cook].They should not be left until one desires to eat from them a second time.54I.e., beyond the time when it is permitted to eat from them. Instead, when the time for eating from them is completed, one should purge the grill and the spit and wash thoroughly and rinse the utensil whether it be a metal utensil or an earthenware utensil.55The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, stating that there is no point in washing an earthenware utensil thoroughly. Even if one does so, the taste of the sacrificial offering will remain absorbed within it. The Rambam's understanding is that the Torah only required that an earthenware utensil be broken when it was used for cooking a sin-offering, if it was used for cooking other sacrifices, there is no obligation. This difference of opinion relates to a question of greater scope: the difference of opinion mentioned above whether it is necessary to purge the utensils from the food absorbed in them or not. [There is] one exception: [the meat from] a sin-offering. An earthenware utensil [in which it was cooked] must be broken. [Nevertheless,] one may cook [in a utensil] and do so a second and third time immediately, whether using a metal utensil or an earthenware utensil. [The requirement to] wash it thoroughly and rinse it [applies only] at the conclusion of the time permitted to partake [from these sacrificial foods].
Utensils made from animal turds,56In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Keilim 10:1), the Rambam mentions that there are some who interpret the Hebrew term as referring to utensils made from marble. He, however, favors the translation given above. stone, or earth57This refers to utensils made from earth that were not fired in a kiln and hence, are not governed by the laws applying to earthenware utensils. are not required to be thoroughly washed and rinsed even [when the meat of] a sin-offering was cooked in them. All that is necessary is that they be cleansed.58The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that since the Torah does not make any specifications with regard to such utensils (as it does with regard to earthenware and metal utensils), there is no obligation with regard to them. He does not mention wood utensils, because wood utensils do not resemble earthenware and metal.With regard to a sin-offering, [Leviticus 6:20] states: "Anything that will touch its meat will become sanctified,"59See Chapter 10, Halachah 12, which states that at the outset, a sin-offering should not be eaten together with other sacrifices. i.e., it will be of the same status. If it has been disqualified, anything that touches it is also disqualified. If it is kosher, anything that touches it should be eaten according to the laws that apply to it, with the same degree of holiness.60I.e., it can only be eaten in the Temple Courtyard by males of the priestly family on the day the sacrifice was offered and on the following night.
When does the above apply? When [the flavor of the meat of a sacrificial offering] was absorbed by it. If, however, it merely touched it, but its flavor was not absorbed, it does not cause it to become sanctified.61Zevachim 97a, et al, derives this concept from the fact that the term the prooftext uses for "its meat," bibisarah, literally means "in its meat." Implied is the flavor must be absorbed into the meat of the other food. The above applies both to a sin-offering and any other sacrificial offering, whether sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity or sacrifices of a severe degree of sanctity, as [implied by Leviticus 7:37]: "This is the law for the burnt-offering, the meal-offering...."62Zevachim 98b interprets this verse as teaching that there is a fundamental commonality to all the sacrificial offerings.
If the meat [of a sacrificial offering] touched a cake63A soft, spongy wafer [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:4)]. and [its flavor] was absorbed in a portion of it, [the cake] does not become sanctified in its entirety. Instead, one should cut off the portion in which it was absorbed.64And only that portion becomes sanctified.
[The following laws apply to] a utensil in which sacrificial food and ordinary food were cooked together or sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity were cooked together with sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity. If there is a sufficient amount [of the sacrificial food] to impart its flavor,65Unless there is a priest who can distinguish whether the taste was imparted or not, we assume that if the food in the more lenient category is 60 times the amount of the food in the more severe category, the taste of the more severe type of food has not been imparted. Otherwise, we must be stringent (Zevachim 97a). the entire mixture must be eaten according to the laws governing the food of the most severe category. The utensil must be thoroughly washed and rinsed according to the laws governing the food of the most severe category.66Similarly, if an earthenware vessel was used to cook meat from a sin-offering, according to the Rambam, it must be broken. According to Rashi and others, this applies whenever sacrificial offerings are cooked in an earthenware utensil (Radbaz). If it did not impart its flavor to them, the foods of the more lenient category need not be eaten according to the laws governing the food of the most severe category and they are not governed by their laws at all. The utensil [in which the mixture was cooked], however, must be thoroughly washed and rinsed.67I.e., when meat from sacrifices of the most severe degree of sanctity is cooked together with a larger quantity of meat from sacrifices of lesser sanctity, the utensils need not be purged at the time the commandment to partake of the sacrifices of the most severe degree of sanctity is concluded, because that meat is considered insignificant, due to the majority of the other meat. Nevertheless, when the time to partake of the sacrifices of the lesser degree of holiness is concluded, the utensils must be thoroughly washed and rinsed (ibid.). When sacrificial meat is cooked together with ordinary meat, even if its taste is not recognizable, we require that the utensils be thoroughly washed and rinsed, because of the stringencies involving sacrificial food (Radbaz).
When the blood of a sin-offering sputtered on a garment and then that garment was taken out of the Temple Courtyard, it should be returned to the Temple Courtyard and washed there.What should be done if [the garment] became impure outside the Temple Courtyard?68And thus it would not be permitted to return it to the Temple Courtyard in its present state [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 11:6)]. It should be torn69This refers to both ordinary garments and priestly garments with the exception of the cloak. Although it is forbidden to tear priestly garments with a destructive intent (Hilchot K'lei Hamikdash 9:3), tearing it for this purpose is not considered as tearing it with a destructive intent. so that it will become pure.70As stated in Hilchot Kelim 23:11, when the majority of an impure garment is torn, the remnants are considered as ritually pure. He should then bring it into [the Temple Courtyard] and wash it there. He must leave intact a portion of the garment the size of a handkerchief, for [the relevant verse]71Leviticus 6:20. speaks of a "garment," i.e., a garment must be washed.72Anything smaller than a handkerchief could not be justifiably called a garment. Even though [the remnants of the garment] are impure due to Rabbinic decree,73And thus one might think that they should not be brought into the Temple Courtyard. because of the remnant the size of a handkerchief, since the majority of it is torn, it is ritually pure according to Scriptural Law and it is permitted to bring it into the Sanctuary to wash out the blood.74I.e., our Sages did not enforce their decree in this instance, because doing so would lead to the nullification of a Scriptural obligation.
What should be done when blood from a sin-offering sputtered on [the High Priest's] cloak,75Concerning which there is an explicit prohibition not to tear it (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash, loc. cit.). Hence the advice given in the previous halachah is not relevant. it was taken out [of the Temple Courtyard], and became impure? [The difficulty is that] one who tears it is liable for lashes, as we explained. He should bring it into [the Temple Courtyard] less than three fingerbreadths at a time76A portion of cloth less than three fingerbreadths wide is not considered as a garment. Hence, the laws of ritual impurity do not apply to it. Although in this instance, the cloak is intact and hence, is larger than this measure, since there is no alternative, this provision is allowed. and wash it in [the Temple Courtyard]. After all the blood has been washed off it little by little, it should be immersed [in a mikveh]77To purify it. outside [the Temple Courtyard].
When an earthen-ware utensil in which a sin-offering78The Radbaz maintains that this law applies to the meat of a sin-offering, but not the meat of other offerings. was cooked was taken out of the [Temple] Courtyard, it should be brought back in and broken there.79Zevachim 94b explains that this concept is derived from the laws governing the washing of a garment mentioned in Halachah 19. If it became impure outside the Temple Courtyard, it should be perforated to the extent that a small root [could protrude through it] so that it will be ritually pure,80Zevachim 95a explains that "a utensil" must be able to contain liquids and if has a hole, it is no longer fit for such a purpose. Thus once the utensil has been broken, it is ritually pure. (This represents the Scriptural Law. With regard to Rabbinic Law, see Hilchot Keilim 19:2.) and then bring it back inside [the Temple Courtyard] and break it there. If it is broken with a larger hole, it should not be broken in [the Temple Courtyard], because only utensils are broken there.81And if it is broken to a greater extent, it is not considered as a utensil at all and therefore should not be brought into the Temple Courtyard.Why was a utensil broken to the extent that a root could project through it allowed to be brought into the Temple Courtyard? Since our Sages considered it a utensil in certain contexts, they allowed it to be considered a utensil so that the obligation to break utensils in the Temple Courtyard could be fulfilled.Similarly, when a metal utensil in which [sin-offerings] were cooked was taken out of the [Temple] Courtyard, it should be brought back in and thoroughly washed and rinsed there. If it became impure when it was taken out, its [bottom] should be opened82With a large hole (see Hilchot Keilim 11:1-2). until it becomes pure83Because it is no longer fit to be served as a utensil. and then it should be brought back inside [the Temple Courtyard] [The metal] should then be flattened so that the opening becomes closed as is the form of utensils.84Hilchot Keilim 12:1 states that when a metal utensil that had regained ritual purity, because it had been opened, becomes closed again, it reverts to being ritually impure. This, however, is a Rabbinic safeguard and our Sages did not uphold their decree in this instance so that the practice of purging the utensils could be fulfilled. Afterwards, it should be thoroughly washed and rinsed in the Temple Courtyard, as [Leviticus 6:21] states: "If [it was cooked] in a copper utensil, [it should be thoroughly washed and rinsed with water]." [Implied is that] only "utensils" are thoroughly washed in the Temple Courtyard.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
It is a positive commandment to offer the guilt-offerings1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 65) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 140) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. according to its statutes as they are written in the Torah. How are the guilt-offerings brought? Both the definite guilt offerings2See Hilchot Shegagot, Chapter 9, for a description of the transgressions for which these sacrifices are brought. and the conditional guilt-offerings3See Hilchot Shegagot, Chapter 8, for a description of the situations which warrant bringing these sacrifices. should be slaughtered and their blood should be sprinkled on the altar, as we explained.4See Chapter 5, Halachah 2, with regard to slaughter, and Halachah 6 of that chapter with regard to sprinkling the blood on the altar. They are skinned,5As stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 18. the portions offered on the altar6The fats, the lobe of liver, and the kidneys described in Leviticus 7:3-4. are removed, salted,7For every element of a sacrifice offered on the altar must be salted (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:11). and tossed on [the altar's] pyre. If one desires to carry [these portions] to the altar in a [sacred] utensil, he may. The remainder of the meat is eaten by males of the priestly family according to [the laws that govern the consumption of] sin-offerings.8For Leviticus 7:7 establishes an equation between the guilt-offering and the sin-offering. See also Chapter 10, Halachah 3.
There is a difference with regard to [the laws governing] the acceptance of the blood of the guilt offering brought by a person who had been afflicted with tzara'at,9A skin affliction similar to, but not identical to leprosy, that afflicts people, their clothes, and their homes because of spiritual inadequacies, in particular speaking lashon hara, uncomplimentary gossip (the conclusion of Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at). as will be explained in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah.10Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 4:2. Nevertheless, all of its other procedures, the sprinkling of its blood on the altar, and its consumption are analogous to that required for other guilt-offerings in all regards.11This sacrifice is given as an example of one of the Thirteen Principles of Biblical Exegesis taught by Rabbi Yishmael (Sifra 1:4), It describes an entity (the guilt offering brought by a person afflicted by tzara'at) that was once included in a general category (all guilt offerings), but was singled out with regard to a new stipulation (that its blood be received in a different manner). Hence the laws that apply to that general category apply to it only because there is an explicit verse (Leviticus 14:13  that returns it to the general category.
It is a positive commandment to offer all the peace-offerings12Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 66) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 141) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as commanded. There are four types: one is the communal peace-offerings13The two lambs offered on Shavuot (Leviticus 23:19 . and the [other] three are individual peace offerings.14The Radbaz emphasizes that there is a difference between peace-offerings and other sacrifices. Most of the peace-offerings are brought voluntarily, while most of the other offerings are brought due to an obligation.
What is the procedure for bringing the communal peace offerings? [The sacrificial lambs] should be slaughtered and their blood should be sprinkled on the altar, as we explained.15See Chapter 5, Halachah 2, with regard to slaughter, and Halachah 6 of that chapter with regard to sprinkling the blood on the altar. They are skinned,16As stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 18. the portions offered on the altar17The fats, the lobe of liver, and the kidneys described in Leviticus 7:3-4. are removed, salted,18For every element of a sacrifice offered on the altar must be salted (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:11). and brought to be consumed by [the altar's] pyre. The remainder [of the meat] is eaten by males of the priestly family according to [the laws that govern the consumption of] a sin-offering and a guilt-offering, for these [sacrifices] are also sacrifices of the most sacred order, as we explained.19Chapter 1, Halachah 17; Chapter 5, Halachah 3.
There are three types of individual peace-offerings:a) a peace-offering that is brought without bread, e.g., the festive peace-offering20Brought when making the festive pilgrimages (Hilchot Chagigah 1:1). or the peace-offering of celebration,21Additional peace-offerings brought at the time of the festive pilgrimages (ibid.). they are called peace-offerings;b) peace-offerings brought with bread because of a vow or a pledge;22The term "vow" refers to a promise to bring a sacrifice. The term "pledge" refers to a promise to bring a particular animal as a sacrifice (Hilchot Nedarim 1:2). these are called thanksgiving offerings and the bread is called the bread of the thanksgiving offering;c) the peace-offering brought by a nazirite on the day he completes his nazirite vow; this offering is accompanied by bread and is called the nazirite's ram.23See Hilchot Nezirut 8:1.
What is the procedure for bringing these three [types of offerings]? [The sacrificial animals] should be slaughtered and their blood should be sprinkled on the altar, as we explained.24See Chapter 5, Halachah 2, with regard to slaughter, and Halachah 6 of that chapter with regard to sprinkling the blood on the altar. They are skinned25As stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 18. and the portions offered on the altar26The fats, the lobe of liver, and the kidneys described in Leviticus 7:3-4. are removed. Afterwards, the meat is cut up and the breast and the right thigh are set aside.27Ultimately, they will be given to the priests as stated in Halachah 12. The portions to be offered together with the breast and the thigh are placed on the hands of the owners. A priest places his hands below the hands of the owner and performs tenufah28As explained in the following halachah. with all these items "before God," to the east [of the Altar].29Our translation is based on Rashi, Menachot 61a. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 5:6), the Rambam writes: "With regard to the guilt-offering brought by a person afflicted with tzara'at..., it is written (Leviticus 14:12 : 'And tenufah should be performed with them before God.' A tradition has been received interpreting 'before God' as meaning 'in the east.'Rashi (loc. cit.) interprets this to mean that even the area to the east of the altar is considered as "before God," but the area to the west certainly warrants that description. The Rambam does not accept this understanding. His interpretation is questioned by the Kessef Mishneh and others, for the Holy of Holies was to the west of the altar. Seemingly, the closer one comes to it, the more one is "before God." Whenever there is a requirement for tenufah, it is performed to the east [of the Altar].
How is tenufah performed? [The items] are taken [to each of the directions]30The bracketed addition is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 5:5). This is also the perspective of Rashi (Menachot 62a) based on our Sages' statements that this action is intended to prevent destructive winds. and returned, lifted up and brought low.31This is intended to prevent harmful dews (ibid.). If the sacrifice was a thanksgiving offering, one should be taken from each [of the four] groups of ten breads that are brought with it32See Halachot 17-22 for a description of the breads which would accompany the thanksgiving offering. and placed together with the breast, the thigh, and the portions offered on the altar. Tenufah should be performed with all of these items upon the owner's hands, as explained.33In the previous halachah.
How are they placed on the owner's hands? The fats are placed on the owner's hands with the breast and the thigh above them. The two kidneys and the lobe of the liver are placed above them and if [the offering includes] bread, it is placed above them34In this way, the bread will not be spoiled through excessive contact with the meat (Radbaz). In his gloss (based on Menachot 61b), he cites exegetical reasons why the other items are placed in the order mentioned. and tenufah is performed with all these items.
If the sacrifice was a nazirite's ram, [the priest] should remove the portions to be offered on the altar, set aside the breast and the thigh, and cook the remainder of the ram in the Women's Courtyard.35More particularly, as mentioned in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:8, there was a chamber in the southeast portion of the Women's Courtyard set aside for this purpose. The priest takes the cooked foreleg from the ram36As commanded by Numbers 6:19. The Radbaz explains that it would appear that the foreleg would be placed above the other portions of the sacrifice, but below the bread. and one from each [of the two] groups of ten breads that are brought with it,37See Halachah 23. together with the breast, the thigh, and the portions offered on the altar and places everything on the nazirite's hands. The priest places his hands under the owner's hands and moves all [items] as we described.38In the previous two halachot.
What is meant by the breast? The portion [of the animal's body] that faces the ground that extends from the neck until the belly. Two ribs on either side should be cut off [and given to the priest] together with it. What is meant by the foreleg? The portion from the upper-joint until the ankle joint; two limbs, one connected with the other.39An animal's foreleg is comprised of three bones. According to the Rambam, the lower two are given to the priest. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 10:4). Others maintain the upper two should be given to the priest. The foreleg that is mentioned refers to the right foreleg. The corresponding portion in the rear leg is the thigh that is referred to universally.
After tenufah is performed with [these portions], they are offered on the pyre of the altar except for the breast and the thigh that are eaten by the priests,40See Chapter 10, Halachah 4. as [Leviticus 7:34] states: "but the breast with which tenufah was performed and the thigh that was lifted up...." The remainder of the peace-offerings are consumed by the owner.41And any - both male and female - with whom he desires to share the meat. The priests do not acquire the breast and the thigh until after the portions to be offered on the altar were placed on its pyre.42Pesachim 59b derives this law from the order in which the concepts are stated in the Torah. Similarly, the owner may not partake of his portion until that time (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:7).
Similarly, the bread with which tenufah was performed from the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram and the cooked foreleg are eaten by the priests. The remainder of the bread and the remainder of the meat are eaten by the owner. The bread with which tenufah was performed together with the breast and the thigh is referred to43See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:21; Hilchot Bikkurim 1:15. as "the elevated portion from the thanksgiving offering." The cooked foreleg together with the breast and the thigh and the bread with which tenufah was performed are referred to as "the elevated portion from the nazirite's ram."
There is an unresolved doubt whether the bread from the elevated portion of the thanksgiving offering44There is, however, no such doubt with regard to the elevated portion of the nazirite's ram (Radbaz). is categorized as terumah or not.45For Leviticus 7:14 uses the word terumah when describing this offering. Nevertheless, since we find exclusions with regard to penalties associated with terumah in other verses, it is possible that they do not apply with regard to these breads. Accordingly, Menachot 77b leaves the matter unresolved. Therefore one is not liable for death,46Hilchot Terumot 6:6. nor to repay an additional fifth, [as one is when partaking of] terumah. Nor is a mixture of it subject to the laws of dimua47As stated in Hilchot Terumot 13:1-2, in such an instance, one hundred times the amount of terumah is required before the mixture is permitted. as is a mixture of terumah.48The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that if these breads become mixed with ordinary breads, seemingly, there is a question whether a Scriptural prohibition applies and one should rule stringently. They explain that as long as there is a majority of permitted substances, the Scriptural prohibition is considered as nullified and the prohibition is only Rabbinic in origin (see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:13). This also applies with regard to a mixture of terumah (Hilchot Terumot 14:7). Accordingly, in this instance, since it is possible that the laws of terumah are not applied to these breads, we do not impose the Rabbinic prohibition.
If the person bringing the thanksgiving offering was a priest, the remainder of the bread may be eaten by the owner like a thanksgiving offering brought by an Israelite. For the bread that accompanies a thanksgiving offering or a nazrite's ram is not called a meal offering.49As will be stated (Chapter 12, Halachah 9), in contrast to the meal offerings brought by Israelites, meal offerings brought by the priests are consumed entirely by the altar's pyre. Hence, the Rambam felt it necessary to clarify that these breads are not in that category.
When two people bring a peace-offering in partnership, one should perform tenufah with the other's permission.50If the two partners would perform tenufah each one holding part of the items, neither would be performing the rite as required. If one put his hand below the hand of the other one, there would be an interposition between that person's hand and the sacrificial items. And it is also impossible for them to perform tenufah, one after the other, because the Torah speaks about tenufah, using the singular, and not tenufot, using the plural (Menachot 94a). Even if there are 100 [partners], one should perform tenufah for the sake of all of them. This does not apply with regard to semichah.51That rite must be performed by each of the partners individually (Chapter 3, Halachah 9).
When a woman is the one bringing a sacrifice, she does not perform tenufah with it. The priest must perform that rite,52The Radbaz suggests that if she is married, her husband should perform this rite on her behalf. for the sacrifice requires that tenufah be performed with it and a woman is unacceptable to perform that rite. A woman never performs tenufah except in two instances: a sotah53A woman suspected of adultery who is required to bring an offering as part of her process of atonement. and a female nazirite, as we explained.54Hilchot Sotah 3:15; Hilchot Nizirut 8:4. Tenufah should always be performed before [the elements of the sacrifice] are brought close to the altar.55Menachot 61a derives this concept from Numbers 5:25 which speaks of tenufah being performed with a sotah's offering and then of it being brought to the altar.
What is meant by the bread that is brought together with the thanksgiving offering? One should take 20 isaronim56An isaron is defined as a measure equivalent to the volume of 43 and 1/5 eggs. of fine flour. He should make ten isaronim leavened and ten unleavened. The ten that are made leaven should be made into ten loaves.
How are they made leavened? He should bring enough yeast to cause the dough to leaven and place it in the measure of an isaron. He then fills the measure. Even though ultimately, [the measure] will be lacking or excessive because of the yeast,57I.e., the space intended for the flour will be taken by the yeast. for at times [the yeast] will be thick and hard58And thus take up only a small amount of space. and at times it will be soft [and inflated],59And thus take up a lot of space. we are concerned only with its measure at the present time. Hence he should measure full isaronim.From the ten isaronim for the unleavened bread, he should make 30 loaves of the same size, ten of each [of the following three] types: ten loaves baked in an oven, ten loaves of flat-cakes, and ten loaves of fried cakes.60In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 9:3), the Rambam writes that he has found no definition for the term murbechet, but that appears to him that it implies that a large quantity of oil is used in the preparation of the cakes.
How are the fried cakes prepared? [The cakes] should be scalded with boiling water.61See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:6; Menachot 9:3), where he describes how these fried cakes are made. Then they should be baked slightly and then fried in oil in a roasting pot or the like, like doughnuts and fried. A large amount of oil is used for them. This is the deep frying process mentioned in all places.
How much oil is used to prepare these 30 loaves?62Those loaves which are leavened do not require oil [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 7:4)]. Half a log of oil.63A half a log is 172 cc. according to Shiurei Torah and 300 cc. according to Chazon Ish. This measure is a halachah communicated to Moses from Sinai. A fourth is used for the fried doughballs, an eighth for the loaves [baked in the oven], and an eighth for the wafers.64The Radbaz maintains that the measure of half a log was communicated to Moses, but the breakdown of how this measure should be used was not. Hence, after the fact, the sacrifice is not disqualified if there was some deviation.
With regard to the loaves [that are baked]: their flour should saturate in the eighth [of a log]. Afterwards, they should be kneaded and baked. The oil should be poured over the wafers after they have been baked.The priest takes four loaves from the entire [mixture], one of each type, as [Leviticus 7:14] states: "One from each [type], a sacrifice."
When one made [only] four loaves for the bread for the thanksgiving offering, he has fulfilled his obligation. [The Torah] mentions 40 only as [the optimum way of fulfilling] the mitzvah. [This applies] provided he separates a challah from each of the types of sacrifices while they are still dough.65Although the person desires to bake only four loaves, he must also separate one loaf of each type for the priest. This separation must be done beforehand, as the Rambam precedes to explain. Thus one tenth of each type of dough must be separated and prepared for the priest. For a piece of bread may not be separated [as a sacrificial portion].66I.e., it would not be deferential to give the priest a piece of each of the four doughs as his sacrificial portion. [This is implied by the prooftext:] "One from each [type], a sacrifice," that the priest should not receive a portion.
What is meant by the bread that is brought together with the nazirite's ram? He should take six and two thirds isaronim of flour and make 20 equal sized loaves from them. They must all be unleavened bread.67The nazirite is bringing two thirds of the unleavened bread brought in connection with a thanksgiving offering. Hence, he uses two thirds the amount of flour. Ten should be wafers with oil poured over them and ten loaves whose flour was saturated in oil. The entire amount should be baked in an oven. A fourth [of a log] of oil is used for them.68I.e., a similar amount of oil is used as is used for the corresponding loaves of the thanksgiving offering. This measure is a halachah communicated to Moses at Sinai. The priest takes two of the loaves, one from each type.69As stated in Numbers 6:19.
Each of the two types of bread [brought by] a Nazirite and the four types of bread brought for the thanksgiving offering is an absolute necessity.70I.e., if any of the types of bread are lacking, the sacrifice is unacceptable and nothing should be brought at all. The bread for both these offerings is prepared outside the Temple Courtyard.71In his gloss to the Mishnah (Menachot 3:7), Tosafot Yom Tov writes that these breads were baked in Beit Pagi, a small settlement, outside, but close to the Temple Mount.
How are the firstborn, tithe, and Paschal sacrifices offered? After their blood is poured on the altar as we explained,72Chapter 5, Halachah 17. they are skinned, the portions offered on the altar are removed,73Chapter 5, Halachah 18. salted, and placed on [the altar's] pyre.74See Hilchot Korban Pesach 1:14; Hilchot Bechorot 1:2; 6:4. The remainder of the meat of the firstborn offering is eaten by the priests. The remainder of the meat of the tithe sacrifice is eaten by the owner. The remainder of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice is eaten by those enumerated upon it according to its laws, as will be explained in Hilchot [Korban] Pesach.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
It is a positive commandment for the sin offerings and the guilt-offerings1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 89) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 102) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to be eaten,2This mitzvah is incumbent on the priests; it is not a dimension of the obligation to bring a given sacrifice. as [Exodus 29:33] states: "And they shall eat [the sacrifices] which convey atonement."3The choice of this prooftext and the concept it teaches sheds light on an issue debated by the commentaries: Is it a positive mitzvah to partake of the meat of the sacrifices of lesser sanctity? In his Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., the Rambam explains that since eating the other sacrifices does not bring about atonement, it should not be considered as an independent mitzvah. Instead, it is an extension of this mitzvah. In this instance, however, since the atonement of the person bringing the sacrifice depends on the priests' consumption of the sacrifice, it is considered as an independent mitzvah. There is extensive discussion on this issue by other Rabbis. The priests eat the sacrifices and the owners receive atonement. This also applies to other sacrifices4E.g., the communal peace offerings. that are eaten by the priests; partaking of them is a mitzvah.
Similarly, partaking of the portion that remains from the meal offerings5I.e., after the handful has been taken out to be offered on the altar. See Chapter 12, Halachah 9. is a positive commandment,6Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 88) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 134) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This mitzvah encompasses partaking of all the different types of meal offerings (Radbaz). as [Leviticus 6:9] states: "What remains of it shall be eaten by Aaron and his sons."
The sin-offering, the guilt-offering, and the remnants of the meal-offering may be eaten only by males7Even minors; see Halachah 17. of the priestly family in the Temple Courtyard.8Indeed, as stated in Chapter 11, Halachah 5, there is a prohibition against partaking of these sacrifices outside the Temple Courtyard. If they were eaten in the Temple building, their consumption is [acceptable], as [indicated by Numbers 18:9-10]: "For all of their meal-offerings, for all of their sin-offerings, and for all of their guilt-offerings.... In the most holy place,9This includes the Temple building. you shall partake of it.10Zevachim 63a asks: From that verse, it would appear that it is desirable (not merely acceptable after the fact) to partake of the offerings inside the Temple building. Our Sages then cite Leviticus 6:9 which indicates that the sacrifices should be eaten in the Temple Courtyard. They explain that it is preferable to consider the Temple Courtyard the primary place where the sacrifices are eaten, for the Temple building is the resting place for the Divine Presence and it is not befitting for that to be the primary place for eating, an activity that is essentially a human need. All males shall partake of it." Similarly, the communal peace-offerings are similar to the sin-offerings and the guilt-offerings, as we explained.11Chapter 9, Halachah 4.
The breast and the thigh of the peace-offerings are eaten by both males and females of the priestly family, for with regard to these [Numbers 18:11] states: "I have given it to you, to your sons and your daughters." This also applies to the elevated portions of the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram,12The breads and the portions of meat given to the priest from those offerings; see Chapter 9, Halachah 12. [ibid.:19] states: "All of the elevated portions of the consecrated [offerings] that the children of Israel shall raise up have I given to you, your sons, and your daughters."
The same applies with regard to the firstborn offering, for concerning it [ibid.:18] states: "Their meat shall be yours, like the breast with which tenufah was performed and the right thigh."13I.e., they are comparable to the peace-offering.All of these14I.e., the portions from the sacrifices of lesser sanctity, including the breast and the thigh of the peace offering and the firstborn offering. [portions of sacrificial meat] that may be eaten by the women of the priestly family may be eaten by the priests' servants and their wives, like terumah. All [these sacrifices]15Not only the portions given to the priests, but also those given to the Israelites. may be eaten throughout the city [of Jerusalem],16See Chapter 11, Halachah 6, which delineates the prohibition against eating such sacrificial meat outside of Jerusalem. as [Leviticus 10:14] states: "And the breast with which tenufah was performed and the thigh that was lifted up shall you eat in a pure place." It was not specified that they [be eaten] "in a holy place," which would mean "the Temple Courtyard," but "in a pure place." This refers to the camp of the Israelites.17As related in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:11, while the Jews were journeying through the desert, their encampment was considered as divided into three camps: the Camp of the Divine Presence, the Camp of the Levites, and the Camp of the Israelites. The parallel with regard to future generations is the city of Jerusalem.The same laws apply to the tithe offering and the Paschal sacrifice, for they are sacrifices of lesser sanctity like the peace-offerings. The windows and the thickness of the wall is considered as being within [the city].18See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:9. See also parallel rulings in Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 2:16; Hilchot Korban Pesach 9:1.The Radbaz clarifies that this is referring to instances where the windows are open to the city. If they are open only to the area outside the wall, he maintains that they should be considered as outside the city.
The peace-offerings may be eaten on the day they were slaughtered, throughout the [following] night, and throughout the following day until sunset, as [Leviticus 7:16-18] states: "On the day when his sacrifice was offered, it shall be eaten and on its morrow... If one would partake of the peace-offering on the third day...."19The verse continues "he shall bear his sin," implying that there is a prohibition in partaking of the sacrifice at that time. Thus one can derive that they may be eaten for two days and one night. [This applies both] to the portion of the priests and the portions of the owners. This also applies to the firstborn and tithe offerings,20But not the Paschal sacrifice, as stated in Hilchot Korban Pesach 8:1, 15. for they are also sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity, like the peace-offerings.
The thanksgiving-offering, by contrast, even though it is one of the sacrifices of lesser sanctity, may be eaten only on the day of its sacrifice and the [following] night, as [ibid.:15] states: "It shall be eaten on the day it was offered. Do not leave anything from it until the morning." This also applies to the nazirite's ram and the bread which accompanies [these offerings], both to the portion of the priests and the portion of the owner. This also applies to the sin-offering, the guilt-offering, the communal peace-offerings, and the remainder of the meal-offerings. All of these are eaten for a day and [the following] night, as it is written: "It shall be eaten on the day it was offered."21I.e., the Rambam understands the verse as referring to all sacrifices unless it is specifically stated otherwise. This appears to include all of the sacrifices with the exception of the peace-offerings concerning which the Torah explicitly [stated otherwise] and the firstborn and tithe offerings which resemble the peace-offerings.
According to Scriptural Law, all of these [sacrifices] that may be eaten on the day [of their sacrifice] and the [following] night may be eaten until dawn.22The first appearance of the sun's rays - but not the sun itself - on the eastern hemisphere. According to different halachic views, it is between 72 minutes and two hours before sunrise. In order to separate a person from sin, our Sages said that they may only be eaten until midnight.23I.e., if a person would be given the entire night, he might become lax and delay the consumption of the meat and come to partake of the meat after dawn. Giving him a more restricted time serves as a safeguard to prevent the violation of this limit. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Berachot 1:1).
All of the sacrifices - both those of the highest degree of sanctity and those of a lesser degree - may be eaten only by those who are ritually pure24Indeed, as stated in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:13, partaking of sacrificial meat in a state of ritual impurity violates a Scriptural prohibition. See also Hilchot Chagigah4. and who are circumcised.25As evident from Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:4, sec. 69, the prohibition against partaking of sacrificial meat while uncircumcised is an extension of the prohibition against partaking of terumah while uncircumcised. See Hilchot Terumah 7:10; Hilchot Korban Pesach 9:7. Even if the duration of the person's impurity has concluded,26The literal meaning of the words used by the Rambam is "his sun has set." For in most instances, it is at sunset when the duration of the term of a person's ritual impurity ends. but he has not brought the [necessary] atonement,27See Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah, ch. 1, which explains that a zav, a zavah, a person who had been afflicted with tzara'at and a woman who gave birth or miscarried must immerse themselves in a mikveh (or in a stream) to regain ritual purity. Nevertheless, they may not partake of sacrifices until they bring the offerings required of them. See also Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:14. he may not partake of sacrificial foods. A tumtum28A person whose gender is masked by an extra piece of flesh. may not partake of sacrificial foods, because there is an unresolved doubt whether he is uncircumcised.29I.e., if he is in fact male, circumcision will not have been performed upon him. It appears to me that an androgynus30One with both a male and female sexual organ. may partake of sacrifices of lesser sanctity.31For these sacrifices may be eaten by both males and females. Although there is a halachic uncertainty with regard to the definition of his gender (see Hilchot Nizirut 2:10), that should not prevent him from partaking of these sacrifices. He may not, however, partake of sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity, for these may only be eaten by males and he is not categorically defined as male.The Kessef Mishneh clarifies that this leniency applies only when the male organ of the androgynus has been circumcised.
It is permitted to eat sacrificial meat together with any other food. Even the priests are permitted to eat their portions - both from the sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity and those of a lesser degree - together with any other food.32There is a slight difficulty with the Rambam's ruling, as noted by Rav Yosef Corcus in his gloss to the following halachah, for sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity may only be eaten in the Temple Courtyard and ordinary food may not be brought into the Temple Courtyard. Rashi (Temurah 23a) explains that the intent is that one may partake of ordinary food outside the Temple Courtyard and then enter the Temple Courtyard to partake of the sacrificial food. Tosafot explains that the prohibition against bringing ordinary food into the Temple Courtyard applies only when it is not being brought there for a purpose connected with the Temple service. If, however, it is being brought there to be eaten together with the sacrifices, there is no prohibition. And they may change the manner [in which it is prepared] to be eaten, eating them roasted, lightly cooked, or thoroughly cooked33The Paschal sacrifice may only be eaten while roasted, but that is a specific obligation that does not apply to other sacrifices. and to spice them with spices that are not consecrated. They may not, however, spice them with spices that are terumah, lest this cause the terumah to be disqualified.34The sacrifices may be eaten only for a limited amount of time as mentioned above (Halachot 6-7), while there is no limit on the time terumah may be eaten. Thus if the sacrifices were cooked with terumah, the terumah could be disqualified with the sacrifices and the time in which it could be eaten would be reduced.The bones that remain are permitted [to be used for any purpose].35I.e., this is not considered as a desecration of consecrated articles (Radbaz). This applies provided there are not any portions of the bones that are fit to be eaten (Kessef Mishneh). A person may make any utensil he desires from them.
If there was only a small amount [of sacrificial meat], ordinary food and terumah should be eaten with it so that it will be eaten in a satisfying manner.36For it is not befitting for one to leave his master's table when he is hungry (Tosafot, Pesachim 120a). If there is a large amount [of sacrificial meat], ordinary food and terumah should not be eaten with it so that one will not have overeaten.37For that is also not becoming. Similar concepts apply with regard to the remainder of the meal offerings.38I.e., that other foods may be eaten with it if there is only a small amount (Kessef Mishneh). Indeed, the verse from which the above concepts are derived (Leviticus 6:9  concerns the meal offerings.
A sin-offering and a guilt-offering should not be cooked together with the elevated portion of the thanksgiving-offering or the elevated portion of the nazirite's ram because doing so restricts the type of people able to partake of them39A sin-offering and a guilt-offering may only be eaten by male priests, while the elevated portions of the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram may also be eaten by their wives, their daughters, and their servants (Radbaz). and the place where they can be eaten.40A sin-offering and a guilt-offering may only be eaten in the Temple Courtyard, while the elevated portions of the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram may also be eaten throughout the city of Jerusalem (ibid.).Needless to say, one may not cook a sin-offering or a guilt-offering with the portion of the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram to be eaten by the owner, for doing so certainly places restrictions on that meat, preventing even the owner from partaking of it. Nor may one [cook] the elevated portion of the thanksgiving-offering or the elevated portion of the nazirite's ram with the breast and thigh of the peace-offering because doing so restricts the time in which they may be eaten.41The elevated portions of the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram may be eaten only for a day and a night, while the breast and thigh of the peace-offering may be eaten on the following day as well (ibid.).The same concepts apply with regard to cooking the meat of the thanksgiving offering or the nazirite's ram together with the meat of a peace-offering. It is only that since the Rambam had been speaking about the portions eaten by the priests, he continued to do so. Nor may the elevated portion of yesterday's peace-offering [be cooked] with a sin-offering or a guilt-offering brought today because doing so restricts the type of people able to partake of them,42For sin-offering and a guilt-offering may only be eaten by male priests, while the peace-offerings may be eaten by Israelites and women (ibid.). the place where they can be eaten,43A sin-offering and a guilt-offering may only be eaten in the Temple Courtyard, while the peace-offering may also be eaten throughout the city of Jerusalem (ibid.). and the time in which they may be eaten.44Here the restrictions are reversed for the peace offering of the previous day may only be eaten until sunset, while the sin-offering and the guilt-offering may also be eaten until midnight of the following night (ibid.).One may, however, cook sin-offerings and guilt-offerings together, the thanksgiving offering and the nazirite's ram together, and the firstborn offering and the breast and the thigh [of the thanksgiving offering] together.45In all of these instances, the pairs of offerings mentioned may be eaten by the same type of individual, in the same places, and for the same duration of time.If one cooked a piece [of meat] from the sacrifices of the most sacred order,46Which may only be eaten by priests. one that was piggul,47Meat from a sacrifice that was slaughtered with the intent to sprinkle its blood, offer the portions required to be offered on the altar's pyre, or partake of its meat at an improper time (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 13:1). or one that was notar48Meat that remained after the required time for partaking of this type of sacrificial meat passed (ibid. 18:10). with other pieces of sacrificial meat,49There are others who include sacrificial meat that became impure in the list of prohibitions mentioned here and indeed this is the standard text of the Mishnah (Orlah 2:16) which serves as the source for this halachah. The Rambam does not, however, include that particular in his version of the mishnah. The rationale for this distinction is discussed by the commentaries. See the notes to the following halachah. those other pieces are forbidden to non-priests and permitted to priests.50In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam explains that this is speaking about an instance when there is sixty times more permitted meat than the piece of meat that is piggul or notar and that forbidden piece of meat was removed. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:5-6 with regard to the latter points. This addition satisfies the objections raised by the Ra'avad.According to this interpretation, the fundamental point of this ruling is that the meat is permitted only to priests and not to non-priests. Although the prohibitions against piggul and notar have been nullified since the sacrificial meat was originally to be eaten only by priests, that restriction still remains. There are, however, others who interpret the mishnah differently.
When meat from the sacrifices of the most sacred order or sacrifices of lesser sanctity is cooked together with ordinary meat,51The term the Rambam uses literally translates as "the meat of desire," i.e., meat that there is no mitzvah to partake of. the ordinary meat is forbidden to those who are ritually impure52Because it has absorbed the flavor of the sacrificial meat. The Radbaz states that even if there is enough ordinary meat to nullify the presence of the sacrificial meat, the prohibition against eating the sacrificial meat in a state of ritual impurity is not nullified. and permitted to those who are ritually pure.53As the Rambam states in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 2:17), the intent is that if the sacrificial meat was from sacrifices of the most sacred order, the ordinary meat may be eaten by priests. If it was of sacrifices of lesser sanctity, it may be eaten by ordinary individuals, provided they are ritually pure.In one of his responsa, the Radbaz mentions that only the ordinary meat is permitted to be eaten, the sacrificial meat is forbidden, because it is considered to have become ritually impure because of its contact with the ordinary meat. See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 11:5. In his Commentary to the Mishnah, however, the Rambam states that "everything may be eaten by pure priests" or "pure non-priests."
With regard to a burnt-offering, [Leviticus 7:8] states: "The hide of the burnt-offering which the priest sacrificed will belong to him." With regard to a sin-offering, [ibid. 6:19] states: "The priest who performs the sin-offering shall partake of it." With regard to a guilt-offering, [ibid. 7:7] states: "It will belong to the priest who brings about atonement because of it." With regard to a peace-offering, [ibid.:14] states: "It will belong to the priest who pours the blood of the peace-offering." And with regard to the meal-offering, it is written: "The priest who offers it shall partake of it."54The verse cited in the text of the Mishneh Torah does not exist. The commentaries have suggested that the intent is Leviticus 7:9 as stated in the following halachah.See the gloss of the Radbaz who explains why all the different verses are necessary, because the concepts cannot be derived from each other.In all the above instances, the verses are not referring [to the priest who actually brings the offering, but] to [any priest] who is fit to have done so. Any priest who is fit to perform the service has a right to share in the division [of the sacrifice] to partake of it.55As indicated by Halachah 17 [see also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 12:1)], priests with a disqualifying physical blemish are not excluded from receiving a portion of the division of the sacrifices even though they are unfit to offer them, because there is a special verse that teaches that they should receive a portion. [Conversely,] one who is not fit [to serve] at the time it is offered, e.g., he was ritually impure, does not have a right to share in the division [of the sacrifice] to partake of it even if he will regain ritual purity in the evening.With regard to the division, the entire [matter] is given to the men of the clan who offer sacrifices that day.56See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:11 with regard to what is meant by a clan. They all share in the division of all of the sacraments of the Temple, each man [receiving the same portion] as his brother, whether he was the one who offered the sacrifice or he was together with him in the Temple, but did not offer the sacrifice.
Why did the verse make a distinction between the meal-offerings that are baked and the meal-offerings of flour? For with regard to [the meal-offerings] that are baked, [Leviticus 7:9] states: "Any meal-offering that is baked in an oven... it will belong to the priest who offers it" and with regard to the meal-offerings of flour [ibid.:10] states: "Any meal-offering that is mixed with oil or that is parched shall belong to all the sons of Aaron, every man like his brother."[The following explanation can be given:]57The commentaries note that the explanation appears to be the Rambam's own, rather than to stem from a prior source. When [the meal-offerings] that are baked are divided among the members of the clan, whenever a person receives a portion, even if it is [merely] an olive-sized portion of bread, it is fit for him to partake of it, because it may be eaten immediately. When, however, we are speaking of flour, if [such an offering] will be divided among them, there will be those who will receive only a handful of flour or less. This is not fit either to be kneaded into dough or to be baked. Hence, one might think that one meal offering should be apportioned in consideration of another meal-offering instead of dividing each meal-offering individually among all the members of the clan.58I.e., if there were 20 meal-offerings and 60 priests, one might think that each of the meal-offerings would be divided among three priests rather than have all 20 divided among the 60. Hence, it is necessary to explicitly state that every priest receives a portion of a meal-offering of flour. Therefore it is necessary for the Torah to state [that it] "shall belong to all the sons of Aaron, every man like his brother," i.e., that it is divided individually.On this basis, our Sages said:59Sifra to the verse, Kiddushin 53a; Menachot 73a. that a meal offering is not divided in consideration of another meal-offering, not even one offering brought in a flat frying pan in consideration of another such offering or one flour-offering in consideration of another such offering. Instead, what remains60After the portions offered on the altar are taken. from every [offering] is divided individually.
Similarly, an offering of fowl is not apportioned in consideration of another such offering, nor a sin-offering in consideration of another such offering, nor a breast and a thigh in consideration of another such portion.61In all these instances, one might think that it would be preferable to divide each of the sacrifices among a smaller number of priests. Instead, every [sacrificial portion] is divided among all [the members of the clan] equally.
Even though it is permitted to feed a minor [meat even] from sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity, he is not given a portion, even from sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity.62Instead, he may only partake of what the other priests give him from their portions. Similarly, a woman and an androgynus63I.e., since the halachic status of the gender of an androgynus is not defined, he is not given a portion as a male would be. are not given a portion of the sacrifices from the Temple at all, as [the above verse] states: "Every man like his brother."64The same phrase excludes both women and minors, because the term "man" implies that the recipient must be male and of age. Since they are not fit to perform service, they are not allocated a portion of the sacrifices.[A priest] who has a disqualifying physical blemish - whether permanent or temporary, whether he was born with it or born unblemished and later disqualified - receives a portion of the sacrifices and may partake of them,65Even though he is not fit to perform service, he is considered an ordinary member of the priestly clan and given a portion of the sacrifices. There is an explicit verse requiring this [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 12:1)]. as [Leviticus 21:22] states: "The food of his God, of the most sacred order... he may eat." [The above applies] provided he is fit to partake [of the sacrifice at the time it is offered]. If, however, he is impure, he is not given a portion to eat in the evening.66Even if he would regain his ritual purity by the evening.
The High Priest may partake [of any of the sacrifices] without a division having been made. Rather, he may take whatever he desires.
All [priests] who are fit to partake of sacrificial foods at the time the sacrifice is offered receive a share [of the sacrifice] to partake of. All [priests] who are not fit to partake of sacrificial foods at the time the sacrifice is offered, even though they are fit to perform sacrificial service and will be fit to partake [of the sacrifice in the evening] do not receive a share [of the sacrifice] to set aside until the evening.67For everything depends on the priest's state at the time the sacrifice is offered (ibid.).What is implied?68I.e., which priests could be fit to perform service during the day and fit to partake of sacrifices after nightfall, but are unfit to partake of the sacrifices at the time they are offered. A priest who has immersed that day,69But will not regain purity until nightfall. one who is lacking in atonement,70A priest who had been a zav or who had been afflicted with tzara'at must immerse himself in a stream or a mikveh to regain ritual purity. In addition, he must bring a specific offering. Until he brings that offering, he is considered as lacking atonement, as explained in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah.These two categories of priests are considered as fit to serve, because they would be fit to offer a communal sacrifice if it were to be brought in a state of ritual impurity. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:10 and Halachah 23 and notes. or one who is onein on the day of burial,71The term onein refers to a person in the acute state of mourning experienced at the time of the death of any of seven close relatives. On the day of such a relative's death, one is an onein according to Scriptural Law. If the relative is not buried on the day of his death, the priest is considered an onein according to Rabbinic Law until after the day of burial. Once the relative is buried, however, the priest may perform service and partake of sacrifices in the evening. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:7, 9-10. whether a High Priest72Who is permitted to serve even though he is in the state of onein mourning. See the following halachah. or an ordinary priest, should not receive a share of the sacrifices in order to partake of them in the evening.
All [priests] who are not fit to partake of sacrificial foods are not fit to perform sacrificial service with the exception of a High Priest who is an onein who may offer sacrifices, but may not partake [of sacrificial foods], as we explained.73Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:6-8. All [priests] who are not fit to perform sacrificial service are not fit to partake of sacrificial foods74The Or Sameach suggests that the text should read "are not fit to receive a portion of sacrificial foods," because women and children are fit to partake of the sacrifices, but are not fit to perform sacrificial service. except one disqualified because of a physical blemish [whose license to partake of sacrificial foods] is explicitly stated in the Torah.75As stated in Halachah 17.
All [priests] who do not receive a portion of the sacrificial meat do not receive a portion of the hides of the sacrifices.76Zevachim 12:2 derives this concept from Leviticus 7:12: "The hide of the burnt-offering which he offered will belong to the priest," i.e., the priest must be fit to offer the sacrifice. If he is fit to offer it, he is fit to partake of it.The Radbaz explains that it is necessary for the Rambam to mention the allocation of the hides explicitly, because one might not necessarily derive this point from the allocation of the meat. Even if a priest was impure at the time when the blood [of a sacrifice] was sprinkled on the altar, but pure at the time its fats were offered on the altar's pyre,77This is speaking about an instance where a priest was impure at the time a sacrifice was slaughtered and its blood was sprinkled on the altar. Nevertheless, the offering of the fats of the sacrifice was delayed and not performed until after nightfall. In the interim, the priest immersed himself and thus was pure at the time the fats were offered. he does not receive a portion of the sacrificial meat, as [Leviticus 7:33] states: "One who offers the blood of the peace-offering and the fat from the sons of Aaron, to him the right thigh will be [given] as a portion." [Implied is that] the priest must be pure and fit to perform service from the time [the blood] is sprinkled until after the fats are offered.78For the prooftext mentions both these services.
If [a priest] became impure after [the blood of the sacrifice] was sprinkled [on the altar] and immersed himself and thus was also pure when the fats were offered on the altar's pyre, there is an unresolved question whether or not he receives a portion.79For although he was pure when both these services were performed, he was impure in the interim. Therefore if he grabs a portion, it is not expropriated from him.80I.e., he is not given a portion, because he cannot prove that he is worthy of one, but it is not taken from him, since the other priests also cannot prove that he is not worthy. In both instances, the basis for the decision is the principle: When one seeks to expropriate money from a colleague, the burden of proof is on the plaintiff.
When a communal sacrifice is offered in a state of impurity,81I.e., as stated in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:10,12, when the majority of priests are impure, the communal offerings may be offered by the impure priests. even though impure priests [could have] offered it,82The bracketed additions are made on the basis of the glosses of the Radbaz and Rav Yosef Corcus who note that if the sacrifice was offered by impure priests, its meat is not eaten (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:11). Hence we are forced to say that we are speaking about a situation where the sacrifice could have been offered by impure priests, but in fact it was offered by pure priests. Thus the sacrifice may be eaten. One might think that the impure priests would receive a portion since they were fit to offer the sacrifice. Hence, the Rambam explains that they do not, because they were not fit to partake of it at the time it was offered. they do not receive a portion together with the priests who are pure to partake of it in the evening,83I.e., even if they would be fit to partake of it in the evening. because they are not fit to partake of it [at the time it is offered].

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
Anyone1This prohibition applies equally to priests and Israelites (Radbaz). who eats an olive-sized portion2This is a general principle with regard to all prohibitions involving eating. Lashes are given only for partaking of an olive-sized portion. of the meat of a burnt-offering, whether before its blood is sprinkled [on the altar] or afterwards,3Compare to Halachah 4. is liable for lashes,4Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 146) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 447) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. As explained in Hilchot Meilah 1:3, this negative commandment is also the source for the prohibition against deriving benefit from consecrated articles (meilah). as [implied by Deuteronomy 12:17]: "You may not eat in your gates the tithe of your grain...5This refers to the second tithe which must be brought to Jerusalem. and [the sacrifices brought because of] the vows that you take." According to the Oral Tradition,6Sifri to the above verse, Makkot 17a. it was taught that this is a warning against partaking of the meat of a burnt-offering.7For the latter term is understood as a reference to the burnt offering (ibid.).
Its fat, its meat, and the flour, oil, and wine of its accompanying offering - all five [of these components] can be combined to comprise this olive-sized portion.8I.e., since they are all considered as components of the burnt offering, they are all forbidden. The Radbaz mentions that the omission of the blood of the sacrificial animal indicates that it is not included.
Similarly, one who partakes of an olive-sized portion9The Radbaz explains that the Rambam explicitly mentions that one must partake of an olive-sized portion to be liable - instead, of allowing a reader to reach that conclusion on his own - because one might think that since the verse states that "It shall be totally consumed," as long as a person prevents it from being totally consumed, he is liable. of any of the portions of the sacrifices to be offered on the altar's pyre, whether before the blood [of the sacrifice] is sprinkled [on the altar] or afterwards, whether he is a priest or an Israelite, is liable for lashes.10Besides the prohibitions mentioned here, a person who partakes of these sacrificial components also violates the prohibition against meilah. For the portions to be offered on the altar's pyre must be totally consumed like the totality of the burnt offering. Now [Leviticus 6:16] states with regard to a meal-offering of a priest: "It shall be totally consumed; it should not be eaten." [From this, we derive that] there is a negative commandment [prohibiting] partaking of anything that should be consumed by [the fire of] the altar.11Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 138) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 137) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Although the commandment specifically refers to the meal offering brought by a priest, the Sifra understands it as applying to a greater scope of sacrificial foods, as the Rambam explains. One is liable for lashes for eating an olive-sized portion [of such substances].Similarly, anyone who eats an olive-sized portion of any of the sin-offerings that must be burnt12See Chapter 7, Halachot 2-4. is liable for lashes,13Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 139) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 139) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. A separate commandment is necessary, for these sin-offerings are not burnt on the altar of the Temple. as [ibid.:23] states: "Any sin-offering whose blood is brought into the Tent of Meeting... should not be eaten. It should be burnt with fire."
Anyone who partakes of an olive-sized portion of the meat of any of the sacrifices - even sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity - before their blood is sprinkled [on the altar]14As stated in Hilchot Meilah 2:1, after the blood is sprinkled on the altar, even one who is not permitted to partake of these sacrifices is not liable for meilah, misappropriating the sacred articles for one's personal use. is liable for lashes,15Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 147) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 448) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Significantly, in his listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of this set of halachot, the Rambam mentions this prohibition only with regard to sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity. as it is written: "You may not eat in your gates the tithe of your grain, your wine, and your oil... and [the sacrifices brought because of] your pledges." Implied is that you may not eat [the sacrifices brought because of] your pledges in your gates before their blood is sprinkled [on the altar] in God's gates.According to the Oral Tradition,16For this is not the simple meaning of the verse (Rav Yosef Corcus). it was taught that this is a warning against partaking of [the meat of] a thanksgiving-offering or a peace-offering before the sprinkling of its blood. This also applies to [the meat of] other sacrifices, whether sacrifices of the highest order of sanctity or those of a lesser degree.17Makkot 17a explains the process of exegesis through which the prohibitions against partaking of the other sacrifices are derived. The six components of the thanksgiving offering, the fat, the meat, the flour, the oil, the wine,18I.e., the flour, the oil, the wine that comprise the accompanying offering that is brought together with the thanksgiving-offering. and the bread, may all be combined to comprise the olive-sized portion [for which one is liable].
Anyone who partakes of an olive-sized portion of the meat of any of the [sacrifices of] the most sacred order that was taken outside of the walls of the Temple Courtyard, and meat from [sacrifices of] a lesser degree of sanctity that was taken outside Jerusalem, is liable for lashes,19Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 145) and the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 446) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Significantly, in Sefer HaMitzvot and in his listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of this set of halachot, the Rambam mentions this prohibition only with regard to sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity although he does state that one who partakes of other sacrifices outside of Jerusalem is liable for lashes. When listing the prohibitions for which lashes are given in Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:4, the Rambam lists these two activities separately. as [implied by] the verse: "You may not eat in your gates the tithe of your grain, your wine, your oil, and the firstborn of your cattle and your sheep...." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that this is a warning against partaking of [the meat of] a sin-offering or a guilt-offering outside the Temple Courtyard. Similarly, one who partakes of [the meat of] the sacrifices of lesser sanctity outside Jerusalem is liable for lashes. For with regard to sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity, the walls of Jerusalem are comparable to the walls of the Temple Courtyard with regard to sacrifices of the most sacred order. [Included equally are] the meat of the sin-offerings and the guilt-offerings and what remains of the meal-offerings.20After the handful was taken to be offered on the altar. All of these are considered as sacrifices of the most sacred order.
Meat from [sacrifices of] the most sacred order that was taken outside of the walls of the Temple Courtyard, and meat from [sacrifices of] a lesser degree of sanctity that was taken outside Jerusalem, is disqualified and is forbidden forever. Even if it is taken back to its place, it is forbidden to partake of it. One who eats an olive-sized portion of it21Whether it was returned to its place or not. is liable for lashes, as [implied by Exodus 22:30]: "Meat in a field [from an animal that is] treifah, you shall not eat." Once meat has left its designated place, it is considered as treifah, as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.22Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 5:9. As the commentaries explain there, the term "field" is referring to a place which is not the natural place for the meat to be found. Being there causes it to be considered treifah, unfit to be eaten. Similarly, the fact that this meat is taken outside its natural place causes it to become forbidden.
If meat from [sacrifices of] a lesser degree of sanctity was taken into the Temple Building, it is acceptable.23Since, as stated in Chapter 10, Halachah 3, after the fact, sacrifices of the most sacred order may be eaten in the Temple Building, taking sacrificial meat there is not considered as taking it outside its designated place. The Radbaz questions whether it is acceptable to eat meat from sacrifices of lesser sanctity in the Temple Building.
A non-priest who ate an olive-sized portion of meat from sacrifices of the most sacred order24The Radbaz emphasizes that this applies only to meat from a sin-offering or a guilt-offering. If, however, a non-priest partakes of meat from a burnt-offering, he is liable only for the prohibition against partaking of the meat of a burnt-offering (see Halachah 1) and not because of the prohibition against a non-priest partaking of sacrificial meat. in the Temple Courtyard after their blood was sprinkled [on the altar] is liable for lashes,25Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 148) includes this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Sefer HaChinuch, however, does not include it. as [Exodus 29:33] states: "And they shall partake of [the sacrifices] which bring them atonement... and a non-priest shall not partake of them." [The association teaches26I.e., as Makkot 18b states, the prohibition against a non-priest partaking of this sacrificial meat applies only in an instance where atonement would be granted were a priest to partake of the meat there. that when sacrificial meat] was eaten by a non-priest in a place where a priest partakes of it and at a time when it is fit to be eaten, he is liable for lashes. If, however, a non-priest ate an olive-sized portion of meat from sacrifices of the most sacred order outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is liable for lashes for partaking of the sacrificial meat outside [the Temple Courtyard]27As stated in Halachah 5. and not because [of the prohibition against] a non-priest partaking of sacrificial foods,28The Radbaz explains that there is a practical as well as a theoretical difference resulting from this concept, for if the non-priest was given a warning for partaking of the meat because he was a non-priest and not because he was partaking of it outside the Temple Courtyard, he is not liable. for they are not fit to be eaten by priests there. Similarly, if [a non-priest] partook of [such meat] in the Temple Courtyard before [the blood] was sprinkled [on the altar], he is liable for lashes only for partaking [of the meat] before the sprinkling of the blood, not because of [partaking of it] as a non-priest.
A non-priest who ate an olive-sized portion of meat from a sin-offering from fowl is liable for two sets of lashes: one because he is non-priest partaking of sacred meat29This law also applies only when the meat of the fowl was eaten in a time and a place when the fowl would have been permitted to be eaten by the priests (Radbaz). and one because he is partaking of a neveilah.30An animal that died without proper ritual slaughter. For every [fowl killed by] melikah31Snipping off its head, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 21. is a neveilah.32For this is not an acceptable process of ritual slaughter. When license was granted to partake of it, it was granted to priests, but not to non-priests. These two prohibitions are considered as two prohibitions that take effect at the same time,33At the time the fowl's head was snipped off, it becomes both forbidden to non-priests and a neveilah. as we explained.34Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 17:8 states:There is a major general principle that applies with regard to all of the Torah's prohibitions. One prohibition does not take effect when another prohibition is in effect unless:a) both of the prohibitions take effect at the same time;b) the latter prohibition forbids additional entities besides [the entity that was originally] prohibited;c) the scope of the [latter] prohibition encompasses other entities together with [the entity that was originally] prohibited.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
Meal-offerings are a type of sacrifice.1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 67) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 116) include bringing the meal-offerings as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The meal-offerings that are offered independently and not as part of the accompanying offerings2See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. include both communal meal-offerings and individual meal-offerings.
All of the meal-offerings are brought from fine wheat flour with the exception of the meal offering of a sotah,3A woman suspected of adultery. See Hilchot Sotah 3:12. and the omer with which tenufah is performed,4This refers to the omer offering which is brought on the second day of the Pesach holiday. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:3-12. which are brought from barley.
There are three types of communal meal-offerings:a) the omer with which tenufah is performed.5This refers to the omer offering which is brought on the second day of the Pesach holiday. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:3-12. [A portion of] it is offered on the altar, as will be explained.6See ibid.:12.b) the two breads offered on Shavuot.7See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 8:1-16. They are called a meal-offering, but are not offered on the altar and are chametz.8Leavened bread in contrast to almost all the other meal-offerings that are unleavened. Concerning them, [Leviticus 2:12] states: "You shall offer them as a sacrifice of first fruits to God, but they shall not be offered on the altar."c) The third meal-offering is the showbread that is brought every Sabbath. They are not offered on the altar, but instead are eaten entirely by the priests, as will be explained.9See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:10-12; 5:5.
There are nine types of individual meal-offerings. They are all offered on the altar.10I.e., they are brought to the southwestern corner of the altar as described in Halachah 6 and a handful from them (or with regard to offerings brought by priests, the entire offering) is offered on the altar's pyre, as described in Halachah 9. They include:a) the meal-offering of a sinner when he is obligated to bring a sin-offering, but is financially incapable.11See Leviticus 5:11; Hilchot Shegagot 1:4;10:4.b) the meal offering of a sotah; it is the meal-offering of jealously. The manner in which it was offered has already been described.12A woman suspected of adultery. See Hilchot Sotah 3:12.c) the meal-offering that every priest brings at the outset when he enters the Temple service the first time. He brings it himself. It is called the meal-offering of initiation.13See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 5:16. See also Chapter 13, Halachah 4.d) the meal-offering that the High Priest would offer every day. It is called the chavitin [offering];14See Leviticus 6:13-15; Chapter 13, Halachot 2-4; Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:18. The above four offerings are obligatory. The five that follow are voluntary.e) a meal-offering of fine flour.15See Leviticus 2:1; Chapter 13, Halachah 5. It is brought as either a vow or a pledge;16See Hilchot Nedarim 1:2 with regard to the distinction between these two types of commitments.f) a flat-pan flour-offering.17See Leviticus 2:5; Chapter 13, Halachah 6. It is brought as either a vow or a pledge;g) a deep-pan flour-offering.18See Leviticus 2:7; Chapter 13, Halachot 6-7. It is brought as either a vow or a pledge;h) a flour-offering baked in an oven.19See Leviticus 2:4; Chapter 13, Halachah 8. It is brought as either a vow or a pledge;i) an offering of wafers.20This offering is also baked in an oven, as stated in Chapter 13, Halachah 8. It is brought as either a vow or a pledge.
With regard to all of the meal-offerings that are brought to the altar, none may be less than an isaron,21An isaron is 2500 cc in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah, and 4320 cc according to Chazon Ish. this an absolute requirement for the offering to be acceptable.A person may pledge and vow as large a quantity as he desires, even 1000 isaronim22The offerings must, however, be of complete isaronim. for any of the five meal-offerings that are brought as a pledge or a vow. By contrast, the meal-offering of the omer, the meal-offering of a sinner, the meal-offering of jealously, the meal-offering of initiation, and the chavitin offering must each be one isaron, neither more or less.
All of the meal-offerings23The Radbaz explains that this includes the meal offerings brought by priests even though a handful of flour is not removed from them. It does not, however, include the meal-offerings brought as part of the accompanying offerings. The rationale for the distinction is that this rite is required only for the meal-offerings that are brought as independent offerings, not for those that merely accompany other offerings. The showbread and the two loaves offered on Shavuos are not brought close to the altar, because they are not offered on the altar at all. that are brought to the altar must be brought close to the altar on its western side, facing the tip of its southwest corner.24Leviticus 6:7 states: "The sons of Aaron will bring it close, before God, towards the face of the altar." Sotah 14b interprets this as referring to the southwest corner of the altar." Tenufah25See Chapter 9, Halachah 7, where this rite is described. is not required for them with the exception of the meal-offering of a sotah26See Chapter 9, Halachah 16. and the omer [offering].27See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:12. Both of them require both tenufah and being brought close to the altar.
All of the meal-offerings that are brought to the altar28This term excludes the showbread and the two loaves offered on Shavuos, as mentioned above. require that oil and frankincense be placed upon them,29With the exception of the meal-offering of a sinner and a sotah, it is explicitly stated that oil must be brought with every meal-offering. Including frankincense is mentioned only with regard to the offering of fine flour. Nevertheless, Menachot 59a uses techniques of Biblical exegesis to derive that it should be included with every meal-offering. a log30A log is 344 cc in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah, and 600 cc according to Chazon Ish. of oil for every isaron [of flour]31This represents the minimum. More oil is placed on certain offerings as mentioned in Halachah 8. and a handful of frankincense for every meal-offering whether it comprised one isaron or 60 isaronim32In contrast to the oil which is added proportionately to the flour, a uniform measure of frankincense is included for every meal offering. - [the latter measure is mentioned because] more than 60 isaronim are never brought in one container, as will be explained33See Chapter 17, Halachah 6. - with the exception of the meal-offering of jealously and the meal-offering of a sinner, as [Leviticus 5:11] states:34This verse applies to the meal-offering of a sinner. Similar statements are made with regard to the meal-offering brought by a sotah in Numbers 5:15. In both instances, the commentaries explain that the reason for the prohibition is so that the sinner's (or the suspected adulteress') sacrifice should not appear attractive. "He shall not place oil upon it,35Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 104) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 366) include the prohibition against placing oil on the meal-offering of a sotah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. See also Hilchot Sotah 3:13. nor shall he place frankincense upon it."36Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 105) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 367) include the prohibition against placing frankincense on the meal-offering of a sotah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.
If one placed [oil and/or frankincense on these offerings] and offered them,37The Rambam's understanding is that one is not liable unless he offers these meal-offerings on the altar after placing the oil and frankincense on them (Radbaz). he is liable for the oil individually and the frankincense individually.38For they are considered as independent prohibitions. If one placed a container holding oil or frankincense on the offering, he does not transgress,39Even if he offers the meal-offering on the altar in this manner (Radbaz). nor does he disqualify [the offerings].40If, however, he placed oil and/or frankincense directly on the meal-offering, he does disqualify it. Should one remove the frankincense after placing it upon the offering, the offering becomes acceptable again (Radbaz). Oil must be added to each of the initiation and chavitin meal-offerings, as will be explained.41Chapter 13, Halachah 2.
A handful is taken42See Chapter 13, Halachah 13, for a description of how this handful is taken. from all of the meal-offerings that are brought to the altar.43The Radbaz states that this does not include the meal-offerings that are brought as part of the accompanying offerings, for they are offered on the altar in their entirety. That handful is offered on the altar in its entirety and the remainder [of the offering] is eaten by the priests with the exception of a meal-offering brought by a male priest. A handful is not taken from such an offering. Instead, the entire offering is offered on the altar's pyre, as [Leviticus 6:16] states: "Every meal-offering from a priest [is offered on the pyre in its entirety]."44The passage from which the prooftext is taken speaks about the initiation offering and the High Priest's chavitin offering. Nevertheless, since it includes the word "every," the concept it states is applied to other offerings brought by priests (Radbaz). From this we learn that all [of the following offerings]: an initiation and chavitin meal-offering or a meal-offering of a sinner or a free-will meal-offering brought by a priest are all offered on the altar's pyre and a handful is not taken from them.
A handful is taken from a meal-offering brought by a woman of the priestly family45I.e., one unmarried, alternatively, one married to an Israelite as evident from Halachah 12 (Radbaz; Kessef Mishneh). as it is taken from the meal-offerings brought by Israelites and the remainder of it is eaten.46Sotah 23b derives this concept from the fact that the prooftext cited above uses a male term for priest.
When sons [from a priestly family and one of Israelites] become intermingled and each of their identities are doubtful, a handful is taken from a meal-offering [brought by either], as is done with regard to a meal-offering brought by an Israelite, but [the remainder] is not eaten, as is done with a meal-offering brought by a priest.47I.e., since there is a doubt involved, the offering is treated with both the stringencies applying to one brought by priests and those applying to one brought by Israelites (Yevamot 99b).What is done? The handful alone is offered on the altar and the remainder is scattered over the ash heap.48Rashi (ibid. 100a) interprets this as referring to the place outside the Temple Courtyard where the ashes from the altar are deposited. Tosafot interprets it as the place inside the Temple Courtyard where sacrifices of the most sacred order that are disqualified are burnt. This difference of opinion is possible, because the term ash-pile is used for several different places.The offering may not be eaten, for perhaps the person bringing it is a priest and meal-offerings a priest brings may not be eaten. Nor may it be burnt entirely on the altar, for perhaps the person bringing it is an Israelite and an Israelite's offerings may not be burnt entirely.
The meal-offerings brought by all women married to a priest - whether from the priestly family or Israelites - are not eaten, because of the portion of the husband [present within them],49For a woman will bring her offering from flour that belongs to her husband (Rashi, Sotah 23a). nor is it offered on the pyre in its entirety, because of the portion of the woman.50For she is bringing it for her atonement. Instead, a handful alone is offered on the altar and the remainder is scattered over the ash heap.The handful may be taken in any place within the Temple Courtyard. If it was taken in the Temple Building, it is acceptable.
A meal-offering may be consecrated by [placing the flour] in a container [even] while it is placed on the ground.51I.e., it need not be held by a priest. [Similarly,] the handful may be taken from a container [placed] on the ground, [but] the handful may not be consecrated52The consecration of the handful is discussed in Chapter 13, Halachah 12. in a container [placed] on the ground.53Menachot 7b derives this concept from a parallel to the receiving of the blood. Just as that is only acceptable when the priest holds the container in his hands, so too, the consecration of the meal-offering is acceptable only when the priest holds the container.When is the remainder of a meal-offering permitted to be eaten? When the fire [of the altar] has consumed most of the handful.
All of the meal-offerings that are brought to the altar are unleavened.54The only meal-offerings that are leavened are the two loaves brought on Shavuos and ten of the loaves brought for the thanksgiving offering and these are not brought to the altar. Similarly, although the remaining portions of the meal-offerings that may be eaten by the priests may be eaten with all foods and with a sweetener,55Although a sweetener may not be offered on the altar (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:1), it may be eaten with sacrificial foods. they may not be eaten while leavened, as [Leviticus 6:10] states: "It shall not be baked leavened; their portion...." [Implied is that] even their portion may not be leavened. If they cause the remaining portion to become leavened, they are liable for lashes.56Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 124) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 135) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. One who performs an act that causes [the remaining portion of the meal-offering] to be leavened after it was leavened,57E.g., one allowed it to leaven while kneading it and then another baked it. is liable. One is liable for each act [that causes the remnants of the meal-offering to leaven].58As explained in the following halachah.
What is implied? If one mixed [the remnants of a meal-offering] with water in a manner that causes them to leaven, one kneaded them in a manner that causes them to leaven, 59Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 5:2). one shaped the loaves in such a manner, or baked them in such a manner, he is liable for lashes,60Each of these acts carries liability individually, as the Rambam proceeds to explain. as [Leviticus 2:11] states: "It shall not be prepared as leavened." [Now it is also written:] "It shall not be baked leavened." [Why are the two verses necessary?] To make one liable for every individual act performed [in its preparation]. If one prepared it as leavened from the beginning to the end, one is liable for lashes for every individual act performed.
If one left yeast on a dough and then departed and sat elsewhere and [let] it leaven on its own accord, he is liable for lashes, for placing yeast [on the dough] is a deed.61And thus the person caused the dough to leaven.
If one dipped the remainder [of a meal-offering] in caraway or sesame seeds or any type of spice or oil, it is acceptable. It is matzah; it is merely called spiced matzah.62See Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 5:20 where the Rambam rules that the addition of such substances does not cause matzah to leaven.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam, stating that it is permissible to dip baked matzah in the substances mentioned in this halachah, but not to mix them into the dough used to prepare matzah. The Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh, and others support the Rambam's position.
A person who causes a meal-offering that was disqualified63Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim, ch. 11, describes many different factors that can cause a meal offering to become disqualified. to become leavened is exempt, as [implied by Leviticus 2:11]: "which will be offered to God; it should not be prepared as leaven." [We can infer that the prohibition applies when the offering is] acceptable to God, not when it is disqualified.If one caused [a meal-offering] to become leaven while it was acceptable and then it was taken outside the Temple Courtyard,64Which disqualifies it, as evident from Chapter 11, Halachah 6. and he then caused it to leaven again after it was disqualified, he is not liable65For the second leavening. He is, however, liable for the first leavening (Rav Yosef Corcus). for lashes.66Although generally one who causes a meal-offering to leaven a second time is liable (Halachah 14), in this instance, since it was disqualified in the interim, he is exempt. If one caused [a meal-offering] to become leavened at the top of the altar, he is not liable for lashes, for it is written "which will be offered," and this [offering] was already offered and it is acceptable.67It should not, however, be offered on the altar's pyre (but should be taken from the altar and discarded), because no leaven should be offered on the altar, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:1 (Radbaz).
One who causes the showbread to become leaven is liable for lashes, for [the verse cited] states: "Any meal-offering."68And this also includes the showbread. The commentaries note that Menachot 57a derives this concept from a different prooftext. [Causing] the meal-offering of the accompanying offering [to leaven] does not incur liability for lashes. For if [the flour] was mixed with water, it was disqualified before it became leavened.69For the flour of the accompanying offerings should be mixed with oil, not water (Chapter 2, Halachah 4). And if it was mixed with the oil70Our translation is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text states "wine" and hence, has been questioned by many. of the accompanying offerings, it is considered as fruit-juice and it does not cause [dough] to leaven.71See Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 5:2.
We do not soak the wheat kernels72In the Talmudic era, when preparing fine flour, the wheat kernels would be soaked and then ground in a mill so that the shell of coarse bran would be removed. See Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 5:7 which states that in order that the kernels not become leaven, they should be ground immediately. for the meal-offerings, lest they leaven. For they would be soaked outside [the Temple Courtyard]73By private individuals. and not everyone is ardent [enough] to watch them [so that they do not leaven]. With regard to the meal-offering of the omer, since it is a communal offering, [the kernels] are soaked, for [those acting on behalf of] the Jewish people as a whole are ardent74Rashi (Pesachim 36a) states that this sacrifice would be prepared by the agents of the court and those individuals would certainly act with the proper care and energy. and watch it.
All of the meal-offerings that are baked should be mixed with lukewarm water75Even though lukewarm water will serve as a catalyst to cause the dough to leaven faster (Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 5:11), since the priests inside the Temple Courtyard are performing the service, we are not concerned that they will allow it to leaven. and watched so that they do not leaven. [This is permitted,] because they are mixed and baked within the Temple Courtyard and [the priests] inside [the Temple Courtyard] are ardent.76And will not allow the flour to leaven.
In the place where the sacrifices of the most sacred order are cooked, the meal-offerings are baked,77For their status is the same. as [Ezekiel 46:20] states: "This is the place where the priests will cook the guilt-offering and the sin-offering, where they will bake the meal-offering...."
The grinding and the sifting [of the flour] for the meal-offerings is performed outside [the Temple Courtyard],78See Chapter 13, Halachah 12; Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:19. while the mixing of the dough, the kneading, and the baking are performed inside.79Exceptions to this general principle were the showbread and the two loaves offered on Shavuos which were also kneaded outside the Temple Courtyard, as stated in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:7; 8:7).All of the acts [necessary to prepare it] are acceptable [when performed] by a non-priest until it reaches the stage where the handful [of flour] is separated.80See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 11:7. There were a flat frying pan and a deep frying pan in the Temple Courtyard. They were both considered as sacred utensils and caused [the substances placed in them] to be sanctified.81For anything placed in a sacred utensil becomes sanctified, as stated in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 1:19. The oven in the Temple Courtyard was made of metal.82Zevachim 96a explains that it could not be made of earthenware, because it had the status of a sacred utensil since the showbread and the two loaves offered on Shavuos were sanctified because they were baked inside of it and it is not befitting to make a sacred utensil from earthenware.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
It is a positive commandment to prepare all of the meal-offerings1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 67) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 116) include bringing the meal-offerings as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. according to the commandments prescribed by the Torah.
How was the chavitin offering of the High Priest prepared? He would bring an entire isaron and sanctify it2By placing it in the isaron measure found in the Temple Courtyard (see Chapter 2, Halachah 8). Once it was sanctified, it could not be taken out of the Temple Courtyard. Hence all the stages of its preparation had to be completed within the Temple Courtyard (Radbaz). Indeed, one of the chambers in the Temple Courtyard was the Chamber of the Makers of the Chavitin (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:17). and then divide it in half3Because half was sacrificed in the morning and half in the afternoon. with the half isaron measure in the Temple. [This was necessary,] because even though it was offered in half [portions],4See Halachah 4. it was not sanctified in half portions. Three lugim of oil are brought with it, as [Leviticus 6:13] states: "You shall prepare it with oil," i.e., [an amount of] oil equivalent to the accompanying offering for a lamb5See Chapter 2, Halachot 4, 7. should be added to it.6Menachot 51a explains that since the chavitin is cooked on a flat frying pan, it is obvious that oil should be added to it like the other meal offerings cooked on such a frying pan (see Halachah 7). Hence by saying that the chavitin is prepared in oil, the verse implies that additional oil is added. The need for three lugin is then derived from a textual association of the terms used. The flour should be mixed with the oil and then scalded7In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:6) the Rambam defines the term cholait, the verb translated as "scalded" here as: "pouring boiling water over the flour." with boiling [liquid].Each half isaron should be kneaded into six loaves. Thus there are a total of twelve loaves.8Menachot 15a derives this point from a comparison to the showbread which also comprised twelve loaves.
[These loaves] were prepared one by one.How were they prepared? The three lugim of oil would be divided [into twelve] using the measure of a revi'it [of a log] that existed in the Temple,9I.e., when the quantity of three lugim is divided in twelve (an equal portion for each loaf), we arrive at the figure of a revi'it (a fourth of a log). There was a measure of this size in the Temple. Hence the oil would be poured into this measure for each loaf to provide it with the desired amount of oil. a revi'it for each loaf. The loaf would be baked some and then fried on the flat frying-pan with the remainder of its oil.10Thus there were three phases in the cooking process of these loaves. First, the flour was scalded as mentioned in the previous halachah. Then the loaf was made and then baked. Afterwards [see also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 9:3)], the oil was boiled and the loaf fried in it. See also Chapter 9, Halachah 19, which describes all these different stages of the cooking process. The same term, murbechet, is use to describe both that offering and the chavitin offering. It should not be cooked very much,11I.e., he should only bake it slightly (Kessef Mishneh). This interpretation is also borne out by Chapter 9, Halachah 19. for [Leviticus 6:14] uses the term tufinei which implies something between cooked and lightly cooked.12Afterwards, it is fried to complete the cooking process (Kessef Mishneh).
Afterwards, each loaf should be divided into two13The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the cakes should not be divided. Thus instead of offering twelve half-cakes as the Rambam maintains, he maintains that six full cakes should be offered in the morning and six in the afternoon. by approximation,14I.e., although half should be offered in the morning and half in the afternoon, an exact division is not required. The division is made by hand and not with a utensil. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's position, noting that the concept of dividing the cakes by hand and not with a utensil is stated in Menachot 87b. so that half can be offered in the morning and half in the evening.15I.e., in the late afternoon. He should take the halves and fold each one of them in half and then divide [the loaves at] the folds so that each flat cake will be folded in half. He then offers the halves with half of a handful of frankincense in the morning and the remaining half with half a handful of frankincense in the evening.16Further details concerning the bringing of this offering are mentioned in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:18-22.If it is an initiation offering,17Both an ordinary priest and a High Priest bring a meal-offering prepared in the same way to mark their initiation into office (Chapter 12, Halachah 4). it is not divided in half. Instead, it is offered entirely as a single entity together with the handful of frankincense. Both of them are consumed entirely by the altar's pyre.18For the meal-offering of a priest is never eaten (Chapter 12, Halachah 9).
How is a meal-offering of fine flour prepared? One brings an isaron19But no less than an isaron (ibid.:5). - or several isaronot or [many,] according to his vow20One may bring as many isaronot as he desires, even 1000 (or more). - of fine flour and the oil appropriate for it.21A log of oil for every isaron of flour, as stated in Chapter 12, Halachah 7. The flour should be measured in the isaron measure22Even if the offering contained many isaronot, it is measured out, isaron by isaron (Kessef Mishneh). of the Temple. Oil should be placed in23As stated in Menachot 6:3, oil is added to all of the meal-offerings offered other than those which are baked in the oven three times: it is placed in the container before the flour, it is mixed into the flour and then it is poured over the mixture of flour and oil. This sequence is not explicitly stated with regard to the offering of fine flour. In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam explains the process through which it is derived that the above concepts apply to this meal-offering as well. a container24I.e., a trough where the oil and flour are mixed. Both the Radbaz and Kessef Mishneh state that, from the Rambam's wording, it appears that this trough was not a sacred utensil. They question that conclusion, for once the flour had been put in a sacred utensil, it does not appear appropriate to place it in an ordinary utensil again. Indeed, they explain that perhaps the second utensil was also sacred. and the flour poured upon it, and then other oil should be poured over the flour and the flour mixed in it. Afterwards, it is placed in a sacred vessel and oil is poured into it. The total of the oil placed first, that mixed with the flour, and that poured upon it is a log for an issaron. Frankincense is placed upon it.25A handful of frankincense for every offering regardless of its size (Chapter 12, Halachah 7).
How are a meal-offering [cooked in] a flat frying-pan and one [cooked in] a deep frying pan prepared? Oil should be placed in a container and the flour poured upon it and then other oil should be poured over the flour and the flour mixed in it. Afterwards, it should be kneaded with warm water26Care was taken so that they do not leaven (Kessef Mishneh). and baked in a flat frying-pan or a deep frying-pan as he vowed. It is broken into pieces27As required by Leviticus 2:6. and placed in a sacred vessel and the remainder of the oil is poured upon it. [Then] its frankincense is placed [upon it].
What is the difference between a flat frying-pan and a deep frying pan? A deep frying-pan has an edge28Menachot 63b notes that Leviticus 7:9 states of such an offering being cooked "in a deep frying-pan," while the others are described as being cooked "on a flat frying-pan." Implied is that the deep frying-pan had an edge large enough to contain liquids. and the dough cooked in it is soft,29And thin like the dough of pancakes [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 5:8)]. because since it has an edge, [the dough] does not drip off. The flat frying-pan does not have an edge. The dough cooked in it is firm so that it will not drip off to either side.
How is a meal-offering baked in an oven prepared? If it is of loaves, one should mix the flour with oil,30Oil is not, however, placed in the container before the flour is (Menachot 6:3). knead it with warm water, and bake it. [Afterwards,] it is broken into pieces, placed in a sacred utensil, and its frankincense is placed upon it. Oil is not poured over it, as [indicated by Leviticus 2:4]: "loaves of matzah mixed with oil."31I.e., only "mixed with oil." No other oil is used in preparing them.If it is of wafers, one should knead the flour with warm water and smear the wafers with oil, as [ibid.] states "wafers of matzah smeared with oil." It appears to me that they should be smeared after they are baked.32The Radbaz supports this supposition, explaining that if the wafers were smeared before they were baked, they would not absorb the oil.
How are they smeared? One brings a log of oil for every isaron and smears them and then smears them again until all of the oil in the log is finished.
All of these four types of baked33I.e., those fried in a deep frying pan and a flat frying-pan or the two types baked in an oven. Excluded is only the flour offering which is presented without being baked or cooked. meal-offerings, when they are baked, they are baked when dividing [each] isaron into ten loaves.34Menachot 76a derives this from a comparison to the thanksgiving offering. See Chapter 9, Halachot 17-18. If, however, one added or subtracted loaves, it is acceptable.35For even a thanksgiving offering is acceptable if its loaves are less than the required number (ibid.:22).How are they36These four types of meal-offerings. Again, a flour offering is excluded. broken into pieces? Each loaf should be folded into two and then the double fold into four37Menachot, loc. cit., explains the rationale, stating that Leviticus 2:6 mentions "breaking them (i.e., into two) into pieces" (i.e., that the two are divided again). and then [the folds] should be separated. If the meal-offering was brought by males of the priestly family,38For their meal-offerings are consumed entirely by the altar's pyre. Meal-offerings brought by females of the priestly family are broken into pieces. they should not be separated and broken off. All of the pieces should be the size of an olive.39For making them any smaller would make them appear insignificant. If, however, one made them larger or smaller, [the offering] is acceptable.
If one did not mix [the oil into the meal],40Note, however, Chapter 17, Halachah 6, which states that the offering must not be so large that it could not be mixed with its oil. fold [the loaves], bring [the meal-offering to the corner of the altar],41As required by Chapter 12, Halachah 6. or smear the wafers [with oil],42Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 7:8 rules that if the required amount of oil is not added to a meal offering, it is not acceptable. Nevertheless, after the fact, the oil does not have to be applied to the offering in the manner detailed above. [the offerings] are acceptable.43Menachot 3:2, the source for this halachah, mentions the above concepts and adds that the offerings are acceptable if salt and oil were not placed upon them. In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that the intent is not that the offering is acceptable without salt and oil, but that they need not be added to the offering by a priest. All of these matters were mentioned only as a mitzvah,44I.e., as the optimum manner to perform the mitzvah. for it is a mitzvah [to bring the meal-offerings] in this manner.
What is the order in which the meal-offering is brought? A person should bring flour from his home in a container of silver, gold, or another type of metal, a container that is fit [to be sanctified] as a sacred vessel.45As stated in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 1:18, a sacred utensil may not be made of wood, bone, stone, or glass, only of metal.If it is a meal-offering of flour, he should place it in a sacred utensil and consecrate it46Placing it in the sacred vessel with the intent to consecrate it brings about its consecration. See Chapter 2, Halachah 9, Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:20. in the sacred utensil.47As described in Halachah 5. If it is one of the meal-offerings that are baked48Or fried, i.e., any of the other types of meal offerings. it should be baked there in the Temple and broken into pieces as we explained.49See Halachot 6-10. The pieces should be placed into a sacred utensil and its oil and frankincense placed upon it. It should then be brought to a priest50I.e., up until this point, the services could have been performed by a non-priest. From this stage onward, they must be performed by a priest. See Chapter 12, Halachah 23. who brings it to the altar. He approaches the southwest corner of the altar with it. That is sufficient.51I.e., he touches the altar's corner with the utensil. He does not have to have the flour itself touch the corner (Kessef Mishneh).He then moves all of its frankincense to one side52So that it will not be mixed with the flour taken in the handful (Sotah 14b). and gathers a handful from the place where the majority of its oil has collected, as [Leviticus 2:2] states: "[He shall take a full handful] from its flour and from its oil." He places the handful in a sacred vessel and consecrates it in the sacred vessel.53Although the handful of flour was consecrated together with the other flour, it should be consecrated again now that it has become a separate entity. Sotah, loc. cit., draws a comparison to the blood from a sacrificial animal which is consecrated together with the entire animal at the time of its slaughter and is consecrated again when collected in a sacred utensil. If a handful [from a meal-offering] was divided into two vessels, it is not consecrated. [Instead,] he should go back and consecrate it [in a single vessel].54Although placing the handful of flour in two utensils is unacceptable, it does not disqualify it.He should gather all of its frankincense and place it on the handful of flour in the vessel and take it up to the altar. He should salt it55As required by Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:23. and place it on the pyre with a sacred utensil.56I.e., he should empty the flour from the sacred vessel over the pyre. If the meal-offering is brought by [male] priests, he does not take a handful. Instead, he salts the entire offering and tosses everything on the pyre.
How is a handful [of flour]57We have mentioned flour, because taking a full handful - but only a handful, not more and not less - of flour can be easily pictured. In truth, however, an exact handful must also be taken from those meal offerings that were already baked and that is much harder to picture. taken from those meal-offerings from which it is taken? As any person would take a handful. He extends his fingers58On the basis of Menachot 11a and Yoma 47b, many commentaries maintain that the handful is taken only with the priest's three middle fingers. The pinky and the thumb are not included. Therefore it is considered as one of the difficult services in the Temple. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 1:2; see also Yoma 1:5), however, the Rambam rejects this understanding and maintains that all of the priest's fingers should be used in taking the handful. over the palm of his hand and closes them.59The Ra'avad (in his gloss to the Sifra) states that he should cup his hand and then insert his fingers into the flour until his palm is covered. He then closes his fingers over his palm.If he gathered the flour only with his fingertips60I.e., closing his fingers over themselves and not over the palm of his hand and thus collected only a small amount of flour (Rav Yosef Corcus). or from the side [of the container],61Instead of from the middle (Radbaz). There are also other interpretations to these concepts. he should not offer it on the altar's pyre. If he does so, nevertheless, it is accepted.62Menachot 11a and Yoma 47b question whether these two ways to take a handful are acceptable and does not reach a conclusion. Therefore the Rambam rules that as an initial preference, one should not take a handful in this manner, but if one does so, it is acceptable after the fact. If he added to the handful, i.e., he spread out his fingers and closed them,63And thus the handful was overflowing. it is unacceptable.
A handful should not be less than two olive-sized portions.64In modern measure, approximately 28 cc according to Shiurei Torah. [Bringing every] portion of the handful is an absolute requirement in [bringing] the entire handful.65For Leviticus 2:2 states that "a full handful" must be offered. Thus if one cannot bring a portion of the handful, it is disqualified and should not be brought at all (Menachot 27a). [Bringing both] the handful [of flour] and the frankincense are absolute requirements for [bringing] either of them.66I.e., the offering should not be brought unless both are included. [Bringing both] the flour and the oil are absolute requirements for [bringing] either of them.67Both are necessary because Leviticus 2:2 mentions the "full handful of flour" and "all of its frankincense." This emphasis is repeated in Leviticus 6:8, indicating that it is an absolute requirement. [Bringing] even a portion of the oil is an absolute requirement in [bringing] the entire quantity.68I.e., if one does not bring the entire amount, one should not bring the offering at all. Less than a log [of oil] should not [be brought] for every isaron of flour, as we explained.69Halachah 5; Chapter 12, Halachah 7.

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
A person may vow or pledge1See Halachah 4 for the distinction between the two terms. to bring a burnt-offering, a peace-offering, or any of the five types of meal-offerings2See Chapter 12, Halachah 4. that may be brought as vows or as pledges.3With regard to sin-offerings and guilt-offerings, see Halachah 8. And he may vow or pledge [to bring] a meal offering from one of the three types of meal-offerings that serve as the accompanying offerings, as we explained.4See Chapter 2, Halachah 1, 4. One may pledge or vow wine as an independent offering,5See Chapter 16, Halachah 14; Chapter 17, Halachah 12. frankincense as an independent offering,6See Chapter 16, Halachah 13. oil as an independent offering,7See Chapter 16, Halachah 14. or wood for the arrangement [of wood on the altar], for that is like a sacrifice,8See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 6:9-10. as [Nechemiah 13:31] states: "for the sacrifice of wood."
Two people may pledge or vow one sacrifice, a burnt-offering or a peace-offering, even one turtle-dove and large ordinary dove in partnership. A meal-offering, by contrast, may not be brought in partnership. These matters were conveyed by the Oral Tradition.
When a person set aside a meal-offering for [the merit of] his two sons and died,9Before bringing it. they may both bring it.10This is not considered as bringing an offering in partnership.
What is meant by a vow and what is meant by a pledge? When one says: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering," "I promise to bring a peace-offering," "I promise to bring a meal-offering," or "I promise to bring the value of this animal11Even though he mentions a specific animal, since his promise focuses on the animal's value and not the animal itself, it is considered as a vow and not a pledge. Moreover, he made a promise incumbent on himself - that he bring the value of the animal as a sacrifice - and did not designate the animal's worth itself. See also Halachah 6. as a burnt-offering" or "...as a peace-offering," this is considered a vow.12The obligation is on him; he has made a commitment to bring the sacrifice. If, however, he said: "This animal..." or "The value of this animal is [designated as] a burnt-offering,"13I.e., pledging that the animal would be sold and the money received be designated for the purchase of a sacrifice. or "...a peace-offering," or "This isaron [of flour] as a meal-offering," this is a pledge.14I.e., the animal or its worth is designated as a sacrifice.
What is the difference between vows and pledges? If a person took a vow and separated a sacrifice and then it was lost or stolen, he is obligated to replace it15For the obligation is incumbent on him and it was not fulfilled. until he offers the sacrifice he vowed.16Moreover, the sacrifice must be offered in an acceptable manner. If it was disqualified, he is still obligated to fulfill his vow. If a person made a pledge and said: "This [animal] is a sacrifice," he is not obligated to replace it if it died or was stolen.17Because he personally is under no further responsibility. He fulfilled his obligation by designating the animal.
When one says: "I promise to bring the value of this ox as a burnt-offering" or "I promise to bring the value of this house as a sacrifice," if the ox dies and the house falls, he is obligated to pay.18As stated in Halachah 4, this is considered a vow. The rationale is that he said: elai, "I promise to bring." That expression indicated his willingness to accept responsibility.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Arachin 5:5), the Rambam states that he is obligated to pay only the value of the dead ox, not its value when it was alive. If one says: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering on the condition that I am not obligated to replace it," he is not obligated to replace it.19Since he made an explicit stipulation freeing himself of responsibility, he is not considered as liable.
We already explained20See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:14 and the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 13:10) which refers to the temple constructed in Alexandria by Chonio, the son of Shimon the Just. that one who constructs a temple to offer sacrifices within, outside the Temple is not considered as [having built] a temple to a false divinity. If one says: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering to sacrifice in the Temple [in Jerusalem]," and he brings it in [such] a temple, does not fulfill his vow.21The Mishnah (Menachot 13:10) states merely "a burnt offering," omitting the words "to sacrifice in the Temple." The commentaries question why the Rambam felt it necessary to add them. If he vowed to offer it in such a temple and he offers it in the Temple [in Jerusalem], he fulfills his vow.22Since he promised to bring a burnt-offering, it is necessary that it be brought to Jerusalem. The fact that he added that he would bring it elsewhere is not significant. If he offers in such a temple, he fulfills his vow. He is like someone who vowed to bring a burnt-offering on the condition that he is not obligated to replace it.23I.e., according to the Rambam, the animal set aside is considered as designated as a burnt-offering and the person is liable for offering a sacrifice outside the Temple. Nevertheless, he is considered to have fulfilled his vow for the reason stated by the Rambam. He is liable for karet for offering [the sacrifice] outside [the Temple Courtyard].Similarly, if one takes a vow saying that he is a nazirite on the condition that he shave24As is done at the conclusion of one's nazirite vow. in such a temple, he fulfills his obligation if he shaves there. He is considered as one who vowed to abstain from wine and he did so abstain. This is not considered as a nazirite vow.
A sin-offering and a guilt-offering may be brought only for a sin.25Thus when Leviticus 5:1 introduces the obligation to bring a sin-offering, it states: "If a person will sin...." They may not be brought because of a pledge or a vow. [Hence,] if one26I.e., one who is not obligated to bring such a sacrifice. says: "I promise to bring a sin-offering" or "...a guilt-offering," his statements are of no consequence. [Similarly,] if he said: "This animal is [designated as] a sin-offering" or "...a guilt-offering," his statements are of no consequence.If he was obligated to bring a sin-offering or a guilt-offering and he said: "This [animal] is for my sin-offering" or "...for my guilt-offering" or "This money is for my sin-offering" or "...my guilt-offering," his statements are binding.
When a person says: "I promise to bring the sacrifices of this person afflicted by tzara'at" or "...this women who gave birth," if the afflicted person or the women are poor, the one who took the vow should bring the sacrifices of a poor person.27The types of sacrifices these individuals are obligated to bring vary dependent on the person's financial standing, as explained in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:3. Accordingly, one might think that regardless of the financial status of the person who pledged to bring the sacrifice, the type of sacrifice to be brought is determined by the financial status of the person who is obligated to offer it. Nevertheless, as stated in Arachin 13a (and quoted by the Rambam in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 5:11), this is not the case. If a wealthy person vows to bring the sacrifices of a poor person afflicted by tzara'at, he must bring the sacrifices of a wealthy man. Hence, we are forced to say that here the Rambam is speaking of a poor person who took such a vow. If they were wealthy, the person who took the vow must bring the sacrifice of a wealthy person even though he is poor.
[The following laws apply when] one says: "I promise to bring the sin-offering, burnt-offering, guilt-offering, and peace-offering of so-and-so." If that person agrees, he may allow him to bring those sacrifices for him and he receives atonement thereby. If he agreed at the time [the sacrificial animals] were set aside, but reneged and did not agree at the time they were offered,28Rashi (Arachin 21a) interprets the passage as referring to an instance where the person obligated to bring the sacrifice did not know it was being offered on his behalf. If he did know, however, he must consent. The Rambam differs and maintains that since he gave his consent originally and the atonement associated with these sacrifices is achieved immediately, it is not necessary that he consent at the time the sacrifice was offered (Rav Yosef Corcus; see Halachah 17). with regard to a burnt-offering and a peace-offering, they should be sacrificed and he receives atonement through them even if he does not consent at this time, because he agreed at the time [the sacrificial animals] were set aside. With regard to a sin-offering and a guilt-offering,29Since the atonement associated with these sacrifices is more encompassing, it requires not only his initial consent, but also continuous willful activity (ibid.). by contrast, he does not receive atonement unless he consented from the beginning until the end.
One who says: "I promise to bring vows like the vows of the wicked who take upon themselves nazirite vows, sacrifices, and oaths," he is obligated in all [of his statements].30The Rambam is referring to the wording of the Mishnah (Nedarim 1:1). The intent of the Mishnah is that the wicked make vows hastily and moreover, obligate themselves for vows which constitute a commitment incumbent on their person that they will not necessarily be able to fulfill. As the Rambam writes in Hilchot Nedarim 13:25 and in his commentary to the above mishnah, it is preferable not to take vows, for it is possible one will not be able to fulfill them. See also ibid. 1:25. If he says: "...as the vows of the upright," he is not obligated in anything.31For the upright do not take vows for the reason stated in the previous note (ibid.:26). If he says: "as the pledges of the upright," his vow is binding32For the upright do make pledges, for a pledge involves the sanctification of an article at hand and if the upright wish to take such action, there is nothing preventing them from fulfilling their vow. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam explains that the upright would bring their sacrificial animals to the Temple Mount and only then, pledge to bring them. In this way, there would be no question of them keeping their word. with regard to nazirite vows and sacrifices.33The Rambam does not mention oaths, because the upright try to avoid taking oaths entirely. All terms used to refer to sacrifices are considered as sacrifices.34See Hilchot Nizirut 1:16 which states:There are places where people are inarticulate and mispronounce words, calling subjects by different names. [In those places,] we follow the meaning of the local term.What is meant by the statement that all the terms used for the word korban, "sacrifice," are equivalent to the term korban? When one says: "[This produce] is considered for me like a konam," "...a konach," or "...a konaz," they are all terms referring to a korban.
Neither one who takes a vow or one who makes a pledge is liable unless his statements match his intent.35This is a general principle applying with regard to oaths (Hilchot Sh'vuot 2:10-12) and vows (Hilchot Nedarim 2:2).In the continuation of the halachah, the Rambam describes a situation in which one is liable for a sacrifice he intended to give even though he does not say anything. That, however, is not a contradiction to the statements here, because here, the person's statements contradict his intent.What is implied? If one had the intent of saying: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering," but he said "...a peace-offering" or he had the intent of saying: "I promise to bring a peace-offering," but he said "...a burnt-offering," his words are of no substance. If, [however,] he intended to take a vow to bring a burnt-offering and said: "a sacrifice," or he intended to say devotion offerings36Which is consecrated to the Temple treasury. and he said: "consecrated property," his statements are binding, for a burnt-offering is a sacrifice, and something designated as devotion offerings is consecrated. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.With regard to vows and pledges, it is not necessary for him to make any verbal statements. He is obligated even if he made a firm resolve in his heart without saying anything. What is implied? If one made a resolve in his heart that an animal should be designated as a burnt-offering or that he should bring a burnt-offering, he is obligated. [This is derived from Exodus 35:5]: "All those generous of heart shall bring it." Generosity in the heart [alone is sufficient to] establish an obligation to bring. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations involving vows and pledges for the consecration [of sacrifices].
With regard to vows and pledges and other commitments that a person makes that obligated him, endowment obligations, pledges for worth,37Both of these terms refer to commitments to make donations to the Temple treasury. See Hilchot Arachin, ch. 1, for a more complete description. tithes.38I.e. the tithes (including the second tithe and the tithe for the poor) separated from one's crops (see Hilchot Ma'aser and Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni). Also, implied are the tithe offerings. See Hilchot Bechorot, ch. 4. and the presents to the poor,39Leket, pe'ah, ollelot, etc., as described in Hilchot Matanot Aniyim. it is a positive commandment of Scriptural origin to bring everything on the festival of immediate proximity,40Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 83) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 438) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Deuteronomy 12:5-6] states: "And you shall come there and you shall bring your burnt-offerings, your sacrifices, your tithes,... your vows, your pledges..."], as if to say: When you come [to Jerusalem] to celebrate a festival bring there everything that you are obligated and satisfy every obligation upon you.If the festival arrived and he did not bring [the gifts in which he is obligated], he has negated the observance of a positive commandment. If three festivals pass without him bringing the sacrifices he vowed or pledged to bring or without giving the endowment obligations, devotion offerings, and pledges for worth, he violates a negative commandment,41Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 155) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 574) count this prohibition among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [ibid. 23:22] states: "Do not delay in paying it." He does not violate the negative commandment until all of the three pilgrimage festivals of the year pass. Lashes are not given for the violation of this negative commandment, because it does not involve a deed.42As stated in Hilchot Sanhedrin 18:2, lashes are only given for the violation of a prohibition that involves a deed.
If one consecrated an animal [to be offered] on the altar and [after] two festivals passed [without it being offered], it became blemished and it was redeemed for another animal, the person does not violate the negative commandment until three festivals pass without the second [animal being sacrificed].43For the calculation begins anew with the consecration of the second animal.Both a man and a woman44Rosh HaShanah 6b explains that since a woman is not obligated to bring a burnt-offering (olat re'i'ah) for the pilgrimage festival, one might think that the entire concept of a pilgrimage festival - and hence, this commandment - does not apply to her. This supposition is, however, negated, for she is obligated in bringing the peace-offering of rejoicing (shalmei simchah) that are sacrificed on festivals. are liable for the transgression [the prohibition against] delaying [the offering of a sacrifice]. An heir, however, does not violate this prohibition.45The prohibition is not to delay paying one's vow. Since the heir did not make the vow himself, he does not violate this prohibition if he does not carry out the vow at the appropriate time. He is, however, to bring the sacrifice. See Rosh HaShanah 6b.
Despite the fact that three festivals passed, no [animal consecrated as] a sacrifice is disqualified. Instead, [such animals should be] sacrificed and they are acceptable. Each and every day that passes after the three pilgrimage festivals involves a violation of [the above] prohibition. The [Jewish] court is commanded to apply physical coercion to the person46As Ketubot 86a-b explains, the court is obligated to compel every individual to observe every positive commandment incumbent upon him, even if it requires beating him to the point of death. immediately until he offers his sacrifices on the first festival that presents itself.47The Rambam's wording appears to imply that if the court sees the person acting indolently with regard to the sacrifice, it is obligated to subject him to compulsion even if the first festival has not passed. This point is not, however, accepted by all authorities (Rav Yosef Corcus).
Even though [Leviticus 1:3] states that [a burnt-offering must be sacrificed] "willfully," he may be compelled until he says: "I desire."48In Hilchot Gerushin 2:20, the Rambam explains why acting under compulsion in such circumstances can be considered willful activity. [For there also, a bill of divorce must be written with the husband's consent and yet he can be compelled to consent.]The concept of being compelled against one's will applies only when speaking about a person who is being compelled and forced to do something that the Torah does not obligate him to do - e.g., a person who was beaten until he consented to a sale, or to give a present. If, however, a person's evil inclination presses him to negate [the observance of] a mitzvah or to commit a transgression, and he was beaten until he performed the action he was obligated to perform, or he dissociated himself from the forbidden action, he is not considered to have been forced against his will. On the contrary, it is he himself who is forcing [his own conduct to become debased].With regard to this person who [outwardly] refuses to divorce [his wife] - he wants to be part of the Jewish people, and he wants to perform all the mitzvot and eschew all the transgressions; it is only his evil inclination that presses him [to act otherwise]. Therefore, when he is beaten, until his [evil] inclination has been weakened, and he consents [to the divorce], he is considered to have performed the divorce willfully.The Rambam's statements have implications far beyond their immediate halachic context. The Rambam is saying that the fundamental desire of every Jew is to affirm his Jewishness and observe the Torah and its mitzvot. Even when a person's conscious mind does not necessarily consent to this inner motivation, it is at work, molding his character without his knowledge. And at times, either because of undesirable circumstances - being compelled against his will as above - or because of desirable ones - an expression of Divine favor - this inner drive will surface. Whether he vowed [to bring a sacrifice] and did not set it aside or set it aside, but did not offer it, he may be compelled until he sacrifices it.
[The court] seizes collateral from all of those obligated to bring burnt-offerings or peace-offerings [to compel them to offer them]. Even though [the sacrifice] will not bring him atonement unless he desires to offer it, as [implied by] the term "willfully," he is compelled until he says: "I desire."49As stated in Hilchot Arachin 3:14:They take... [from the persons obligated] against their will. They are not required to return the collateral by day or by night. They sell all the landed property and movable property in [those person's] possession including their clothing, household articles, servants, and livestock, taking their payment from everything. Collateral is not seized from those obligated to bring sin-offerings and guilt-offerings, by contrast. [The rationale is that] since [the failure to bring these sacrifices] prevents [the people] from receiving atonement,50Burnt-offerings also feature in bringing atonement for the failure to fulfill positive commandments. Nevertheless, in that instance the atonement is achieved through the person's repentance and the offering is considered merely as a present. In contrast, a sin-offering is required to bring about the atonement itself. we are not concerned that they will be sinful and delay [bringing] their sacrifices. [The only] exception is the sin-offering brought by a nazirite. Since [the failure to bring] it does not prevent him from drinking wine,51See Hilchot Nazirut 8:10. he is compelled [to bring the offering], lest he delay it.

=== 15 | chapter 15 ===
When a person says: "The offspring of this [animal]1This is speaking about an animal that is not consecrated. If an animal that is consecrated becomes pregnant, its status is automatically transferred to its offspring [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Temurah 5:1)]. is [consecrated] as a burnt-offering2In which instance, the offspring should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering. and it is [consecrated] as a peace-offering,"3In the discussion to follow, it is important to note that burnt-offerings are only male. Peace-offerings can be both male and female. Sin-offerings may also be female (Chapter 1, Halachot 8-11). Nevertheless, as stated in Hilchot Temurah 4:2, the offspring of a sin-offering is not sacrificed, but instead, set aside to die. Hence the Rambam speaks only of the offspring of peace-offerings. his words are binding. [Should he say:] "It is [consecrated] as a peace-offering and its offspring as a burnt-offering," if that was his intent, his words are binding.4The difference between the first clause and the second clause is that the first clause speaks about the offspring first. Consecrating the offspring certainly does not determine the mother's status. In the second clause, by contrast, the person consecrated the mother first. Now consecrating the mother determines the status of the offspring, for the offspring is considered as "the thigh of its mother." Hence ordinarily if an animal is consecrated as a peace-offering, its offspring also has that status and should be offered as such a sacrifice (Hilchot Temurah 4:1). Nevertheless, in this instance, if the person originally had the intent of consecrating the offspring as a burnt-offering, the offspring is given that status, because it was never meant to be a peace-offering. The person could only make one statement at a time and the fact that he chose to speak about the mother first does not affect the offspring's status.If, after he made a resolve in his heart and expressed verbally that [the offspring] should be a peace-offering, he retracted and said: "Its offspring is a burnt-offering," even though he retracted immediately,5The phrase translated as "immediately," toch kedai dibbur, has a very specific halachic meaning: "Within the time it takes to say Shalom Elecha, Rebbi" ("Greetings my master"; Hilchot Sh'vuot 2:17). the offspring are [designated] as peace-offerings. For one cannot retract [pledges of] consecration even when one does so immediately.6In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Temurah 5:3), the Rambam explains that generally if one seeks to retract his statements immediately, the retraction is effective. There are, however, several instances marriage and divorce, the acceptance of a false divinity, blasphemy, the consecration of sacrifices, and the transfer of holiness from one animal to another where retraction is not possible.Nevertheless, the Rambam's perspective is not accepted by all authorities. Siftei Cohen (Choshen Mishpat 255:5) takes issue with him and argues that one may retract the consecration of an animal. Other sages, however, support the Rambam's position.
When one says: "The right forefoot of this animal is a burnt-offering," or "The leg of this animal is a burnt offering," it should be sold to those obligated to bring burnt-offerings.7So that it will be sacrificed for that purpose and hence, the portion of the animal consecrated as a burnt-offering will have been offered as such. The proceeds of the sale are considered as ordinary funds with the exception of the worth of that limb.8For that limb was consecrated. [The above applies] provided the person obligated to bring a burnt-offering who purchased [the animal] vowed [to bring] a burnt-offering for a specific price.9There is a difficulty because the person bringing the burnt-offering will be bringing a sacrifice that does not belong to him entirely. The Jerusalem Talmud (Temurah 1:5) resolves this difficulty, explaining that we are speaking of an instance where the person vowed to spend a specific amount to bring a burnt-offering. Since the animal is worth that amount, he has fulfilled his vow.If one says: "The heart [of this animal]..." or "The head of this [animal] is a burnt-offering," the entire animal is a burnt-offering, for he consecrated an organ upon which [the animal's] life depends. If one consecrated a limb from a fowl, there is an unresolved doubt whether or not the entire fowl becomes consecrated.10This concept is debated without resolution by our Sages in Temurah 11b. The argument centers on the fact that the concept that one can consecrate a limb from an animal as a sacrifice was derived from the exegesis of a verse (Leviticus 27:9 . Now that verse is referring to an animal sacrifice and hence, our Sages question whether the concept applies to all sacrifices or only those involving animals.
When one says: "Half of this animal is a burnt-offering and half is a peace-offering," it is consecrated, but it should not be offered.11Because there is no way that one animal can be offered for two purposes. Instead, it should be allowed to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying physical blemish and then be sold. Half of the proceeds should be used to bring a burnt offering and half, a peace-offering.12For in this way, his vow will be kept to the fullest extent of his capacity.If he was obligated to bring a sin-offering13Here he must be obligated, because as stated above, a sin-offering may not be brought on one's own initiative. and he said: "Half of this animal is a sin-offering and half is a burnt-offering," or "...a peace-offering," or he said: "Half of this animal is a burnt-offering..." or "...a peace-offering and half is a sin-offering," [the animal] should be left to die, as will be explained with regard to the sin-offerings that are left to die.14See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 4:1 regarding what is done with the animal. There the Rambam speaks about an animal separated as a sin-offering that was lost and discovered after its owner had brought another sin-offering in its stead. Since this animal was consecrated for a specific purpose and cannot be sacrificed for that purpose, it cannot be used for any other purpose and is hence caused to die. Similarly, in the instance at hand, since the animal cannot be sacrificed for the purpose for which it was consecrated, it is caused to die.
When one of the partners who owned half an animal consecrated his portion and then purchased the other half and consecrated it, it is consecrated and offered on the altar. Even though originally, when he consecrated half of it, it was unacceptable,15For half an animal cannot be sacrificed. the fact that it was originally unacceptable does not cause it to be unacceptable forever.16This is a concept that applies in many different contexts of the laws concerning the consecration of animals. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:24. Even though originally only its worth was consecrated,17Since only its worth was consecrated (for originally, it could not be sacrificed), there is more reason to think that it would not become acceptable afterwards. since it is a live animal, [we follow the principle:]18Zevachim 59a. This is also a concept that applies in many different contexts of the laws concerning the consecration of animals. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:23; Hilchot Shegagot 3:8, et al. "Living animals are never permanently disqualified." Since it is [ultimately] fit to be sacrificed, it should be sacrificed. [Moreover,] if one sought to transfer its holiness to another animal,19Violating the prohibition of temurah. the transfer is binding.
[Whether] one says: "The worth of this animal is a burnt-offering,"20And thus from his statements, there is room to say that it could be sold and the proceeds used to purchase an offering rather than it having to be sacrificed itself. or "This animal is a burnt-offering," if it is fit to be sacrificed as a burnt-offering,21It is male and unblemished. its body itself is consecrated and it should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering.22For any animal that is consecrated and fit to be offered as a sacrifice should be offered (Radbaz). If it is not fit [to be sacrificed], it should be sold23The Kessef Mishneh elaborates, proving that here also, the Rambam's intent is that it should be left to pasture until it becomes blemished and then sold. and a burnt-offering brought with the proceeds of the sale.
If a person said with regard to an impure animal24I.e., an animal from a non-kosher species. or another similar animal that is forbidden [to be offered] as a sacrifice that can never be consecrated: "Behold this is consecrated as a burnt-offering,"25Or any other type of sacrifice. his words are of no consequence.26The animal is not consecrated at all. Not only is it considered as ordinary property, the person who took the vow is under no obligation and need not sell the animal and purchase a sacrifice with the proceeds.We have punctuated the Rambam's words in this manner so that there is a direct correlation between the law stated in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:10 and the one stated here. Others maintain that the source refers to the first clause. In Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach (see below), the Rambam speaks of consecrating an animal "for the altar." If he states: "This animal is a sacrifice," no holiness is attached to it at all (see the gloss of the Ra'avad there). Similarly, in this instance, since he wished to designate the animals as a sacrifice, his words are of no consequence at all. As we explained in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach,27The commentaries explain that this reference is to Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:10 where the Rambam states:One who consecrates an animal which is a tumtum, androgynus, tereifah... to the altar is like one who consecrated stones or wood.... The holiness does not take effect with regard to its physical substance. It is considered as ordinary property in all contexts. It should be sold and the proceeds of the sale used to purchase any sacrifice one desires. It is not considered like a blemished animal, for a sacrifice may be brought from the species of a blemished animal.Similarly, in the case at hand, since a sacrifice cannot be brought from such animals, they should be sold and the proceeds used to purchase the appropriate sacrifice. if he says: "These are [consecrated] for the sake of a burnt-offering," they should be sold and a burnt-offering brought with the proceeds of the sale.28For we assume that he made his promise in a manner that it would be of consequence (Radbaz).
If a person said:29The Rambam is referring to a difference of opinion among our Sages, Nedarim 29a, whether or not the consecration of the value (but not the physical substance) of an object for a limited time expires if nothing is done within that time. As will be stated, his ruling is that it does expire. "The worth of this cow30The Rambam is speaking of a situation where the cow's worth was consecrated, because all authorities agree that if the physical substance of the cow was consecrated, it would have to be redeemed for the first consecration to be nullified (ibid.). is [consecrated] for the sake of a burnt-offering for an entire 30 day period. After 30 days, [it is consecrated for the sake of a peace-offering," or he said: "The worth of this cow is [consecrated] for the sake of a peace-offering31This point is added, because it possesses an added dimension of severity beyond the first instance. For a cow may not be offered as a burnt-offering, but it may be offered as a peace-offering. Thus it is fit to be sacrificed for the sake of the offering. for an entire 30 day period. After 30 days, [it is consecrated] for the sake of a burnt-offering," his words are binding.32The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling and maintains that the animal must be redeemed for the initial consecration to be nullified. The issue is debated by the subsequent commentaries. [Thus] if he [comes to] offer [a sacrifice from] the proceeds of its sale within 30 days, he should bring the type of sacrifice that he vowed. If he offers it after 30 days, he should bring the type of sacrifice that he vowed.
If a person possessed a pregnant animal33In his gloss to Hilchot Nedarim 12:10, the Lechem Mishneh states that this applies only when the animal is pregnant and thus the fetus exists. If, however, the animal is not pregnant, the person's words are not binding. and said: "Should it give birth to a male, it is a burnt-offering. Should it give birth to a female, it is a peace-offering," if the animal gives birth to a male, it should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering. If it gives birth to a female, it should be sacrificed as a peace-offering. If it gives birth to a male and a female, the male should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering and the female, as a peace-offering.If it gives birth to two males, one should be sacrificed as a burnt-offering34The Radbaz states that the animal of higher quality should be offered as the sacrifice. and the other sold for the sake of a burnt-offering,35For the person's initial vow encompassed both of them. but the proceeds of the sale are ordinary money.36Since he is only obligated to bring one sacrifice, he is allowed to sell the second animal and use the proceeds for whatever purpose he desires. If it gives birth to two females, one should be sacrificed as a peace-offering and the other sold for the sake of a peace-offering, but the proceeds of the sale are ordinary money. If it gave birth to a tumtum37An animal whose gender cannot be determined, because it is masked by a piece of flesh. or an androgynus,38An animal that has both male and female organs. they are not consecrated and they are like ordinary animals,39I.e., they are not consecrated at all and they may be used for ordinary purposes. Since the person specified that he was consecrating the offspring as a sacrifice and these animals are unfit for sacrifice, his words are of no consequence whatsoever. as we explained.40Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:10 (cited above). See the second interpretation given in the notes to Halachah 6. When a person consecrates a fetus, whose mother has a disqualifying blemish or the like,41I.e., animals that are of a type able to be sacrificed, but disqualified for a particular reason. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, op. cit. while it is in its mother's womb, it is consecrated.

=== 16 | chapter 16 ===
When a person vows to bring a large animal, but instead brings a small one, he does not fulfill his obligation.1For he has not fulfilled his vow. [If he vows to bring] a small one and brings a large one, he fulfills his obligation.2For it is as if the promise to bring the smaller animal included the possibility of bringing the larger one.What is implied? He said: "I promise [to bring] a lamb3An animal in the first year of its life (Chapter 1, Halachah 14). as a burnt-offering" or "...as a peace-offering," and he brings a ram,4One that is more than one year and one month old (ibid.). or he vowed a calf5An animal in the first year of its life (Chapter 1, Halachah 14). and brought an ox,6An animal in the second year of its life (ibid.). or a kid7An animal in the first year of its life (Chapter 1, Halachah 14). and brought a goat,8An animal in the second year of its life (ibid.). he fulfills his obligation.
If he vows to bring a burnt-offering9The laws to follow also apply with regard to a peace-offering. They do not apply with regard to a guilt-offering or a sin-offering, for those sacrifices may not be brought voluntarily. either from lambs or from rams and brings a pilgas,10A sheep that is between the age of one year and one year and one month. Thus it is no longer a lamb, but it is not yet considered as a ram (ibid.). there is an unresolved doubt whether or not he fulfilled his obligation.11There is an unresolved doubt regarding the status of a pilgas. Hence, the person cannot be considered as having fulfilled his obligation. Nevertheless, since its status is unresolved, we are not definitely certain that he did not fulfill his obligation.The Kessef Mishneh questions why is he not considered to have fulfilled his obligation if he vowed to bring a lamb. As stated in the previous halachah, if one vows to bring a small animal and instead, brings a large animal, he is considered to have fulfilled his obligation. Thus in the case at hand, if a pilgas is considered a lamb, he will have fulfilled his obligation and if it is considered as a ram, he would have fulfilled his obligation, based on the principle stated in Halachah 1. The Kessef Mishneh answers that the animal's status is considered one of doubt, an intermediate state between the two. Hence it is not considered as acceptable as either type. Similarly, if one vowed to bring a burnt-offering12This law applies only with regard to burnt-offerings, for peace-offerings may not be brought from fowl. of fowl, from either turtle-doves, or ordinary doves13Turtle doves may only be brought as sacrifices when they are small and under-developed. Ordinary doves, by contrast, may be brought as sacrifices only when they have developed and reached a mature state (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:2). and brought a fowl that began to sprout yellow feathers14An intermediate stage in which the fowl is unacceptable, because it is too mature for a turtle-dove and not mature enough for an ordinary dove (ibid.). of both species, there is an unresolved doubt [whether or not he fulfilled his obligation].15Since there is an unresolved doubt concerning a fowl that reached this state of development, a person who brings one such dove would certainly not fulfill his obligation. In this instance, however, since he brought one for each species, one might think that it is considered as if he fulfilled his vow. For if this is considered as a stage of development, he will have fulfilled the vow for he brought an acceptable ordinary dove. And if it is not considered acceptable, he would have fulfilled the vow for he brought an acceptable turtle dove. Nevertheless, since a priest is not permitted to offer such a fowl as an initial preference, he is not considered to have fulfilled his vow.If one vowed to bring a black[-colored animal] and brought one that was white, [vowed to bring] a white one and brought a black one, [vowed] a male and brought a female or vowed a female and brought a male, he did not fulfill his obligation.16For he did not bring the animal that he vowed to bring as a sacrifice.
When one takes a vow without specifying [the type of animal he is bringing], he should bring from the developed animals in the species he vowed to bring. If in his place [of residence], people commonly identify one of [the type of sacrifices] with a specific species [of animals], he should bring [the type of animal brought by] the people of that locale.17This follows a general principle stated by the Rambam, that with regard to the interpretation of the wording used in vows, everything is determined by local custom.What is implied? If a person vowed to bring a burnt-offering from cattle," he should bring an ox.18I.e., and not a calf. Should he say: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering," if the practice of the people of that locale is to use the term "burnt-offering" without any description to refer even to a fowl offered as a burnt-offering, he may bring even one fowl, a turtle dove or an ordinary dove. If their practice is to use that term only when referring to a burnt-offering of cattle, he should bring an ox. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
A person who vowed to bring an ox, a ram, a lamb, a calf, or the like should not bring the frailest specimen of that species, because their value is minimal.19As Malachi 1:14 asks rhetorically: "You bring the stolen and the lame and the sick and offer it as a sacrifice. Shall I accept it from you." See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:1. Nor is he obligated to bring the nicest, stockiest specimen of which there is no better.20Although ibid.:11 states: "One who desires to gain merit for himself, subjugate his evil inclination, and amplify his generosity, should bring his sacrifice from the most desirable and superior type of the item he is bringing," this is a desirable ethical standard, but not a halachic imperative. Instead, he should bring an average animal.21Menachot 13:8 mentions prices to be paid for animals offered as sacrifices. In the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, he explains that the prices mentioned were the average prices for animals at that time. If he brought a frail animal, he fulfilled his vow.22As long as the animal is unblemished.
When a person says: "I promise to bring an ox worth a maneh,"23100 silver pieces. he should bring an ox worth a maneh in that place aside from its accompanying offerings.24The wine, meal, and oil brought together with the offering, as stated in Chapter 2. If he brought two [oxen] for a maneh, he did not fulfill his obligation.
[The following rules apply when] a person says: "This ox is a burnt-offering" and it becomes blemished. If he desires, he may bring two for the price he receives for it.25In this instance, since the ox was consecrated as a burnt-offering and was no longer fit to be offered as such, the proceeds of its sale must be used for that purpose. It does not matter, however, which animal(s) is purchased for that purpose.In the previous halachah, it was not acceptable for him to bring two oxen that have a combined worth of 100, for he made an explicit vow to bring one ox worth 100 and until he does so, he does not fulfill his obligation. In this halachah, once the consecrated animal is disqualified, there are no qualifications regarding which animals may be brought as burnt-offerings. See Menachot 108a. If he brings even one ram26I.e., the sacrifice he brings need not even be of the same species as the animal he originally designated for sacrifice. for the price he receives, he fulfills his vow.If he says: "These two oxen are burnt-offerings," and they become blemished, should he desire, he may bring one with the money he receives for their sale.27The new point this clause is teaching is that even if two animals were originally consecrated, one may be brought with the proceeds of their sale. "This ram is a burnt-offering" and it becomes blemished, if he desires he may bring a lamb with the money he receives for its sale. Similarly, if he vows a lamb and it becomes disqualified, he may bring a ram with the money he receives for its sale.
If he says: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering" and he set aside an ox and it was stolen, he may fulfill his obligation with a sheep.28For when taking the vow, he did not specify what animal he would bring. This applies provided people of this locale also refer to a sheep as a burnt-offering (see Halachah 3). Moreover, if he had pledged to bring that particular ox as a burnt-offering, he is not obligated to bring any sacrifice at all (Radbaz). If he says: "I promise to bring this ox or its value as a burnt-offering," [his commitment] is established as binding.29Even if the animal is disqualified, he is obligated to bring another one like it as a sacrifice. If [the ox] is disqualified, he may bring only an ox with the money he receives for its sale.
If he says: "One of my sheep is consecrated and one of my oxen is consecrated," but he had two, the larger one is consecrated.30For we assume that anyone who consecrates his property does so generously (Menachot 108b). If he has three, the larger one is consecrated, but concern should also be shown for the middle one.31For it is also possible that this was his intent, since consecrating the middle one is still acting generously, because there is a smaller one.What should be done? He should wait until the middle one becomes blemished so that the holiness will fall on the larger one alone.32The Kessef Mishneh interprets the Rambam's words as implying that once the second one becomes blemished, the holiness automatically falls on the third. This runs contrary to Rashi's approach (Menachot, loc. cit.) which requires the person to make a stipulation conditionally transferring the holiness that might have fallen on the middle ox. If he says: "An ox from my oxen is consecrated," the larger one is consecrated and concern need not be shown for the middle one.33For by saying "An ox," we assume he meant the choicest one (Menachot, loc. cit.). The commentaries note that the Rambam's ruling in Hilchot Meilah 7:7 appears to run contrary to this explanation.
If he designated one of [three animals as a sacrifice] and forgot [which one he designated] or his father told him "One of these animals was consecrated,"34And then his father died without informing him which one was consecrated (Rashi, Menachot, loc. cit.). he should designate the largest one as consecrated35For we assume that he intended to offer the most choice one as a sacrifice. The Radbaz explains that this case is different from the one in the previous halachah where concern is also given to the middle one, because since he already designated the animal, we assume that he chose the best one. and, afterwards, he fulfills his obligation [with its sacrifice]. Similarly, if one vowed to bring a burnt-offering from cattle and designated [an animal as a sacrifice to fulfill] his vow and [later] forgot whether he had designated an ox or a calf, he should bring an ox.36For even if he originally designated a small animal as a sacrifice, we follow the principle stated in Halachah 1 that a person who vows to bring a small animal, but instead brings a large one fulfills his obligation [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 13:6); see also Ra'avad]. Similarly, if he designated a sheep and forgot what he designated,37Whether a ram or a lamb. he should bring a ram. If he designated a goat and forgot what he designated,38Whether a grown goat or a kid. he should bring a grown goat. If he forgot the species from which he designated the burnt-offering, he should bring an ox, a ram, and a grown goat.39I.e., he must allow for the possibility that he designated any of the three types of animals that could be offered as burnt-offerings and he must offer a large animal from each species for the reason mentioned above. If he was in doubt that perhaps he designated the burnt-offering from fowl, he should also add a turtle-dove and an ordinary dove.40He must bring both, because they are considered as two separate species and not as developed and underdeveloped specimens of the same species.
When a person vowed to bring a thanksgiving-offering or a peace offering, specifying that it would be brought from cattle, but forgot what he designated to bring, he should bring an ox and a cow.41As stated above with regard to burnt-offerings, he is obligated to bring a developed specimen. Unlike a burnt-offering, these sacrifices may be brought from females as well as males. Hence, although bringing a large animal fulfills his obligation even if he originally vowed to bring a small one, he is still required to bring both a male and a female, for he is unsure of the gender of the animal he originally designated. Similarly, if he is unsure with regard to sheep, he should bring a ram and a ewe. If he is unsure with regard to goats, he must bring a he-goat and a she-goat.If he forgot the species from which he designated the sacrifice, he should bring an ox, a cow, a ram, a ewe, a he-goat, and a she-goat.42Peace-offerings may not be brought from fowl, so there is no need to bring doves. If he said: "I promise to bring a burnt-offering of fowl," he should bring a turtle-dove or an ordinary dove.43Bringing either will enable him to fulfill his vow. If he designated one particular species in his vow and forgot which one, he should bring both a turtle-dove and an ordinary dove.
When one says: "I promise to bring [an offering] for the altar," he should bring a handful of frankincense,44As stated in Halachah 13, when one brings frankincense, he must bring at least a handful. for there is nothing that is offered entirely on the altar in its immediate state except for frankincense.45Since he said: "For the altar," we assume he meant something that is only for the altar. As mentioned below, there are other entities which are also offered on the altar, but unlike frankincense, they are not offered on the altar in their entirety. (The hide of an animal offered as a burnt-offering and the feathers of a fowl offered as a burnt-offering are withheld. With regard to the wine, it is not consumed by the altar's pyre, but poured upon it. And with regard to an offering of flour, since there are types of meal-offerings which are given to the priests to eat, we assume that his intent was not to bring such an offering.)If he specified his vow, but forgot what he specified to bring, he should bring every type of entity that is offered on the altar in its entirety.46Since the primary elements of the burnt-offering are burnt on the altar and the wine is poured over the altar, it is possible that this was his intent. Therefore he should bring a burnt-offering of an animal, a burnt-offering of fowl, a meal-offering of flour, frankincense, and wine alone.47I.e., aside from the wine brought as part of the accompanying offering of flour (Kessef Mishneh).
When a person says: "I promise to bring [an offering] worth a sela48A large silver coin used in the Talmudic era. to the altar," he should bring a sheep,49As a burnt-offering. The Radbaz states that this word should be included in the statement of the person's promise. for there is nothing offered on the altar worth [exactly] a sela except a sheep. If he specified [a particular entity], but forgot what he specified, he should bring a sela's worth of everything that is offered on the altar.50In addition to the burnt-offering, this could include wine, frankincense, and flour.
When a person says: "I promise to bring frankincense," he should not bring less than a handful.51Menachot 106b derives this concept from a comparison to the flour offered from a meal offering, just as there a handful is offered, so too, a handful of frankincense should be offered. If one says: "I promise to bring wood," he should not bring less than two52The Hebrew term is written in the plural. Hence at least two logs are required. logs as thick as a leveling rod that are a cubit long.53See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:3. "I promise to bring a piece of wood," he should bring one log a cubit long. If he desires to bring the worth of the logs, he may.54He would place the money in a container designated for that purpose and the priests would take the money and purchase the wood (Tosefta, Shekalim 3:3).
What should a person who vowed or pledged to bring oil do? He should take a handful of it,55Kin'at Eliyahu questions how one takes a handful of oil. put salt on it,56As required of all the sacrifices (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:11). and toss it on the fire. The remainder is eaten by the priests like the remainder of the meal offerings.57See Chapter 12, Halachah 9.What is done with wine that is brought independently? It is salted58Although Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, loc. cit., states that salt is not required for wine that is offered on the altar, that refers to wine offered as a libation accompanying other sacrifices. When, however, wine is offered alone, salt is required (Kessef Mishneh). and then poured entirely59None is given to the priests to partake of. down the shittin60See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:11 which states: "There were two cavities in the southwest corner [of the Altar], resembling two thin nostrils.... The blood [which was poured onto the Altar] would run off through them and... [ultimately,] go out to the Kidron River." like the other libations.61It is not poured over the fire, because it would - at least partially - quench the fire and that is forbidden (Kessef Mishneh). Frankincense which is brought independently should be salted and then offered on the pyre in its entirety.
When a person vowed [to bring a sacrifice], he should not bring it from money [for which] the second tithe [was redeemed].62As mentioned in Hilchot Ma'asaer Sheni, ch. 4, when a person lives far from Jerusalem and cannot easily take produce from the second tithe to the holy city, he should redeem it for money. That money must be used to purchase food which must be eaten in Jerusalem according to the strictures that apply to the second tithe. [The rationale is that] he became obligated63Because of his vow. to bring this sacrifice and anyone who is obligated to bring a sacrifice may bring it only from ordinary property.64And the second tithe is considered as holy, "consecrated unto God."This is a general principle. The rationale is that since the person is obligated to bring the offering, it must be brought from resources that belong to him entirely (see the conclusion of Halachah 17).
If a person states: "I promise to bring a thanksgiving-offering from ordinary funds and its bread from the [second] tithe," he should bring its bread only from ordinary funds. [The rationale is that] he vowed to bring a thanksgiving-offering and that offering comes only when accompanied by bread which is from ordinary property.65I.e., the bread is considered as an integral part of that offering and not an additional element. Thus when he vows to bring a thanks-giving offering, that vow also requires him to bring bread. Hence the bread must come from ordinary property (Radbaz).
If he explicitly said: "I promise to bring a thanksgiving offering from money from the second tithes and its bread from ordinary property," he may bring [the sacrifice] as he vowed.66As stated below, if he specifies, he is allowed to bring a thanksgiving-offering using the money from the second tithes, for he will partake of the meat of that sacrifice in Jerusalem. What is unique here is the fact that the sacrifice will be from the second tithes and the bread from ordinary funds. Even so, the sacrifice is acceptable. If he brought it all from ordinary property, he fulfilled his obligation.67In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 7:5; based on Menachot 81b), the Rambam writes that it is indeed more desirable for him to bring the sacrifice from ordinary funds. Similarly, if he explicitly said: "I promise to bring a thanksgiving-offering and its bread from the second tithe," he may bring it [as vowed].68In this instance as well, in his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam states that it is desirable for him to bring everything from ordinary property. He should not bring the bread from wheat that is the second tithe, but from [flour purchased with] money [for which] the second tithe was redeemed like the animal which was [purchased with] such money.Even though he explicitly stated that he would bring the bread from [the money of] the second] tithe, he should not bring its libations from the money of the second tithe, for at all times, libations must be brought solely from ordinary funds, as explained.69Chapter 3, Halachah 13. [The rationale is] that concerning [the libations],70This refers not only to the wine libations, but to all vows for sacrifices. [Numbers 15:4] states: "The one who offers them shall offer his sacrifice." Implied is that the sacrifice must be his without having any dimension that belongs to the Most High.

=== 17 | chapter 17 ===
When a person vows to bring a meal-offering baked in an oven, he should not bring one baked in a kopach,1A range with an opening for one pot [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 5:9)]. one baked on rafters,2I.e., one of the common ways to bake in the Talmudic period was to heat rafters and stones until they were glowing hot and place dough upon them. Afterwards, the stones and rafters were covered and thus the dough would bake (ibid.).or one baked in Arab pits.3A pit covered with mud into which wood was placed and kindled. The dough was placed within and it was covered so that it would bake like an oven (ibid.). These are not acceptable, because the person took a vow that he would bring a meal offering cooked in an oven and these devices do not fit that description.
When one says: "I promise to bring a meal offering [baked] on a flat frying-pan," and he brings one [baked] in a deep frying-pan4See Chapter 13, Halachah 6, with regard to the difference between the two. or he promised to bring one [baked] in a deep frying-pan and brought one [baked] on a flat frying-pan, [the sacrifice] he brought is acceptable, but he did not fulfill his obligation.5Because he did not bring the sacrifice he vowed to bring.If he said: "I will bring these6Pointing to cakes that he prepared to bake. [baked] in a deep frying-pan and brings them [baked] on a flat frying-pan or promised to bring it [baked] on a flat frying-pan and brought it [baked] in a deep frying-pan," [the sacrifice] is unacceptable.7For he specified that the cakes be prepared in one way and they were not. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.Similarly, if a person says: "I promise to bring two esronim in one vessel and he brings them in two vessels" or "...in two vessels" and he brings them in one vessel, [the sacrifice] he brought is acceptable, but he did not fulfill his obligation. [The rationale8For all the above.is that Deuteronomy 23:24] states: "As you vowed to G‑d."9Implying that the vow must be fulfilled in all its particulars.
If he said: "I will bring these cakes in one vessel" and he brought them in two or [promised] to bring them in two and brought them in one, they are unacceptable.10If he can take a handful from each one separately, they are acceptable as indicated by the conclusion of Halachah 4.If he did not specify what he would bring when he took the vow, but [merely] said: "I promise to bring two esronim and when he designated [the meal for the offering], he set [the flour] aside in two vessels and afterwards, brought it in one vessel, it is acceptable. For the verse states "as you vowed" and not "as you set aside."When he said: "I promise to bring two esronim in one vessel," but he brought them in two, if despite being told that he vowed to bring them in one vessel, he offered them in two, they are not acceptable.11Because he did not fulfill his vow. It is, however, necessary to ask him and have him respond as the Rambam states. Otherwise, we assume that he is not bringing this offering in fulfillment of his vow, but rather as a separate sacrifice. In that instance, although he would not have fulfilled his vow, the sacrifice would be acceptable. If he brought them in one vessel, they are acceptable.12Since he offered them as he vowed, the fact that he originally brought them in two vessels is not significant.
When he said: "I promise to bring two esronim in two vessels," but he brought them in one, if after being told that he vowed to bring them in two vessel, he offered them in two, they are acceptable. If he brought them in one vessel, they are like two meal-offerings that became mixed together.13In that instance, as stated in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 11:29, the law is that if one can take handfuls of each individually, they are acceptable. If not, they are not.
If one says: "I promise to bring a meal-offering," he should bring one of the five types of meal-offerings that can be either vowed or pledged.14See Chapter 12, Halachah 4, for a description of these meal-offerings. If he says: "I promise to bring meal-offerings," he should bring two15Since he used the plural, at least two offerings are required. of the five types of meal-offerings.16The Kessef Mishneh suggests that the word "types" is a printing error, because even if he brought two of the same type of meal-offering, he fulfilled his obligation. The Radbaz, however, initially explains that the Rambam's wording could be interpreted as being precise. Since the person said two meal-offerings, we can assume that he meant of two different types. Otherwise, he would have just vowed to bring one large meal-offering. Nevertheless, ultimately, the Radbaz rejects this interpretation and states that the Rambam's intent is "even of two types," i.e., he may bring two offerings either of one type or of two types. If he says: "I promise to bring a type of meal-offerings," he should bring two17Here also, since he spoke of "meal-offerings," using the plural, he is required to bring two. meal-offerings of one type.18For he said "a type," limiting him to only one type. If he says: "I promise to bring types of meal-offerings," he should bring two meal-offerings [coming] from two types.19Since he used the plural for both offerings and types, he should bring two offerings and they should be of two different types. Similarly if he says: "...types of a meal-offering," he should bring two types of meal-offerings.20One offering from each type, as in the previous clause. Hebrew grammar occasionally allows for a singular term to be used in a plural sense. The Kessef Mishneh notes that this matter is debated by Menachot 105a and a ruling is not reached. Hence he questions how the Rambam can require him to bring a second offering: If it is not required, he will be bringing ordinary flour into the Temple Courtyard (which is forbidden). Hence he maintains that the person must make a stipulation when bringing this offering: "If I am obligated to bring it, this is to fulfill my vow. And if I am not obligated, it is a freewill offering." If he specified that he would bring one type [of meal-offering] and forgot [which type he specified], he should bring all five types.21For in this way, he will certainly fulfill his vow.
A private individual22I.e., in contrast to the community at large. For there is no concept of a voluntary communal meal-offering and all the required communal meal-offerings have specific measures. should not bring more than sixty esronim [of flour] in one vessel as a meal offering. If he vowed more than sixty, he should bring sixty in one vessel and the remainder in a second vessel.23As indicated by the following halachah, it appears to be preferable that he bring sixty in one vessel and the remainder in the other, rather than dividing the sum evenly between the two.[The rationale is that] no more than sixty [esronim of flour] can be mixed together [with oil as one].24Even though oil is always mixed with the flour at a ratio of one log to every isaron (Chapter 12, Halachah 7), nevertheless, if there is a very large quantity of flour, it will be difficult to get a proper mixture. It is not an absolute requirement for [the flour and the oil] to be mixed together as we explained.25Chapter 13, Halachah 11. Nevertheless, our Sages said:26Menachot 18b; 103b. "Whenever a [meal-offering] is fit to be mixed [with oil], it is not an absolute requirement for it to be mixed. Whenever it is not fit to be mixed [with oil],27Because there is too large a quantity of flour. mixing it is an absolute requirement."28As long as the meal and the oil could be mixed together, the fact that they were not mixed together is not significant, because there is nothing inherently lacking in the mixture. If, however, they could not be mixed together, there is an inherent difficulty with the mixture, therefore it is disqualified. Note the parallels to the declaration made with regard to the firsts fruits mentioned in Bava Batra 82a.
If one says: "I promise to bring 121 esronim [as a meal offering]." He should bring 120 [esronim] in two vessels - 60 in each vessel - and one isaron in a third vessel.29I.e., he does not divide them into three equal portions.If he said: "I promise to bring an isaron," he should bring one isaron. "I promise to bring isaronim," he should bring two. If he specified [the number of esronim] he vowed and then forgot how many he specified, he should bring 60 esronim in one vessel.30For an individual meal-offering is never more than 60 esronim and if he had promised a lesser amount, bringing more will not disqualify his offering (Radbaz). If he forgot how many esronim he specified and which type [of meal-offering] he specified, he should bring 60 esronim of each of the five types [of meal-offerings].
If he specified his vow and forgot both how many esronim he vowed and the number of vessels in which he vowed to bring them, he should bring [the full range of] one to sixty esronim in sixty different vessels.31This is necessary, because as stated in Halachah 3, if a person vowed to bring two esronim in two vessels and he brought them in one, the offering is unacceptable. By bringing the full range of vessels from one to sixty, the person will certainly have included the entire number he vowed to bring. Any extra are considered as voluntary offerings.The Radbaz notes that there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in Menachot 13:2 and the opinion the Rambam quotes here is that of Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi. The Sages, however, differ and maintain that it is sufficient to bring one meal offering of 60 esronim. The Radbaz questions why the Rambam chooses to follow Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi's view, for it is a minority opinion. Moreover, he notes that in the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, he explicitly states that the halachah does not follow this view. The Radbaz explains that since the Talmud (Menachot 106a) tries to justify other teachings according to Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi's view, we can assume that it is accepted as halachah.What is implied? He should bring one isaron in the first vessel, two esronim in the second vessel, three in the third, until he brings 60 esronim in the last vessel. If he also forgot what type [of meal-offering] he designated, he should also brings [60 offerings] according to this pattern in 60 vessels of each type. Thus he will be bringing 1830 esronim from each type.
When a person says: "I promise to bring a meal-offering of barley,"32Which is unacceptable, because as stated in Chapter 12, Halachah 2, all the meal-offerings are brought from wheat except the meal-offering of a sotah and the omer offering. Those are obligatory offerings and cannot be vowed by a person."...a meal-offering of a half an isaron,"33Which is also unacceptable, because a meal-offering may not be less than an isaron (Chapter 12, Halachah 5). or "...a meal-offering without oil or frankincense,"34Such an offering is also unacceptable, for oil and frankincense are absolute requirements (Chapter 12, Halachah 7). he is exempt, because he did not vow an entity that is sacrificed.If he said: "I promise to bring a meal-offering35The difference between this and the previous clause depends on the precise Hebrew term used. If he said minchat ("meal-offering of"), as in the first clause he is not obligated at all, for the grammatical structure of the term is that of an adjective and the emphasis is on the words that follow. If, however, he used the term minchah ("meal-offering"), we assume that the fundamental intent of his vow was to bring a meal-offering. Since the specifics he mentioned were unacceptable, we ask him to clarify his intent. The Ra'avad does not accept this distinction, but the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain the Rambam's position. of barley," "...of lentils,"36Which is also unacceptable. Although Menachot103a debates whether a person could possibly err and think that a meal-offering from lentils is acceptable, from the resolution of that passage, it appears that such an error is plausible. "...a meal-offering without oil or frankincense," or "...a meal-offering of a half an isaron," we ask him [what his intent was]. If he says: "I only took the vow because I thought it was permissible to offer such [sacrifices]. Had I known that one could only offer a complete isaron of fine [wheat] flour together with oil and frankincense, I would not have taken a vow," he is exempt. If, [however,] he said: "Had I known [that such offerings were unacceptable], I would have taken a vow to bring [an offering] like those that are offered," he is obligated to bring an offering like those that are offered.
If he vowed to bring an isaron and a half37Based on the conclusion of the clause and the explanations in the previous halachah, the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh maintain that this law applies only when the person said: "a meal-offering (minchah) of an isaron and a half." and he said: "Had I known [that such offerings were unacceptable], I would have taken a vow to bring [an offering] like those that are offered," he must bring two [esronim].38For he obviously desired to bring more than one isaron. If he said: "I promise to bring coarse flour"39As stated in Chapter 12, Halachah 2, all of the meal-offerings are brought from solet, "fine flour," and not kemach, "coarse flour." This he is vowing to bring an entity that is never offered. or "I promise to bring a half an isaron" without mentioning the term "meal-offering," he is exempt.40The Ra'avad differs concerning this point and states that in this instance as well, he should be asked to clarify his intent, as mentioned in the previous halachah. It as if he never took a vow at all.Similarly, if one said: "I promise to bring a thanksgiving-offering without bread,"41See Chapter 9, Halachah 5, which includes the bread as an integral part of the thanksgiving-offering.or "...a sacrifice without its accompanying offerings,"42See Chapter 2 which explains that every sacrifice is offered together with wine, meal, and oil. he is exempt. If he said:43I.e., as in the previous halachah, he is asked about his intent (Kessef Mishneh). "Were I to have known that such offerings are not sacrificed, I would have taken a vow to bring [an offering] like those that are offered," he is obligated to bring [an offering] like those that are offered.
When a person says: "I promise to bring the bread of a thanksgiving-offering," He must bring a thanksgiving offering and its bread. [The rationale is that] it is known that the bread is never offered without the thanksgiving-offering and he mentioned merely the conclusion of the sacrifice.44We assume that this was intent when making the vow. The Radbaz explains that it is not even necessary to ask him to clarify his intent, since he mentioned the thanksgiving-offering when making his vow, we take for granted that this was what he meant to say. If he said: 'I promise to bring the bread to fulfill the obligation for so-and-so's thanksgiving offering," he should bring the bread for a thanksgiving offering together with the offering of his friend.
A person may vow or pledge to bring wine independently.45See Chapter 14, Halachah 1; Chapter 16, Halachah 14. One should not vow to bring a log of wine or two lugim,46See Halachah 14. for there are no libations that are [only] a log or two lugim.47As mentioned in Chapter 2, Halachah 4, the wine libations are 3, 4, or 6 log, depending on the animal offered. Nor should one vow five lugim, for five lugim are not fit for the libations of one animal or for those of two animals.48For no two offerings will reach a total of five. See also Halachah 14. One may, however, vow three, four, six, or more lugim,49For any number over six will be able to be broken up into multiples of 3,4, or 5, as stated in the following halachah [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 12:4)]. because they are fit for the wine libations for sacrificial animals.
What is implied? If a person vows seven [lugim], they are considered as the libations for a sheep and for a ram.50The libations for a sheep are three lugim and those for a ram are four. We assume that the person desired to bring them both. If he vowed eight, they are the libations for two rams; nine are the libations for an ox51Six lugim. and a sheep or those of three sheep. If he vowed ten, they are the libations for an ox and a ram or two sheep and a ram. Similarly, all numbers [can be seen as such combinations].
If he vowed to bring five lugim, we tell him: "Make it a complete six."52Which are the libations for an ox. [The rationale is that] he already established it as fit for a sacrifice.53Since libations of three and four lugim are brought, we assume that he did not want to make an empty statement. Hence, we ask him to increase the amount so that he will also be able to bring a valid offering. We do not reduce the amount, because there is an unresolved discussion in Menachot 104a if that is acceptable.If, by contrast, he vowed one log or two, he is exempt, for this amount or their components are not fit to be used as a libation.54Based on the ruling in Halachah 9 with regard to a meal-offering of a half an isaron, the Radbaz states that if one says: "a wine libation of one log," he should be asked to clarify his intent.Less than a log of oil should not be vowed or pledged, for there is no meal-offering smaller than an isaron and it requires a log of oil.55See Chapter 12, Halachot 5 and 7.
When a person says: "I promise to bring wine," he should not bring less than three lugim.56See Halachah 12. "I promise to bring oil," he should not bring less than a log.57See the previous halachah. If he specified a given amount in his vow and forgot how many lugim of wine or oil he specified, he should bring 140 lugim. For there is no day on which there are more communal offerings sacrificed than on the first day of Sukkot that falls on the Sabbath. On that day, the accompanying offerings included 140 lugim of oil and an equal amount of wine as will be explained in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim.58See Chapter 10, Halachot 3, 14, for the details of the number and types of animals sacrificed on that day. The wine and oil brought as accompanying offerings for these sacrifices totaled 140 lugim. We assume that a person would not vow or pledge a larger amount. The Radbaz clarifies that this ruling applies to a very wealthy person who can be assumed to have made a generous vow. A person of ordinary means, by contrast, should be required to pay the largest amount he could conceive of having pledged (see Hilchot Arachin 2:8-10).

=== 18 | chapter 18 ===
There is a positive commandment to offer all of the sacrifices - whether sacrifices of animals or fowl or meal-offerings - in [God's] chosen house,1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 84) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 440) include this commandment as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. as [Deuteronomy 12:14] states: "There you will perform everything that I command you." Similarly, it is a positive commandment for a person to take the effort to bring animal sacrifices2The Kessef Mishneh explains that this excludes sacrifices from fowl, but this understanding is not accepted by all authorities. that he is obligated to bring3Temurah 21a states that the firstborn offering is not included in this commandment. [and transport them] from the Diaspora to [God's] chosen house,4Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 85) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 453) include this commandment as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. The Ramban differs and maintains that this should not be considered as an independent mitzvah. as [ibid.:26] states: "[Only] your sacraments that you possess and your vows shall you bear... [to the place that God will choose]." According to the Oral Tradition, we have learned that [the verse] is speaking only about sacrificial animals from the Diaspora which he takes the effort to deal with until he brings them to [God's] chosen house.
One who offers a sacrifice outside the Temple Courtyard negates a positive commandment5The one stated in the previous halachah. and violates a negative commandment,6Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 90) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 186) include this prohibition as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. There are several historical dimensions to this prohibition. First of all, in the era between the destruction of the Sanctuary of Shiloh and the construction of the Temple, it was permitted to offer sacrifices on bemot (literally, "high-places"), i.e., individual altars. See the notes to Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 1:3 which explain the transition between these periods. It is also relevant with regard to the sanctuary constructed by Chonio, the son of Shimon the Just, described in the notes to Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:14. as [ibid. :13] states: "Take heed lest you offer your burnt-offerings in any place that you see." If he offered a sacrifice [in such a place] willfully, he is liable for karet,7Literally, the soul's being cut off. This involves premature death in this world (before the age of 50, Mo'ed Kattan 28a) and the soul not meriting a portion in the world to come (Hilchot Teshuvah 8:1). as [Leviticus 17:8-9] states: "[Any man]...who will offer a burnt-offering or a sacrifice, but did not bring it to the Tent of Meeting... he will be cut off from his people." [If he transgressed] unknowingly, he must bring a fixed8This term is used to distinguish this sacrifice from the adjustable guilt offering. See Hilchot Shegagot 1:4. sin-offering.
Similarly, one who slaughters sacrificial animals outside [the Temple Courtyard], even though he does not offer them as a sacrifice, [is liable].9Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 89) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 439) include this prohibition as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. If he acted willfully, he is liable for karet, as [ibid:3-4]: "[Any man]...who will slaughter an ox, a sheep, or a goat... it will be considered as [the shedding of] blood for that person. He has shed blood... He will be cut off." [If he transgressed] unknowingly, he must bring a fixed sin-offering.
Which source serves as a warning not to sacrifice outside [the Temple Courtyard]? [It is derived through] an association of verses. [Deuteronomy 12:14] states: "There will you offer your burnt-offerings" and it continues: "There you will perform everything that I command you." [We can conclude:] Just as [the Torah] warns explicitly against offering a sacrifice outside the Temple, and one incurs punishment for this, as it is written: "Take heed lest you offer your burnt-offerings...," so too, it has warned with regard to the "performance" that is involved in slaughtering, for which it is explicitly stated that one receives punishment. For the Torah does not prescribe punishment unless it has issued a warning.
A person who slaughters sacrificial animals outside [the Temple Courtyard] and offers them [in such a place] is liable twice: once for slaughtering and once for offering.10This applies even if he performed both transgressions without realizing the prohibitions involved in the interim, for they are two separate transgressions that are not dependent on each other (Radbaz).If he slaughtered [a sacrificial animal] in the Temple Courtyard and offered it outside, he is liable for offering it. If he slaughtered [such an animal] outside, but offered it inside, he is liable for slaughtering it.
He is not liable unless he slaughtered sacrificial animals that are fit to be offered on the altar. If, however, he slaughtered an animal that was forbidden [to be offered on] the altar11I.e., the animals mentioned in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach. or one of the sin-offerings that was consigned to death12See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 4:1 for a definition of this term. outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is exempt.13It is, however, forbidden to do so. [The rationale is that Leviticus 17:414The source for this prohibition, as stated in Halachah 3.] mentions "before the Sanctuary of God." Whenever [an animal] is not fit to be come to the Sanctuary of God, one is not liable [for its slaughter].
If one slaughters an animal that is unacceptable because of a time factor involving its body15See the following halachah. or the status of its owners16See Halachah 9. outside the Temple Courtyard], he is exempt.17It is, however, forbidden to do so. [The rationale is that] in its present state, it is not fit to be brought into the Temple Courtyard.18The prohibition involves slaughtering sacrificial animals and since these animals are not fit to be sacrificed or their owners are not fit to sacrifice them, they are not considered sacrificial animals in the full sense.
What is meant by a disqualifying time factor involving its body? An animal in the seven days following its birth,19See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:8 which states that it is a positive commandment to offer sacrificial animals after eight days of life, but not before. turtle-doves which have not reached the stage of development at which time [they are fit to be sacrificed],20See ibid.:2 which states that "Turtledoves are acceptable when [their feathers all] are of a golden hue." Before this stage, they are not acceptable (ibid.:9). and an animal and its offspring; for if one slaughters one on a particular day, the other is not fit to be slaughtered until the morrow.21See Hilchot Shechitah 12:1-2 which states that it is forbidden to sacrifice an animal and its offspring on the same day. No matter which is slaughtered first, one must wait until the following day to sacrifice the other.
What is meant by a disqualifying time factor involving the status of its owners? A sacrifice whose owners have not reached the appropriate stage of time to offer it.What is implied? If a zav,22A person with a physical affliction somewhat similar to gonorrhea that renders one ritually impure and obligates him to bring a set of sacrifices (see Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:1, 3-4; 2:1). a zavah,23A woman who bleeds for three consecutive days after the seven days associated with her menstrual period. This renders her ritually impure and obligates her to bring a set of sacrifices (see ibid. 1:1, 3-4,6) and a woman who gave birth24Who is ritually impure after giving birth and must bring a set of sacrifices (see ibid. 1:1, 3, 5). slaughtered [the animal designated for] their sin-offerings outside [the Temple Courtyard] during the days of their counting,25As explained in the above sources, a zav and a zavah must wait seven "spotless days" after their condition ceases before bringing their sacrifices. A woman must wait 40 days after giving birth to a male and 80 days after giving birth to a female before bringing her sacrifices. they are exempt. Similarly, if a person afflicted with tzara'at26A skin affliction similar to, but not identical with leprosy that is a spiritual manifestation of the impurity resulting from improper speech (the conclusion of Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at). Such a person must bring a set of sacrifices when emerging from ritual impurity (see Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:1, 3-4). slaughtered his sin-offering and[/or] his guilt-offering outside [the Temple Courtyard] during the days of his counting,27Such a person must also wait seven days after his condition ceases before bringing his sacrifices. he is exempt, for the owners of these sacrifices are not yet fit for their atonement. Nevertheless, if these individuals slaughtered their burnt-offerings28The sacrifices of all of these individuals include a burnt-offering and a sin-offering and the sacrifice of a person emerging from tzara'at also includes a guilt-offring. outside [the Temple Courtyard] during the days of their counting, they are liable. [The rationale is that] a burnt-offering is a present29To appease God and restore His favor. and it is the sin-offering and the guilt-offering which are the fundamental [factors leading to] atonement.Similarly, when a nazirite slaughters his sin-offering outside [the Temple Courtyard] during the days of his nazirite vow, he is exempt.30See Hilchot Nezirut, ch. 8, for the details regarding the sacrifices a nazirite must bring upon completion of his nazirite vow. He may not bring these sacrifices beforehand. If he offered his burnt-offering or his peace-offering outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is liable. For the sin-offering is what prevents him [from completing his nazirite vow] and it is the fundamental dimension [of the conclusion of] his nazirite vow.
When a person offers a conditional guilt-offering31See Hilchot Shegagot, Chapter 8, for a description of the situations which warrant bringing these sacrifices. or sin-offering of fowl that is brought because of a doubt32See Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:7 which describes the situations under which such sacrifices should be brought. outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is exempt. [The rationale is that] it was not definitely established that a prohibition [was violated].33With regard to these sacrifices, it is possible that it will be discovered that the person definitely did sin. In such an instance, the sacrifice is not offered. If the sacrificial animal has not been slaughtered, it is left to pasture until it contracts a blemish. If it was slaughtered, its blood is poured down the drainage channel. Since there is a possibility of this taking place, the animal is not deemed a sacrificial animal in the full sense and one is not liable for slaughtering it or offering it.The Ra'avad accepts the Rambam's ruling with regard to a sin-offering of fowl brought because of a doubt since only its blood is offered on the altar, but not its body. Hence, there is room to free one from the obligations involved with a sacrificial animal. Nevertheless, he argues, a conditional guilt-offering is offered on the altar. Hence one should be liable for slaughtering and offering it outside the Temple. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh question the Ra'avad's objection, noting that the Rambam's ruling has its basis in Keritot 18a. When a guilt-offering for one afflicted by tzara'at was slaughtered outside [the Temple Courtyard], but not for the desired intent, [the one who slaughters it] is liable. [The rationale is that] since [when such a sacrifice is] not [slaughtered] for the desired intent in [the Temple Courtyard], it is deemed appropriate and acceptable, as will be explained.34As stated in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 15:1, with the exception of a sin-offering or a Paschal sacrifice, whenever a sacrificial animal was slaughtered for the sake of an offering other the one for which it was intended, it is acceptable, but it does not fulfill the obligation of the owner (see also ibid.:20). Since the sacrifice would be acceptable if it was offered in the Temple, the person is liable for slaughtering it outside.Whenever one is exempt for slaughtering a sacrificial [animal] outside the [Temple Courtyard], one is also exempt for offering it there.
[The following rules apply if] one slaughters the two goats offered on Yom Kippur35The goat sent to Azazel and its pair whose blood is taken into the Holy of Holies. See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 1:1. outside [the Temple Courtyard]. Before [the High Priest] recites the confessional over them,36More precisely, the confessional is recited only over the one sent to Azazel (ibid. 4:2).The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that the matter is dependent not only the confessional, but on the lottery in which the goats are designated for their respective purposes. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that the Rambam's ruling is based on Zevachim 113a. Although there are other interpretations of that passage, the Rambam has a foundation for his decision. he is liable for both of them,37Or for either of them, were he to slaughter only one. since [they are both] fit to come before God for the confessional. After [the High Priest] recited the confessional, one is exempt for slaughtering [the goat] that is sent [to Azazel], because it is no longer fit to come before God [as a sacrifice].
When one slaughters [animals designated as] peace-offerings outside [the Temple Courtyard], before the gates of the Temple building are opened, he is exempt, for a [necessary] deed is lacking. [Only] afterwards are they fit to be offered before God, as we explained.38See Chapter 5, Halachah 5, which states that the gates to the Temple building must be open for the slaughter of peace offerings to be acceptable.One who slaughters a Paschal sacrifice outside [the Temple Courtyard] - even during the other days of the year, whether for the sake of the Paschal sacrifice or for another purpose39The Kessef Mishneh emphasizes that this applies only during the remainder of the year. The rationale is that as explained below, during the remainder of the year, an animal designated as a Paschal sacrifice is considered as a peace-offering and a peace-offering is not disqualified if it is not offered for the desired intent. On the day preceding Pesach, when the Paschal sacrifice is offered, it is unacceptable if it is not offered for the desired intent. Hence on that date, were someone to slaughter an animal designated for this purpose for the sake of another sacrifice outside the Temple Courtyard, he would not be liable. - is liable. [The rationale is that] during the remainder of the year, a Paschal sacrifice [that is offered] is considered as a peace-offering.40See Hilchot Korban Pesach 4:7. Since it is considered as a peace-offering, just as one is liable for slaughtering an animal designated as a peace-offering outside the Temple Courtyard, so too, he is liable for slaughtering such an animal.
When the fetus [being carried by] an ordinary animal was consecrated [as a sacrifice for] the altar, it is forbidden to slaughter [the mother] outside [the Temple Courtyard].41Since the fetus it is carrying will later be offered as a sacrifice, it is forbidden to cause that sacrifice to be disqualified. If he slaughtered it, he is not liable for lashes, because it42Neither the mother nor the fetus. is not fit to come before God [as a sacrifice].
When one stole [an animal] and consecrated it, and afterwards, slaughtered it outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is liable.43Even though the animal did not belong to him and hence, he had no right to consecrate it, our Sages considered it as his own so that he would be liable for karet. See Gittin 55b. The Kessef Mishneh raises questions on the Rambam's ruling based on that passage, but Rav Yosef Corcus resolves the Rambam's decision. From which time was it considered in his property with regard to his being liable for karet for it? From the time he consecrated it.[The above applies] provided he slaughtered it after [the owner] despaired of its return. [If he slaughtered it] before then, by contrast, the consecration is not effective.44For then it is still considered as belonging to the owner. Hence, the thief's consecration is not effective. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:7 which speaks of the disqualification of a thief's offering. From Hilchot Geneivah 2:6, it appears that the thief must have also consecrated the animal after the owner's despair and not before. Otherwise, the consecration would not be effective.
If the entire body of the animal was outside [the Temple Courtyard] and its neck was inside and one slaughtered it, he is liable,45Karet or lashes for slaughtering the animal outside the Temple Courtyard. as [Leviticus 17:3] states: "[Any man]...who will slaughter an ox, a sheep, or a goat in the camp or who will slaughter outside the camp... [and he has not brought it as an offering]." This applies whether the one who slaughters is standing in the Temple [Courtyard] and the animal's neck was inside, but the remainder of its body was outside, or its body was inside and its neck was outside. He is liable unless the animal was entirely within the Temple [Courtyard], as [implied by ibid.:9]: "And he will not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting."46The Kessef Mishneh notes that Zevachim 107b uses this prooftext to teach the following concept: that one who slaughters on the roof of the Temple Building is exempt. Hence he suggests that a printing error crept into the Mishneh Torah and that the text should be amended to fit the Talmud's teaching. This conception is not, however, shared by all authorities. If, however, one slaughters on the roof of the Temple Building, even though it is not fit for sacrifice at all,47See Chapter 5, Halachah 4. he is exempt.48For he did not slaughter the animal outside the Temple Courtyard.
Two people who held a knife and slaughtered [a sacrificial animal] outside [the Temple Courtyard] are exempt,49Note the contrast to Chapter 19, Halachah 12, with regard to offering an animal as a sacrifice. for [the prooftexts] say "who will slaughter" "or who will slaughter"50The verses use a singular form. [implying] one and not two.51The commentaries note that although the Rambam's ruling has a source in Zevachim 108a and in the Sifri, his process of exegesis is different than that used in those sources.When one slaughters a sacrificial animal outside [the Temple Courtyard] even though he had no intention of sacrificing this animal to God,52But instead was slaughtering it for mundane purposes. he is liable.53In this as well, there is a contrast to offering an animal as a sacrifice, as stated in Chapter 19, Halachah 1. This is [implied by the prooftext]: "It will be considered as [the shedding of] blood for that person. He has shed blood."54Here also, the Rambam's method of exegesis is different from that of his apparent source, Zevachim 108b. Significantly, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 13:3), he cites the method of exegesis used by the Talmud. [One can infer that] even if [the person slaughtering] thinks of the blood [from the sacrificial animal] as blood that was shed55Literally, "poured out." and not as a sacrifice, he is liable.
A person who slaughters [a sacrificial animal] outside [the Temple Courtyard] at night is liable, since slaughtering an animal56I.e., an ordinary animal, not one designated as a sacrifice. is acceptable at night. Similarly, if, at night, one offered as a sacrifice [an animal] he slaughtered at night outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is liable for offering it as a sacrifice.57The Ra'avad maintains that the person is exempt in such a situation. The Radbaz justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that there is a fundamental difference between slaughtering an animal inside the Temple Courtyard and slaughtering it outside. When it is slaughtered inside the Temple Courtyard at night, it is disqualified as a sacrifice, because of it having been slaughtered at night and hence, it is not acceptable wherever it was offered. If, by contrast, it was slaughtered outside the Temple Courtyard, it becomes placed in the category of animals slaughtered in such a place. Hence the time when it is offered is not significant. The Kessef Mishneh also justifies the Rambam's approach.If, however, one slaughtered [a sacrificial animal] inside [the Temple Courtyard] at night and offered it as a sacrifice outside,58Even during the following day (Kessef Mishneh). he is exempt. [The rationale is that] he offered merely an unacceptable article,59See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:6. for there is no conception of acceptable slaughter in the Temple at night.60See Chapter 4, Halachah 1. Similarly, if one received [the blood of a sacrificial animal] with an ordinary vessel61This disqualifies the sacrifice, for as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 1, the blood of a sacrificial animal must be received in a sacred vessel. inside [the Temple Courtyard], but poured it [on an altar] outside, he is exempt.62For the animal was no longer acceptable as a sacrifice.
Similarly, when a person performs melikah on a fowl outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is exempt.63For the prooftext defining the prohibition (Leviticus 17:3  mentions slaughter, but not melikah (Zevachim 107a). If he offered it [as a sacrifice there], he is exempt. If he performs melikah on a fowl inside [the Temple Courtyard], but offered it outside, he is liable for offering it.64This is equivalent to slaughtering an animal inside the Temple Courtyard and offering it outside.If one slaughtered [a fowl] in [the Temple Courtyard]65Thus disqualifying it, for in the Temple Courtyard, a fowl should be killed through melikah not ritual slaughter. and offered it outside, he is exempt, for he offered something that is not fit to be offered. If he slaughtered the fowl outside [the Temple Courtyard] and offered it outside, he is liable twice,66Both for slaughtering and for offering. because slaughtering a fowl outside [the Temple Courtyard] is acceptable. It is comparable to performing melikah inside.

=== 19 | chapter 19 ===
A person who offers a sacrifice outside [the Temple Courtyard] is not liable unless he brings [the sacrificial animal] to the top of the altar that he constructed outside [the Temple]. If, however, he offered it on a stone or a rock, he is exempt, for the term sacrifice applies only when [an animal is offered] on an altar, even if it is outside [the Temple], as [indicated by Genesis 8:20]: "And Noah built an altar." He is not liable unless he offers the sacrifice to God, as [Leviticus 17:9] states: "...to offer it to God," i.e., unless his intent is for God.1I.e., if he offers it for the sake of a person without designating him as a deity, but merely as a token of appreciation, he is not liable.
One is liable only for offering an entity that is fit for the fire2In contrast to an entity which is eaten, as stated in Halachah 4. and for the altar,3Excluding sacrifices that are not offered on the altar, as mentioned in Halachah 7. for example, a burnt offering, as [ibid.:8] states: "who will offer a burnt-offering or a sacrifice." [One may infer:] Just as a burnt-offering is fit to be offered on the fires, so too, everything that is fit to be offered on the fire is what one is liable for offering outside [the Temple Courtyard].
On this basis, [our Sages] said that individuals [who perform the following services] outside [the Temple Courtyard] are liable: One who throws the blood, offers on the pyre the limbs of a burnt-offering, the parts of an animal offered on the altar,4This applies with regard to all sacrifices, even sacrifices of a lesser order of sanctity. Since these parts are offered on the altar in the Temple, one is liable for offering them outside the Temple (Radbaz). a handful [of meal], or frankincense,5Both the handful of meal taken from the meal-offering and the frankincense from that offering are offered on the altar in their entirety (Chapter 13, Halachah 12). or incense,6This is offered on the inner altar twice daily (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 2:11). the meal-offering of a priest,7Which is offered on the altar in its entirety (Chapter 12, Halachah 9). or the meal-offering within the accompanying offerings8See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. or one who pours a libation of three lugim9For a wine libation is never less than three lugim. See the following halachah. of wine or of water.10The Radbaz and Kessef Mishneh maintain that one is liable for pouring water on an altar only during the holiday of Sukkos, for only then is water offered on the altar in the Temple. The Radbaz does clarify that this is not necessarily apparent from the Rambam's wording. Indeed, on the contrary, from the following halachah, one could infer the opposite. [This is derived from ibid.:9:] "He did not bring it [to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting] to offer it." [Implied is that] any [sacrifice] that would be accepted within [the Temple Courtyard] causes one to be liable for [offering] it outside.
If, however, one throws the remainder of the blood [of a sacrificial animal] - even the remainder of the blood [from a sin-offering whose blood was offered] inside [the Sanctuary],11This refers to the sin-offerings that were burnt. See Chapter 5, Halachah 11. he is exempt. [The rationale is that] throwing the blood on the altar is the remaining aspect of the mitzvah and is not an absolute necessity.12I.e., the fundamental aspect of pouring the blood is the sprinkling of the blood on the altar - or in the Temple Building - each sacrifice according to its laws. Pouring out the remainder of the blood on the base of the altar is not of fundamental importance and the sacrifices are acceptable even if it is not performed. Hence, it is not considered as an act of significance for which one is liable.Similarly, one who pours a libation of less than three lugim of wine or water outside [the Temple Courtyard] is exempt, whether during Sukkot13When the water libation is offered. See the notes to the previous halachah. or throughout the year. Since the required measure is lacking,14For three lugim is the smallest wine libation offered (see Chapter 17, Halachot 12, 15). Similarly, the water libation offered on Sukkot is three lugim (Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:7). they are not fit to be accepted within [the Temple]. Similarly, one who offers from the meat of a sin-offering, that of a guilt-offering, or that of a peace-offering whether of an individual or of the community or from the remainder of the meal-offerings, the two breads [offered on Shavuot], or the showbread outside [the Temple Courtyard] is exempt. [The rationale is that] all of these are fit to be eaten, not for the fires [of the altar].
One who offers an entire animal outside [the Temple Courtyard] is liable, because of the portions offered on the altar. Even though they have not been separated, the meat of the sacrifice is not considered as an intervening substance15In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 13:5), the Rambam explains that the rationale is that we follow the principles that two entities that are the same substance are never considered as intervening substances. and it is as if he offered those portions on the pyre alone. In contrast, if one offers a meal-offering from which a handful [of meal] has not been separated, he is exempt. [Even though he would have been liable for the handful], the handful is not a distinct and discrete entity. If he separated [the handful] and then it was mixed back into it and he then offered the entire [measure] outside the Temple Courtyard, he is liable.
One who pours oil [over a meal-offering], mixes the meal and oil, breaks up the wafers, salts them, waves them, approaches an altar with them, arranges a table for showbread, cleans the lamps of a candelabra, separates a handful [of meal], or receives the blood [of a sacrificial animal] outside [the Temple Courtyard] is exempt. [The rationale is that] all of these are not activities that complete the offering [of the sacrifice] and [the prooftext] says: "Who will offer a burnt-offering or a sacrifice." [One may infer:] Just as offering [these sacrifices] is the final stage of the service [involved with them], so too, one is liable only for activities that are the final stage of sacrificial service.
When one burns a red heifer outside the place where it is required to be burnt16The red heifer should be slaughtered on the Mount of Olives, as stated in Hilchot Parah Adumah 3:1-2. or if one offers, outside [the Temple Courtyard], the goat that is sent [to Azazel]17As stated in Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 3:7, the goat sent to Azazel was pushed off a mountain cliff in the desert outside of Jerusalem. after the confession was recited over it,18See Chapter 18, Halachah 11. he is exempt. [The rationale is that the prooftext] says: "He did not bring it to the entrance of the Tent of Meeting." [One may infer:] One is not liable for any sacrifice which is not fit to be brought to the entrance to the Tent of Meeting.19I.e., the Temple. This excludes offerings like the above which, though they are consecrated, are not offered in the Temple.In contrast, one is liable for offering [outside the Temple Courtyard] sacrificial animals that were disqualified, if they were disqualified in the Temple. What is implied? [Sacrificial meat or blood] that remained overnight [without being offered], they were taken out [of the Temple Courtyard], they became impure, or they were disqualified because of the intent of the person sacrificing them, all are required to be burnt20Radbaz notes that Zevachim 109a mentions sacrifices disqualified for other reasons. He explains that the Rambam does not mention them here, because here he is speaking in general terms. They are detailed in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim where he discusses the particulars pertaining to these laws. as will be explained in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukkdashim.21See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim, ch. 19, which mentions the obligation to burn sacrifices that were disqualified for all these reasons. If a person transgressed and offered [such entities] as sacrifices outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is liable. [This is derived from the prooftext]: "...to offer it to God." One is liable for any [entity] that is are fit to be offered to God and these are fit to be offered to God.22As explained in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim, ch. 3, if sacrificial meat or blood was brought to the top of the altar after being disqualified for these reasons, it should be offered on the altar's pyre.
Whenever there is a substance for which one is liable for offering it outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is liable for offering an olive-sized portion of it outside.23Any lesser amount is not considered significant. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 14:10. [This applies] whether he offered [a portion of the entity] inside [the Temple Courtyard] first, left over an olive-sized portion and then offered it outside or left the entire entity inside and took an olive-sized portion and offered it outside. If, however, [the size of] the sacrificial entity was decreased in the slightest way24I.e., a portion of it was lost or burnt. inside the Temple Courtyard and then the remainder was offered outside, he is exempt.
What is implied? If a portion of the handful [of meal offered on the altar], the frankincense, the portions of a sacrifice offered on the altar, a burnt-offering, a meal offering that is burnt,25This refers to a meal offering brought by a male priest, the meal offering of the High Priest, and the meal component of the accompanying offerings (Zevachim 13:4). and the wine libations was decreased within [the Temple Courtyard] and the remainder was offered outside [the Temple Courtyard], he is exempt. [This is derived from the prooftext which states:] "to offer it." [Implied is that] he is liable for a complete entity, but he is not liable if it is lacking.26For the prooftext states "it," and this implies that the entity must be complete. If one removed [the sacrificial entity] from the Temple Courtyard while it was complete, its [size] was decreased outside [the Temple Courtyard] and then he offered it [there], there is an unresolved question [whether he is liable]. Therefore [a transgressor] is not given lashes.
If, [outside the Temple Courtyard,] one offered a limb that did not have an olive-sized portion of meat on it, but the bone itself caused it to reach the olive-sized measure, he is liable, because the meat is connected to the bone. If salt caused [the sacrificial entity] to reach the olive-sized measure, there is an unresolved question [whether he is liable].27Note a similar ruling in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 3:10. Therefore [a transgressor] is not given lashes. A burnt-offering and the portions of the innards of a burnt-offering28We have translated the text according to its straightforward meaning. Nevertheless, the Radbaz states that this ruling applies, not only to a burnt-offering and its own innards, but even one that is combined with the innards of another sacrifice. Thus he maintains that one is liable for combining the meat of a burnt-offering, not only with the innards of a burnt-offering, but also with the innards of a peace-offering. that are offered on the altar, can be combined to complete an olive-sized portion [to cause one to be liable].29For they are part of the same type of offering and are both offered on the altar in their entirety.
If one offered [a portion of a sacrifice outside the Temple Courtyard] and then offered another portion of it, he is liable for every individual limb.30Provided he was notified of the transgression between the offering of each particular limb (Radbaz, based on Hilchot Shegagot 6:2). If he sprinkled its blood [outside the Temple Courtyard] and then offered its limbs, he is liable twice. For the Torah made a distinction between [offering blood and offering limbs as indicated by the two prooftexts] "Who will offer a burnt-offering" and "to offer it."31The fact that the Torah uses two prooftexts implies that two different prohibitions are involved. The prooftext "to offer it" refers to both the prohibitions against slaughter and against sprinkling the blood and the prooftext "who will offer it" refers to the prohibition against offering the limbs on the altar (Radbaz and Kessef Mishneh, thus resolving the questions raised by the Ra'avad).If one offered a limb that was lacking [in substance], he is exempt,32The Ra'avad objects to this ruling, noting that the previous halachah stated that a person is liable if the combination of a portion of a limb and the portions of the innards offered on the altar equal an olive-sized portion. This indicates that a limb need not be whole. The Kessef Mishneh and others, however, justify the Rambam's ruling. as [one can infer from the prooftext] "to offer it." [This indicates] that one is liable [only] for a complete [limb].
When two people slaughter [a sacrificial animal outside the Temple Courtyard], they are exempt.33This law has already been stated in Chapter 18, Halachah 16. Indeed, there are some who considered its inclusion here as a scribal error. If two people hold a limb [from a sacrificial animal] and offer it outside the Temple Courtyard], they are liable. [The rationale is that the prooftext states] "Every man34The original Hebrew repeats the word ish meaning man, implying that even two men can be held liable for the same activity. who will offer a burnt-offering." Implied is that even two people who offer [a sacrifice] are liable.
If a person makes several of the required sprinklings [of blood] outside [their appropriate place], he is liable.35Even though he did not complete the required service associated with the sacrifice, as long as he sprinkled the blood on an altar once, he is liable. A person who receives the blood of a sin-offering36The Rambam is quoting the wording of the mishnah (Zevachim13:6). Nevertheless, according to his understanding, this law applies to the blood of other sacrifices as well. in one cup and applies it to an altar outside [the Temple Courtyard] and then applies it to the altar inside [the Temple Courtyard],37He is liable even if he does not apply the blood to the altar inside. The Rambam mentions the application of the blood inside only to emphasize that offering the blood properly does not remove the liability that was already established. he is liable for the portion applied outside [the Temple Courtyard]. [The rationale is that] the entire amount was fit to be offered inside.38Hence if he offers any of it outside first, he is liable. The fact that he does not offer the entire amount outside is not significant. As long as a portion is offered outside, he is liable.If he applied it to [the altar] inside and then applied it outside, he is exempt, for [the blood he used] was merely remnants.39I.e., the offering was completed through the application of the blood to the altar inside. Although the remainder of the blood should also have been dashed on the altar, that is not an absolute requirement. Hence one is not liable for offering such blood outside the Temple Courtyard. If, however, he received the blood in two cups, he is liable whether he applied both of them outside [the Temple Courtyard], [the first] outside and the other inside, or [the first] inside and the other outside.40The Ra'avad takes issue with the Rambam regarding the latter point, explaining that Zevachim 112a states that one is exempt in the latter instance. Since the blood was first offered inside, the sacrifice is acceptable and the fact that later blood was also offered outside is not of consequence. The Radbaz explains that, according to the Rambam, that rationale applies when the blood was offered inside according to all of its specifications. In this instance, however, the Rambam is speaking about a situation where the applications of the blood to the Temple altar were not completed. Hence, the blood in the second cup is still significant.
When one offered a handful [of meal] or the frankincense from the meal offering41See Chapter 13, Halachot 12-13, which describe the offering of the meal-offering. outside [the Temple Courtyard], or offered one inside and the other outside, he is liable. Similarly, with regard to the two bowls of frankincense from the showbread,42See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:2 for a description of the offering of the showbread. if one offered [the first] outside the [Temple Courtyard]43Even though the offering is not complete until both bowls of frankincense are offered (ibid.:3), one is liable for offering even one of them outside. or [the first] inside and the second outside, he is liable.
If a person slaughtered consecrated animals in the present era and offered them outside the Temple Courtyard, he is liable, because [the sacrifices] are fit to be offered inside. For it is permitted to offer sacrifices even though the Temple is not built, because [when the Temple was] consecrated originally, it was consecrated for the immediate time and for all future time.44See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:15-16 for an explanation of these concepts. See also ibid. 2:4 which states that as long as the altar is built in its appropriate place sacrifices may be offered even though the Temple is destroyed. Based on Zevachim 59a, the Radbaz states that even if the altar is not built, sacrifices can be offered on its site. Indeed, he writes that it is only because the gentiles do not allow us that we do not offer communal sacrifices in the present age. (Communal sacrifices may be offered while ritually impure.)Based on this rationale, after the conquest of Jerusalem in 5727 (1967), the Lubavitcher Rebbe advised his chassidim to leave the holy city on the day before Pesach. The rationale is that the Paschal sacrifice may also be brought while ritually impure. Now anyone who is close to Jerusalem on the day before Pesach and does not bring a Paschal sacrifice is liable for karet. Although many factors are involved and the Rebbe did not advise his followers to actually bring a sacrifice, he felt it necessary that precautions be taken so that they would not be held liable for not bringing the offering. This situation persisted for several years until the Rebbe felt that the Jewish control of the Temple Mount was weakened to the point that it would be impossible to bring an offering.
[A Jew] who slaughters sacrificial animals belonging to a gentile outside [the Temple Courtyard] is liable.45For slaughtering these animals outside the Temple Courtyard. As the Rambam proceeds to explain, this is speaking about a situation where the gentile desires to offer the sacrifice to God. Similarly, one who offers them outside [the Temple Courtyard is liable].Gentiles are permitted to offer burnt offerings to God in all places,46Zevachim 116b notes that the passage prohibiting the slaughter of sacrificial animals outside the Temple Courtyard begins: "Speak to the children of Israel," implying that the prohibition applies only to them. provided they sacrifice them on a raised structure that they build.47This license applies in the present era as well. It is forbidden to help them [offer these sacrifices] or act as agents for them, for we are forbidden to sacrifice outside [the Temple Courtyard]. It is permitted to instruct them and teach them how to sacrifice to the Almighty, blessed be He.
