=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
The months of the year are lunar months, as [implied by Numbers 28:14]: "... the burnt offering of the month when it is renewed,"1The concept of a renewal each month is relevant regarding lunar months, but not with regard to solar months. For the moon is not seen for a day or two each month, while the sun shines continually every day throughout the year. and [Exodus 12:2]: "This month shall be for you the first of months."2Although the implication to a lunar month in this verse is not as obvious as in the former verse, there is an explicit teaching from our Sages indicating a connection, as the Rambam proceeds to explain. [Concerning this verse,] our Sages commented:3Mechilta D'Rashbi on the above verse; see also Midrash Tanchumah, Shemini, sec. 8; Menachot 29a. The Holy One, blessed be He, showed Moses in the vision of prophecy an image of the moon and told him, "When you see the moon like this, sanctify it."The years we follow are solar years, as [implied by Deuteronomy 16:1]: "Keep the month of spring."4Sanhedrin 13b (cited by the Rambam, Chapter 4, Halachah 1) explains that this verse is a charge to arrange the calendar so that the vernal (spring) equinox always falls in the month of Nisan.
How much longer is a solar year than a lunar year? Approximately eleven days.5The Rambam speaks in more precise figures in Chapter 6. At present, he is speaking in general terms to give an outline of the how the Jewish calendar is structured. Therefore, [to correct the discrepancy between the lunar and the solar calendars,] when these additional days reach a sum of 30 - or slightly more, or slightly less - an additional month is added, causing the year to include thirteen months. This is called a full year.[This is necessary,] because it is impossible to have a year with twelve months and an odd number of days, as [implied by Numbers 28:14]: "... of the months of the year." [On this verse, our Sages6Megillah 5a. commented:] "You count the months of a year, but not the days of a year."
The moon becomes hidden and cannot be seen for approximately two days - or [slightly] less or slightly more - every month: approximately one day before its conjunction with the sun at the end of the month, and one day after its conjunction with the sun, [before] it is sighted in the west in the evening.7As explained in the notes to Chapter 11, when the sun, the moon, and the earth are aligned in a straight line in that order, the moon reflects the sun's rays directly back to it, and no light can be seen from the earth. This is called the conjunction of the sun and the moon. Afterwards, the moon proceeds in its orbit away from the sun, and within approximately one day's time it will have moved a sufficient distance for it to reflect a small crescent of light to the earth. This crescent will always be sighted first in the western portion of the sky, close to the horizon.The commentaries note that Rosh HaShanah 20b states that the moon cannot be seen for twenty-four hours every month. Aruch HaShulchan (Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh, sec. 88) explains that there is no contradiction to the Rambam's statements here. There are twenty-four hours every month in which it is impossible to see the moon. There is in addition, however, approximately one day every month when the probability of seeing the moon is very low.The first night when the moon is sighted in the west after being hidden is the beginning of the month. Afterwards, 29 days are counted from that day. If the moon is sighted on the night of the thirtieth [day], the thirtieth day will be Rosh Chodesh [of the following month].If it is not sighted, Rosh Chodesh will be on the thirty-first day, and the thirtieth day will be included in the previous month. There is no need [to sight] the moon on the thirty-first night; whether or not [the moon] is sighted [the new month begins that night]. For there are no lunar months longer than thirty days.
When there are twenty-nine days in a month, [because] the moon was sighted on the thirtieth night, the month is called chaseir, ["lacking"]. If the moon is not sighted and the previous month has thirty days, the month is called me'ubar ["pregnant"] or malei ["full"].When the moon is sighted on the thirtieth night, the moon is said to have been sighted at the appropriate time. When the moon is sighted on the thirty-first night, but not on the thirtieth night, the moon is described as having been seen on the night of its fullness.
The [establishment of Rosh Chodesh] based on the sighting of the moon is not the province of every individual,8I.e., in contrast to the Sabbath, a person who thinks that he has sighted the moon may not begin counting the days of the new month on his own initiative. Rather, he must go to the Sanhedrin and present his testimony to them, and it is they who decide whether or not to begin the new month. (Note the Rambam's comments in Sefer HaMitzvot , Positive Commandment 153, where he elaborates on this theme.) as is the Sabbath [of the weekly cycle]. [In the latter instance,] everyone counts six days and rests on the seventh day.[The sanctification of the new month,] by contrast, has been entrusted to the court.9I.e., the Sanhedrin, the High Court that held sessions in Jerusalem until the Temple's destruction, and afterwards was located in various cities throughout Eretz Yisrael. [The new month does not begin] until it has been sanctified by the court, and it is the day that they establish as Rosh Chodesh that is Rosh Chodesh. [This is implied by the verse,] "This month will be for you...," - i.e., the testimony [concerning the new month] will be entrusted to you.10As explained in Rosh HaShanah 22a, this command was addressed to Moses and Aaron. The words "to you" are seemingly unnecessary. Thus, they are interpreted to mean that just as this command is being given to you, so too, the fulfillment of it in subsequent times will be the responsibility of men like you - i.e., the judges of Israel's High Court. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 8, which mentions an application of this principle. See also Chapter 5, Halachah 1.)
The [High] Court would make calculations in a manner resembling11Rav Kapach explains that the Rambam chose his wording exactly. The calculations of the High Court merely "resembled the calculations of the astronomers." In truth, however, they operated under a different system. As the Rambam explains in Chapter 17, Halachah 24, the prophets and the descendants of the tribe of Issachar had a method of calculating the movement of the sun, the moon, and the stars, which had been transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai. Although this method resembled the method of calculations employed by gentile scholars, it was unique and different. (See also the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 2:8.)This method of calculation was lost to our people shortly after the composition of the Mishnah. Subsequent texts, including the Rambam's own system of calculation, as explained from Chapter 11 onward, were based on Greek sources. the calculations of the astronomers, who know the location of the stars and their paths [in their orbits]. They would perform careful research to determine whether or not they would be able to sight the moon at the appropriate time - i.e., the thirtieth night.If [the judges] determined that it was possible to sight [the moon], they would sit waiting for witnesses [to come and testify] throughout the entire thirtieth day. If witnesses came, and [the court] examined their testimony according to law, and verified the truth [of their statements], the court would sanctify [the new month]. If [the moon] was not sighted, and witnesses did not come,12Because the moon was covered with clouds or for other similar reasons. (See Chapter 18, Halachah 1.) they would complete the thirtieth day, thus making the month full.If, according to their calculations, [the judges] knew that it was impossible for the moon to be sighted, they would not sit [in session] on the thirtieth day, nor would they await [the arrival] of witnesses. If witnesses came, they would know that they are false witnesses, or that clouds appeared to them in a form resembling the moon, but it was not the real moon.
It is a positive commandment of the Torah13See Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 153) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 4), which consider this to be one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. for the court to calculate and determine whether or not the moon will be sighted, to examine witnesses until the moon can be sanctified, and to send forth [messengers] to inform the remainder of the people on which day Rosh Chodesh was observed,14The Rambam mentions three activities imperative on the court in fulfillment of this mitzvah: the calculation of the time for the sighting of the moon, the examination of the witnesses, and the notification of the Jewish people.It is interesting to note that the structure of Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh represents somewhat of a departure from the Rambam's usual style of presentation in the Mishneh Torah. He generally begins by citing a mitzvah and the proof-text from which it is derived, and afterwards he describes it. In this instance, the Rambam begins by describing the basic ground rules for the sighting of the moon, and afterwards he explains the mitzvah that is associated with this sighting.Rav Kapach suggests that this approach could have been taken in reaction to the position of Rav Sa'adiah Gaon, who maintains that the fundamental aspect of determining the calendar was not the sighting of the moon, but rather the calculations of the Sages. See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Rosh HaShanah 2:6). so that they will know the day [on which to celebrate] the festivals [as implied by Leviticus 23:2]: "that you will pronounce as days of holy convocation,"15As stated in the conclusion of Chapter 2, this verse is an indication that the determination of the days on which the festivals are to be celebrated - and thus the establishment of the monthly calendar on which the former depends - was entrusted to the Jewish High Court. and [as implied by Exodus 13:10]: "And you shall observe this statute in its appointed season."16This verse refers to the Paschal sacrifice and teaches us that there is an obligation to "observe this statute," bring the Paschal sacrifice, "at its appointed time" - i.e., in the spring. This alludes to the second dimension of this mitzvah, the establishment of leap years so that the holiday of Pesach will always fall in the spring.Note the Ramban (Hasagot to Sefer HaMitzvot, Shoresh 1), who cites opinions that consider these two dimensions - the establishment of Rosh Chodesh and the decision whether to observe leap years - as two separate mitzvot.The Rambam's citation of this proof-text has attracted the attention of commentaries because of another difficulty. In Menachot 36b, the meaning of this verse is the subject of a difference of opinion between Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yosse HaG'lili. While the simple meaning of the phrase "this statute" is the Paschal sacrifice - and this is the interpretation of Rabbi Akiva - Rabbi Yosse HaG'lili interprets the phrase as referring to the mitzvah of wearing tefillin.What is significant is that in the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam cites both the interpretations of Rabbi Akiva (in this halachah) and that of Rabbi Yosse HaG'lili (Hilchot Tefillin 4:10) as Torah law. The commentaries (see Radbaz, Vol. V, Responsum 1693) explain that this is indicative of a general pattern within the Mishneh Torah. The Rambam's intent in composing the Mishneh Torah was to provide us with a text of Torah practice, not a source book explaining the derivation of Torah law. He refers to verses only when they are necessary as supports. Therefore, in each instance he cites the proof-text that has the most obvious connection to the law or principle he is referring to, although it is possible that there is another verse from which this law was actually derived.
The calculations and the establishment of the months and the leap years is carried out only in Eretz Yisrael [as implied by Isaiah 2:3]: "For out of Zion will emerge the law, and the word of God [will emerge] from Jerusalem."17See Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., where the Rambam explains the connection of this mitzvah - and the Jewish people as a whole - to Eretz Yisrael in stirring terms.If a great sage who received semichah18The ordination conveyed upon the Sages from Sage to Sage, in a chain that began with Moses himself. (See Hilchot Sanhedrin, Chapter 4.) in Eretz Yisrael left for the diaspora without leaving a colleague of equal stature in Eretz Yisrael, he may make calculations, establish the monthly calendar, and institute leap years in the diaspora.19Yevamot 122a relates that Rabbi Akiva journeyed to Neharde'a for this purpose, and from the narrative in Berachot 63a, it would appear that Chanina, Rabbi Yehoshua's nephew, lived in Babylon and ordained the order of the calendar from there for several years.If, however, it becomes known to him that a sage of his stature has arisen in Eretz Yisrael - and surely, if a sage of greater stature has arisen in Eretz Yisrael - it is forbidden for him to establish [the monthly calendar] and [institute] leap years in the diaspora.20Berachot, ibid., states that the Sages of Eretz Yisrael ordered Chanina to stop ordaining the calendar, because "the kids that you left behind have grown and become billy-goats with horns" - i.e., the Sages who were once on a lower level of understanding had matured and achieved a par with him. If he transgresses, and [attempts to structure the calendar in this manner], his actions are of no consequence.21The Rambam is speaking about the era when the beginning of the new month was determined through the testimony of witnesses. The use of the fixed calendar we follow at present is discussed in Chapter 5.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The only testimony that is acceptable with regard to [the sighting of] the new [moon] is that of two1For all evidence must be substantiated by the testimony of two witnesses, as implied by Deuteronomy 19:15 which states, "The testimony of a single witness will not stand." See Hilchot Edut, ch. 5. adult males2Both these concepts are implied by the Hebrew word anashim. who are fit to testify regarding all matters.3See Hilchot Edut, Chapters 9-10, 12-14. Women and slaves,4Who are not acceptable for testimony in court (Hilchot Edut 9:2,4). The slaves referred to here are "Canaanite slaves," gentiles purchased as slaves. A Jewish servant, eved ivri, may give testimony in court on this and other matters. by contrast, are like other unacceptable witnesses and may not testify.When a father and a son both see the new moon, they should both go the court to testify. Not because testimony regarding the [the sighting of] the new [moon] is acceptable [from witnesses who are] related, but because one of them may be disqualified because he is a thief or for other reasons, and the other will be able to join with another person and give testimony.A person who is disqualified from serving as a witness by Rabbinical decree,5E.g., gamblers, usurers, and other individuals described in Hilchot Edut, Chapter 11. although he is acceptable according to the law of the Torah itself, may not serve as a witness with regard to [the sighting of] the new [moon].
According to the law of the Torah, there is no need to be precise regarding testimony about [the sighting of] the new [moon]. For even if the new moon was sanctified on the basis of the testimony of witnesses, and later it was discovered that those witnesses had perjured themselves,6More particularly, the term used by the Rambam, zomemim refers to witnesses who claimed that they saw the moon while they were located in a specific place at a specific time, and later it was proven that they had been in another place at that time. (See Hilchot Edut, Chapter 18.) [the new moon] remains sanctified.7See Halachah 10.Accordingly, in the early generations, testimony regarding [the sighting of] the new [moon] was accepted from any Jew [without further enquiry], for any Jew can be presumed to be an acceptable witness unless one knows with certainty that he is unacceptable. When the followers of Baithos8Avot D'Rabbi Natan 5:2 relates that Antigonus of Socho had two talented students, Tzadok and Baithos. When Antigonus taught: "Do not be like students serving a master in order to receive a reward," they turned away in disgust, commenting, "Is it proper for a worker to toil the entire day without receiving any recompense?"They began splinter groups that rejected the core of Jewish practice and coveted material wealth. They found that they could not convince the majority of the people to reject the Torah entirely, so they adopted a different tactic. They claimed that they were true to Torah, but the only Torah that was Godly was the written law. The oral law, they maintained, was merely a human invention.This thesis was only a ruse to sway the people from the performance of the mitzvot. Accordingly, the Sages would refer to all those who deny the Torah and its tradition as Sadducees (from Tzadok) or Baithosees (from Baithos) [the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 1:3]. Not only did these individuals scorn Torah observance themselves, but they tried, as indicated by this halachah, to undermine the observance of the Jewish nation as a whole.Our translation follows the standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah. Many original printings and manuscripts state minnim, "non-believers," rather than "the followers of Baithos." Similarly, the Rambam's source, Rosh HaShanah 2:1, uses this term. Some consider this as a reference to the early Christians. began conducting themselves in a debased manner and would hire people9Rosh HaShanah 22b relates that the Sadducees paid witnesses 400 zuzim to testify falsely with regard to the sighting of the moon. to testify that they had seen the moon when in fact they had not, the court decreed that it would accept testimony regarding [the sighting of] the new [moon] only from witnesses whom the court knew to be acceptable. Moreover, they would examine and question their testimony.
Therefore, if the [High] Court did not know [the character of] the witnesses who sighted the moon, the inhabitants of the city where the moon was sighted would send other witnesses10The Rambam uses a plural term, implying that two character witnesses are required. This prerequisite is apparent from Rosh HaShanah 22b. The Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh HaShanah 2:1), by contrast, requires only one character witness. together with the witnesses who saw the moon to substantiate their character to the court, and inform [the judges] that they are acceptable [witnesses]. [Only] afterwards would the court accept their [testimony].
The court would make calculations in a manner resembling the calculations of the astronomers, and would know whether the position of the moon - when it would be sighted - would be to the north of the sun, or to its south,11As the Rambam states in his Commentary on the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 2:7, this refers to the latitude of the moon. This subject is explained in Chapter 16. if its [crescent] would be wide or narrow,12As the Rambam explains in his Commentary on the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the size of the moon's crescent grows as it moves further away from the sun. and the direction in which its corners would be pointed.13See Chapter 19 for an explanation of how the court can determine these matters.When the witnesses came to testify, they would ask them: "Where did you see [the moon]: to the north or to the south [of the sun]?", "In which direction were its corners pointed?", "How high and how wide did it appear to you?" If their replies were suitable, their testimony was accepted. If their replies were not suitable, their testimony was not accepted.
If the witnesses say, "We saw [the reflection of the moon] in water," or "...[its form] behind the clouds," or "...[its reflection] in a mirror," [what they] saw is of no [consequence], and this sighting cannot be used as the basis for sanctifying [the new moon].14To sanctify the moon, it is necessary to see the moon itself - and not its reflection - and to see it clearly, not as it is hidden by clouds. [The same law applies if the witnesses say,] "We saw a portion [of the moon] in the heavens, and a portion of [its form] behind the clouds," "...a portion [reflected] in water," or "...a portion [reflected] in a mirror."If one [potential witness says,] "I saw it and it appeared to me approximately two storeys high," and another [potential witness] says, "It was three storeys high," their testimonies may be combined15Although there is a discrepancy between them, the two testimonies are not considered to contradict each other, since it is possible for a person to err slightly in making such an estimation. [and the moon sanctified on this basis]. If, however, one says "It was approximately three storeys high," and the other says, "It was approximately five storeys high," their testimonies may not be joined together.16For this discrepancy is too great for the two to be considered a single statement. Either one of them, however, may join together with another witness who gives identical testimony, or [who gives testimony] involving a discrepancy of merely one storey.
If witnesses say, "We saw [the moon] without concentrating our attention, and, afterwards, when we concentrated our attention with the intent of sighting it so that we could testify, we did not see it," this is not considered [valid] testimony, and it cannot serve as the basis for sanctifying [the new moon]. Perhaps clouds came together, and appeared like the moon, and afterwards became dispersed.17Rosh HaShanah 24a and 25a mentions instances where the conjunction of the clouds appeared to resemble the moon.If witnesses say, "We saw [the moon] on the twenty-ninth [day] in the morning in the east before sunrise, and [afterwards,] in the evening, we saw it in the west on the thirtieth night," their testimony is believed, and the moon can be sanctified on this basis. [The rationale is] that they saw [the moon] at its appropriate time. [Their testimony] about [what they thought] they saw in the morning is disregarded. We need not pay any attention to what they saw in the morning, for it is obvious that it was the conjunction of clouds that appeared to them as the moon.18The Rambam's statements are based on his interpretation of the difference of opinion between Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri mentioned in Rosh HaShanah 2:9. (See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah for a detailed analysis of this matter.)Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri maintains that the witnesses' testimony should be disregarded, because it cannot possibly be true. Everyone knows that, at the beginning of the month, the moon always appears on the western horizon for a brief period after the setting of the sun. At this time of the month, seeing it in the morning, before sunrise, is impossible. (See Chapters 15 and 17 for an explanation of this phenomenon.) Since the testimony of these witnesses contains an obvious error, the testimony should be disregarded entirely.Rabban Gamliel, as his opinion is explained by the Rambam, was aware of this astronomical concept as well. Nevertheless, in the instance mentioned in the Mishnah, he knew that according to the calculations, it would have been possible for the moon to have been sighted on the night mentioned by the witnesses. Why then, he argued, should their testimony be discounted entirely because of the error they made regarding the morning. The fact that then, they mistook the condensation of clouds for the moon should not cause their testimony to be disregarded entirely.Similarly, if [witnesses claim] to have seen the moon at its appropriate time, but it was not seen on the thirty-first night, their [testimony] is believed. For what is significant for us is only the sighting [of the moon] on the thirtieth night.19This represents a parallel difference of opinion mentioned in Rosh HaShanah (op. cit.). Rabbi Dosa ben Hyrkanos maintains that it is impossible for the moon to be sighted on one night, and then for it not to be sighted on the following night.Rabban Gamliel (as his position is explained by the Rambam in his Commentary on the Mishnah) accepted the witnesses' testimony in this instance, because he knew that, according to the calculations, it was possible for the moon to be sighted on the thirtieth night. The fact that it was not sighted again on the thirty-first night was merely a matter of circumstance: no one was trying to see it, their view was obstructed by clouds, or the like.
What is the process through which the testimony regarding the sighting of the moon is accepted? Anyone who saw the moon and is fit to testify20I.e., there is no benefit to be derived from a witness whose testimony will not be accepted by the court because of his conduct - e.g., a transgressor, a gambler, or a usurer. should come to the court. The [judges] should bring them all to a single place,21Rosh HaShanah 23b states that there was a large courtyard in Jerusalem called "the house of Ya'azak" where the witnesses would gather. and should make a large feast for them, so that people will come regularly. The pair [of witnesses] who arrive first are examined first according to the questions mentioned previously.22In Halachah 4. The one of greater stature is invited [into a private chamber] first and asked these questions. If his testimony is accurate according to [the data that the court arrives at through] calculations, they invite his colleague in. If their statements are comparable,23See Halachah 5. their testimony is substantiated.[Afterwards,] the remaining pairs are asked questions of a broader nature. [In truth,] their testimony is not required at all, [and they are being asked] only so they will not depart disheartened, so that they will come frequently [in the future].24The Rambam (based on Rosh HaShanah 2:7) is communicating an important lesson in human dynamics. Since the court might need these witnesses in the future, it is important that they feel that consideration is shown to them, and that their coming was not futile.
Afterwards - i.e., after [the witnesses'] testimony is substantiated - the head of the court declares, "It has been sanctified." And all the people respond, "It has been sanctified. It has been sanctified."A minimum of three judges is required to sanctify the new moon.25Rosh HaShanah 25b derives this concept as follows: The commandment "This month shall be for you..." was addressed to both Moses and Aaron, implying that at least two judges are necessary. A court must be composed of an odd number of judges, and hence a third judge is required. Similarly, the calculations [regarding the moon's position] must be made by three judges. The new moon is sanctified only when it is sighted at its appropriate time.26I.e., as the Rambam continues to explain, for the new month to be sanctified, the moon must be sighted on the thirtieth night, the witnesses must testify on the thirtieth day, and the court must declare the month to be sanctified - all before sunset of that day. Moreover, the moon is sanctified only during the day.27Based on Psalms 81:4-5, Rosh HaShanah 25b draws an equation between the sighting of the new moon and the delivery of a judgment. Just as a judgment may be delivered only during the day, so too, the mitzvah of the sanctifying the new moon applies only by day. If it was sanctified at night, the sanctification is of no consequence.Furthermore, even if the court and the entire Jewish people saw the moon, but the court did not declare that "It has been sanctified"28In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 3:1, the Rambam explains that one might think that since the court and the entire Jewish people saw the moon, there was no need to sanctify the new month. Therefore, as he concludes in this halachah, it is necessary to emphasize that it is the sanctification of the court that establishes the new month, and not the sighting of the moon alone. before the nightfall beginning the thirty-first day, or if the witnesses were cross-examined, but afterwards the court was not able to declare that "It has been sanctified" before the nightfall beginning the thirty-first day,29Rosh HaShanah (loc. cit.) explains that although a decision regarding a monetary case may be rendered at night if the testimony was received by the court during the day, this concept does not apply regarding the sanctification of the new month. The court must actually sanctify the new month during the day. it should not be sanctified,30Based on Chapter 3, Halachot 15-18, it would appear that the Rambam's intent is that, since the new month was not sanctified at its appropriate time, the court endeavors to have the witnesses' testimony disqualified. If, however, the witnesses' testimony is substantiated despite the court's efforts, the month can be sanctified retroactively. and the month should be full. Despite the fact that the moon was sighted on the thirtieth night, it is the thirty- first day that will be Rosh Chodesh. For [the sanctification of the new month] is not established by the sighting of the moon, but by the court that declares, "It has been sanctified."31As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 5, the mitzvah of sanctifying the new month has been entrusted to the court.
If the court themselves see [the new moon] at the conclusion of the twenty-ninth day, before a star has emerged on the thirtieth night, the court may declare, "It has been sanctified; it has been sanctified,"32Rosh HaShanah 25b explains that this teaches us that hearing the testimony of the witnesses is not more effective than the actual sighting of the moon itself. for it is still day.33In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Rosh HaShanah 3:1), the Rambam writes that although the sun has set, the night does not begin until the appearance of the stars, and it is still possible to sanctify the new moon.(The Rambam's wording in this halachah and in the related portions of his Commentary on the Mishnah have raised questions concerning his conception of the limits of the day, the night, and the intermediate period referred to as beyn hash'mashot. See the Radbaz (Vol. V, Responsum 1379), the Ralbach, the Or Sameach and others, who address themselves to this issue.)It is also significant to mention that Rashi (Rosh HaShanah, loc. cit.) and others differ with the Rambam's interpretation of the Mishnah, and consider it as referring to the sighting of the moon at the conclusion of the thirtieth day, on the eve of the thirty- first.If [the judges] sight the moon on the night of the thirtieth day after two stars have appeared,34From this time onward, they can no longer sanctify the new month on the basis of their sighting alone. Instead, the procedure outlined by the Rambam must be followed. [they should adhere to the following procedure]. On the morrow, two other judges join one of the three [to form a court]. The other two [judges] then testify before [this court] of three, who then [sanctify the new month].
Once the court sanctifies the new month, it remains sanctified regardless of whether they erred unwittingly, they were led astray [by false witnesses], or they were forced [to sanctify it].35Significantly, instead of mentioning the court as being forced to sanctify the month on the wrong day, Rosh HaShanah 25a states "even if they purposefully sanctified the moon on the wrong day" - i.e., they accepted the testimony of witnesses even when they knew that it was flimsy. The Rambam chooses not to mention such an instance, and instead quotes the Mechilta D'Rashbi and the Sifra. We are required to calculate [the dates of] the festivals based on the day that they sanctified [as the beginning of the new month].Even if [a person] knows that [the court] erred, he is obligated to rely on them,36Rosh HaShanah 2:10 relates that once Rabbi Yehoshua differed with Rabban Gamliel concerning the acceptance of the testimony of witnesses with regard to Rosh HaShanah. Since Rabban Gamliel was the head of the High Court, his opinion was accepted. To emphasize the importance of following the necessity for uniform adherence to the decisions of the court, Rabban Gamliel ordered Rabbi Yehoshua to appear before him carrying his staff and his wallet on the day that Rabbi Yehoshua thought should be considered as Yom Kippur.After consulting with his colleagues, Rabbi Yehoshua obeyed Rabban Gamliel's instructions. Afterwards, Rabban Gamliel honored Rabbi Yehoshua for his humility and deference to the court's authority. for the matter is entrusted to them alone. The One who commanded us to observe the festivals is the One who commanded [us] to rely on them, as [implied by Leviticus 23:2]: "Which you will pronounce as days of holy convocation."37אתם, meaning "which" in the above verse, can also mean "you," when vocalized differently. Thus, the authority of "you," the Jewish court to whom this matter is entrusted, is emphasized more powerfully (Rosh HaShanah, loc. cit.).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
When witnesses see the new [moon], and there is a journey of the night and a day or less between them and the place where the court holds sessions,1The Rambam does not say "a one-day distance from Jerusalem," because after the destruction of the Temple, the High Court would sanctify the new month in other places. (See Rosh HaShanah 22b.) they should undertake the journey and testify. If the distance between them is greater, they should not undertake the journey. For the testimony [that they will deliver] after the thirtieth day will be of no consequence,2Note the apparent contradiction in Halachah 15. In the light of that halachah, it would appear that the Rambam's intent is that since the court endeavors to nullify such testimony, it is undesirable for the witnesses to come and offer it (Lechem Mishneh). since the month will already have been made full.
The witnesses who see the new [moon] should journey to the court to testify even on the Sabbath, as [implied by Leviticus 23:2]: "[These are the festivals] you should proclaim in their season." Whenever [the Torah] uses the word "season," the Sabbath [prohibitions]3The Rambam is referring to the prohibitions associated with going beyond the Sabbath limits and the performance of any forbidden labors necessary for their journey - e.g., carrying food or weapons. may be overridden.Therefore, [the Sabbath prohibitions] may be violated only for the sake of Rosh Chodesh Nisan and Rosh Chodesh Tishrei,4Significantly, the month of Sivan is not mentioned, although the holiday of Shavuot is celebrated then. The celebration of Shavuot depends, not on a particular day of the month, but on the conclusion of the counting of the Omer. Thus when Rosh Chodesh was determined by the testimony of witnesses, Shavuot could be celebrated on the fifth, sixth, or seventh of Sivan (Rosh HaShanah 6b). to commemorate the festivals in their proper season. In the era of the Temple, [the Sabbath prohibitions] were violated for the sake of every Rosh Chodesh, because of the musaf offering sacrificed on Rosh Chodesh,5See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:1,4, Hilchot Korban Pesach 1:18. since its [sacrifice] supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions.6The sacrifice of any offerings associated with a fixed time supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions.
Just as the witnesses who see the new [moon] should violate the Sabbath [to testify], so too, the witnesses who substantiate their credibility7I.e., the character witnesses mentioned in Chapter 2, Halachah 3. should violate [the Sabbath to accompany] them, if the court is not familiar with the witnesses.Even if only a single individual can testify regarding the witnesses, he should accompany them and violate the Sabbath,8This law is based on an actual historical account. Rabbi Nehorai traveled to Usha together with witnesses to substantiate their credibility, in the hope of finding another person there to testify together with him (Rosh HaShanah 22b). because of the possibility9The Perush questions why the Sabbath laws are broken when there is only a possibility of performing a mitzvah, citing a similar situation - a baby born after sunset on Friday. He should not be circumcised on the following Sabbath, because there is a doubt whether circumcision should be performed on Friday or on the Sabbath (Hilchot Milah 1:12).The subsequent commentaries offer several resolutions to this difficulty. Among them:a) Circumcision can be performed at a later date, while the sanctification of the new moon cannot be postponed (Lechem Mishneh);b) Traveling to Jerusalem to testify always involves violating the Sabbath laws with only a possibility of performing the mitzvah, for it is possible that the court will reject the witnesses' testimony (Rav David Arameah). that they might encounter another individual who can [testify] together with him.
When a witness who sighted the moon on Friday night is sick, he may be mounted on a donkey [and transported to the High Court].10Leading a healthy person on a donkey is not considered to be transporting him in violation of the Sabbath labors, because "a living being carries himself." If, however, the person is sick, this principle does not apply, and he is considered a burden, so that transporting him on a donkey involves a prohibition (Hilchot Shabbat 18:16, 20:1-2). Nevertheless, this prohibition is waived in the endeavor to sanctify the new moon. [Indeed,] even [if he is bedridden,] his bed [may be transported].11Rav David Arameah interprets this to mean that men are allowed to carry him to the court on his bed.If an ambush awaits them on the way,12Rashi, Rosh HaShanah 22a, relates that the Sadducees would lie in ambush for the witnesses, with the intent of delaying their appearance in court until after the thirtieth day had passed. the witnesses may carry weapons. If the distance [to the court] is long, they may carry food.Even if the moon was sighted [with a] large [crescent], and [one is certain that] it was also sighted by many others as well, he should not say, "Just as we saw [the moon], so did others, and there is no necessity for us to violate the Sabbath laws."13In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Rosh HaShanah 1:5), the Rambam explains that although the moon might be seen very clearly in one place, in other locales it might have appeared low on the horizon, or covered by clouds. Therefore, it is desirable for all potential witnesses to journey to Jerusalem to make sure that the new moon is sanctified in its proper time. Instead, every person who saw the new moon, who is fit to serve as a witness, and who is within a distance of the night and a day14I.e., there is sufficient time for the witness(es) to arrive at the High Court on the thirtieth day. or less is commanded to violate the Sabbath laws and go and testify.15In this vein, it is worthy to note a story related in Rosh HaShanah 1:6. Forty pairs of witnesses passed through Lod on their way to Jerusalem to testify regarding the sighting of the moon. Rabbi Akiva held them back, because he saw that their testimony would not stand up under cross-examination by the court. Rabban Gamliel rebuked him, explaining that this would prevent them from journeying to Jerusalem at a future date, when their testimony might be of consequence. (See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah.)
Originally, [the High Court] would accept testimony regarding the new moon throughout the entire thirtieth day. Once the witnesses were delayed and did not come until the evening. This created confusion in the Temple, and [the priests] did not know what to do:16More specifically, Rosh HaShanah 30b states that the problem concerns the song to be sung by the Levites in connection with the sacrifice. Had there not been a difficulty with the song, the afternoon sacrifice could have been offered conditionally: If no witnesses come, the lamb would be considered the afternoon sacrifice; and if the witnesses do come, it would be considered part of the musaf offering (Rishon LeTzion).Significantly, as reflected in the discussion in Rosh HaShanah (ibid.), the instance in question concerned the celebration of Rosh HaShanah, and not an ordinary Rosh Chodesh. If they would offer the afternoon sacrifice, [a difficulty would result] if witnesses [in fact] came, for it is impossible to sacrifice the musaf offering [of Rosh Chodesh] after the daily afternoon sacrifice.17For once the afternoon sacrifice is offered, no other offerings may be sacrificed (Pesachim 58b; Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 1:3).At that time, [the High] Court instituted the [following] edict: Testimony regarding the new moon would be accepted only until the time of minchah,18This refers to the time of the afternoon sacrifice, nine and a half seasonal hours (שעות זמניות) after sunrise (The Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 4:4, Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 1:3). so that there would be enough time in the daylight hours to offer the musaf sacrifices, the daily afternoon offering, and the wine libations [that accompany these sacrifices].
If the time of minchah arrives without witnesses having come, the daily afternoon offering should be sacrificed. If witnesses come after the time of minchah,19The Rambam is referring to Rosh HaShanah. this day should be observed as a holiday,20Indeed, the people would observe the day as a holiday from nightfall on the previous day, lest witnesses come and the new moon be sanctified (Rashi, Rosh HaShanah 30b). See Halachah 9, and Chapter 5, Halachah 8. and the following day should be observed as a holiday. The musaf offering, however, should be offered on the following day, because the new moon should not be sanctified after the time of minchah.After the Temple was destroyed,21And there were no longer any difficulties concerning the sacrifices. Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai and his court22Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai lived at the time of the Temple's destruction, and this decree was instituted shortly after that event. instituted a decree [requiring the High Court] to accept testimony regarding the new moon throughout the entire day. Even if witnesses come at the end of the thirtieth day before sunset,23The Lechem Mishneh and others have raised questions about the Rambam's choice of wording, based on his previous statements in Chapter 2, Halachah 9. Merkevet HaMishneh offers a simple resolution of this difficulty. Here we are speaking of the acceptance of the witnesses' testimony, and it is necessary to take time to cross-examine them. This process cannot be completed in the meager amount of time between sunset and the appearance of the stars. their testimony should be accepted and the thirtieth day alone should be considered a holiday.
When the court would make a month full because the witnesses did not appear on the thirtieth day at all, they would ascend to a previously designated place and hold a feast on the thirty-first day, which would be Rosh Chodesh.24The purpose of holding this feast would be to publicize that the month had become full.They would not ascend there during the [thirty-first] night, but rather at daybreak, before the sun rose.25Sanhedrin 70a relates that the participants in this meal would ascend in a time that is neither day nor night. Thus, the Rambam interprets this as referring to the time between the appearance of the first rays of the sun and sunrise itself. Rashi and others maintain that the participants would ascend in the evening, between sunset and the appearance of the stars. No fewer than ten men would ascend [to participate] in this meal. They would not hold this meal without bread made from grain and legumes, of which they would partake during the meal. This is the intent of all the sources that refer to the feast associated with the mitzvah of the full month.
Originally, when the court would sanctify the new moon, they would light bonfires26The fires would be lit in the evening of the thirty-first night. on the mountaintops to notify the people in distant places.27There are mountains surrounding Jerusalem on all sides. The bonfires on these mountains could be seen by people on further mountains, until in a short amount of time people throughout Eretz Yisrael could be notified that the new moon had been sanctified. When the Samaritans began conducting themselves in a debased manner and would light bonfires [at the wrong times] to confuse the people,28The Samaritans lived between Jerusalem and the Galilee. At one point, they desired to disrupt the calculation of the calendar and would light bonfires on the evening before the thirty-first day, regardless of whether or not the moon was sighted. The people in the Galilee would think that the chain of bonfires had begun in Jerusalem (Rosh HaShanah 22b). [the Sages] instituted the practice of having messengers journey to notify the people.29The Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh HaShanah 2:1) states that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi was the one who nullified the bonfires, and substituted messengers instead. This, however, is somewhat difficult to accept because, as the Rambam mentions in Halachah 9, there were times when the messengers were sent out while the Temple was standing. Perhaps the intent is that until the time of Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi there were times when both messengers were sent out and bonfires were lit. From his time onward, the bonfires were no longer used.These messengers may not violate [the sanctity of] the holidays, nor of Yom Kippur [by traveling on these days]. Needless to say, they may not violate [the sanctity of] the Sabbath. For one may not violate the Sabbath to uphold [the sanctification of] the new month, only to [actually] sanctify it.
Messengers are sent out [to inform the people] for six months: For Nisan, because of Pesach. For Av, because of the fast [of Tish'ah B'Av].30Rosh HaShanah 18b relates that in that era, fasting on the other commemorative fasts - the tenth of Tevet and the seventeenth of Tammuz - was not mandatory. Therefore, it was not necessary to send out messengers for these months. For Elul, because of Rosh HaShanah - i.e., so they could wait in readiness on the thirtieth day of Elul.31The Rambam maintains that the people would observe Rosh HaShanah for two days, because of the doubt. Thus, if the people did not know when the month of Elul began, they would have to observe three days (Lechem Mishneh). If it became known to them that the High Court had sanctified the thirtieth day, they would observe only that day as a holiday. If it did not become known to them,32This is speaking about the villages in the immediate vicinity of Jerusalem. they would observe both the thirtieth and the thirty-first days [as Rosh HaShanah] until the messengers of Tishrei arrived.For Tishrei, because of the festivals. For Kislev, because of Chanukah. For Adar, because of Purim.33The commentaries note that Rosh HaShanah 19b also mentions the possibility of the messengers' being sent out in the second month of Adar if a leap year is declared. This, however, is an infrequent event, because generally, the decision to make the year a leap year was not made at the last moment (Aruch HaShulchan). While the Beit HaMikdash was standing, [messengers] also would be sent out for the month of Iyar, because of the small Pesach.34Pesach Sheni, when all those who had not offered a sacrifice on the first Pesach were given a further opportunity to bring this offering.Messengers were not sent out for the month of Sivan, because the celebration of Shavuot is not dependent on the date of the month, but on the Counting of the Omer (Perush).
[Even when the moon was clearly sighted on the previous night,] the messengers for the months of Nisan and Tishrei would not depart35The messengers for the month of Tishrei could travel only 2000 cubits beyond Jerusalem (or 4000 cubits, if they made an eruv t'chumim) on Rosh HaShanah, because of the sanctity of that day (Perush). until the sun rose and they heard the court pronounce, "It has been sanctified."36Since the holidays observed in these months were prescribed by the Torah itself, this further stringency was required (ibid.). If, however, the court sanctified the moon at the conclusion of the twenty-ninth day, [which is possible,] as we have explained,37See Chapter 2, Halachah 9. and the messengers heard the court pronounce it sanctified, they might depart that evening.The messengers for the other months, by contrast, may depart in the evening after the moon has been sighted. Although the court has not sanctified the new month, since the new moon has been sighted, they may depart, for the court will surely sanctify the new month on the following day.
Wherever these messengers would arrive [before the celebration of the festivals], the holidays would be observed for [only] one day, as prescribed by the Torah. In the distant places, which the messengers would not reach [before the celebration of the festivals],38The observance of an additional day of the holidays is described in greater detail in Chapter 5. the holidays would be observed for two days because of the doubt [involved]. For they would not know the day on which the High Court established the new month.39Thus, if the thirtieth day following Rosh Chodesh Adar fell on the Sabbath, they would not know whether Pesach (the fifteenth day of the following month) would be celebrated on the Sabbath or on Sunday.
There are places where the messengers [sent out for] Nisan would arrive [in time for the celebration of Pesach], but the messengers [sent out for] Tishrei would not arrive [in time for the celebration of Sukkot].40For, as explained in the following halachah, the messengers sent out for Tishrei would not travel on Rosh HaShanah or on Yom Kippur.In the brackets, we mention the holiday of Sukkot, but not Yom Kippur. For Yom Kippur was never observed by a community at large for two days. Rosh HaShanah 21a relates that Rabbah would fast for two days, but this was a stringency that he accepted on himself as an individual. The people in the diaspora would fast ten days after the thirtieth day following Rosh Chodesh Elul, for the court always endeavored to make Elul a month of 29 days. (See Or Sameach.) According to [the letter of] the law, it would have been appropriate for them to observe Pesach for one day, since the messengers reached them and informed them when Rosh Chodesh had been established, and for them to observe Sukkot for two days, since the messengers had not reached them. Nevertheless, so that there would be no difference between the festivals, the Sages instituted the ruling that two days were celebrated [for all holidays] in all places that were not reached by the messengers for Tishrei. [This includes] even the festival of Shavuot.41As mentioned several times, Shavuot is unique, because its observance is dependent, not on a date in the month of Sivan, but on the Counting of the Omer, which begins after Pesach. Thus, even Jews living in the outer reaches of the diaspora were able to know when Shavuot was to be observed.
[How many more] days do the messengers for Nisan journey than the messengers for Tishrei? Two. For the messengers for Tishrei do not travel on the first of Tishrei, because it is a holiday, nor on the tenth, because it is Yom Kippur.42There is also the possibility of additional days, if there are more Sabbaths in Tishrei than in Nisan.
There is no need for there to be two messengers. Even a single individual's [statements] are believed. Moreover, this does not apply to messengers alone. Even when a [traveling] merchant of no particular distinction passes through on his journey, and says: "I heard from the court43From the Rambam's wording, it would appear that it is necessary that the merchant receive his information from the High Court directly; hearing from others is not sufficient. that it sanctified the new month on such and such a date," his statements are believed, and the [celebration of] the festivals is arranged accordingly.[The rationale is that] this is a matter that will [eventually] be revealed.44Rosh HaShanah 22b states that people will not lie about a matter when it is certain that eventually the truth will be revealed. Therefore, the testimony of a single acceptable witness is sufficient.45The commentaries compare the Rambam's statements here with those at the conclusion of Hilchot Gerushin. In the latter source, he employs the same rationale - that the truth of the matter will eventually be revealed - to explain why leniency is shown concerning testimony given to determine that a woman's husband has died, which enables her to remarry. In that instance, however, even greater leniency is shown, and the court accepts the testimony of witnesses who are otherwise unacceptable. The commentaries explain that the greater leniency is granted in consideration of the agonizing situation of the widow.
[The following rules apply when] the court held session throughout the entire thirtieth day, but witnesses did not arrive, [the judges] arose early in the morning and made the month full, as we stated previously in this chapter,46See Halachah 7. and after four or five days witnesses came from distant places and testified that they had sighted the moon at the appropriate time, the thirtieth night. [Indeed, the same principles apply if the witnesses] come at the end of the month.We unnerve them in a very intimidating matter, and we seek to disorient them with queries. We cross-examine them very thoroughly and are extremely precise regarding their testimony. [For] the court endeavors not to sanctify this month, since it has already been declared full.47The Rambam's statements in this and the following four halachot are based on his interpretation of Rosh HaShanah 20a. Significantly, his understanding of that passage differs from that of Rashi.
If the witnesses remain steadfast in their testimony, if it is compatible [according to the calculations of the court], if the witnesses are men whose character is well known, they are men of understanding, and if their testimony was scrutinized in a proper way - the moon is sanctified [retroactively]. We recalculate the dates of the month beginning from the thirtieth day [after the previous Rosh Chodesh], since the moon was sighted [on the appropriate] night.
If it was necessary for the court to leave the month full, as it was before the witnesses came, it is left as it is. This is what is meant by the statement,48Rosh HaShanah, op. cit. "The month is made full out of necessity49Note another interpretation of the expression, "The month is made full out of necessity," in Chapter 18, Halachah 11.." Some great Sages differ concerning this matter and maintain that the month is never made full out of necessity. Rather, if the witnesses come, the month is sanctified and they are not intimidated at all50This opinion is also mentioned in the above passage..
It appears to me51Generally, when the Rambam uses the expression "It appears to me" in the Mishneh Torah, he is introducing an original interpretation. In this instance, the resolution offered by the Rambam is also suggested by Abbaye in the above passage. Nevertheless, there is a certain justification for the use of the phrase, because there are other interpretations offered by the Talmud, and no conclusion is reached. Therefore, the Rambam's choice of the interpretation to follow was motivated by his own comprehension of the passage. that there is a difference of opinion among the Sages regarding this matter only in [the following circumstances]:a) The other months besides Nisan and Tishrei, orb) When witnesses come in Nisan and Tishrei after the holidays have passed, [all the festive practices] have already been observed, and the time to offer the sacrifices and observe the festivals has passed.When, however, the witnesses come in Tishrei and in Nisan before the middle of the month,52When Pesach and Sukkot are celebrated. One might ask why consideration was not given to the observance of Yom Kippur on the tenth of Tishrei.The Or Sameach offers the following resolution: Yom Kippur was observed for only one day in the outlying diaspora. The communities would assume that the moon had been sighted at its appropriate time, and they would observe Rosh HaShanah on the thirtieth day after Rosh Chodesh Elul, and Yom Kippur ten days afterwards. Thus, by accepting the witnesses' testimony, the court will have assured that a large portion of the Jewish people observed Yom Kippur on the proper date.Although this explanation has its advantages, it does not address itself to the observance of Yom Kippur in Eretz Yisrael, or to the sacrifices that had to be offered on that sacred day in the Temple. their testimony is accepted, and no attempt is made to intimidate them at all. For we do not attempt to intimidate witnesses who testify that they sighted at the appropriate time so that the month will be full.
We do, however, intimidate witnesses whose testimony has been disputed, and it appears that their testimony will not be upheld, and the month will be made full. We pressure them so that their testimony will be upheld and the month will be sanctified in its proper time. Similarly, when, before the new month has been sanctified, witnesses come to nullify53The Hebrew term used, lehazim, means to nullify their testimony by stating that, at the time they claimed to have seen the moon, they were in a different place from the place where they claimed to have sighted it. the testimony of the witnesses who saw the moon at its appropriate time, [the court] intimidates the witnesses who want to nullify the original testimony, so that the challenge will not be accepted and the new month will be sanctified at its appropriate time.54It would appear that, in both of the instances mentioned in this halachah, this law applies only when, according to the court's calculations, the moon should have been sighted on the thirtieth night.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
A leap year is a year that includes an additional month.1This month is added to juxtapose the lunar calendar upon which the months are based, with the solar calendar, which governs the years.The extra month that is added is always Adar,2The Mechilta (commenting on Exodus 12:2  states that just as when a month is made full the addition is made at the end of the month, so too, when a year is made full the addition is made at the end. (The year is considered as beginning in Nisan and ending in Adar.) and thus the year contains two Adarin: the first Adar and the second Adar.3Based on Hilchot Nedarim 10:6, it appears that the Rambam considers the first Adar to be the additional month of the leap year. The Tur and the Ramah (Orach Chayim 427:1) differ and consider the second Adar to be the additional month.In practice, Purim is always celebrated in the second Adar (Hilchot Megillah 1:12). There is a difference of opinion with regard to whether to commemorate birthdays, yahrzeits, and the like that took place in Adar of an ordinary year in the first or the second Adar of a leap year. The accepted custom in the Ashkenazic community is to commemorate them in the first Adar of a leap year (Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 221:3).Why is this month added? Because of the season of spring, so that Pesach will fall then, as [implied by Deuteronomy 16:1]: "Take heed the month of spring"4Based on this verse, Rav Sa'adiah Gaon considers the adjustment of the yearly calendar to be a separate mitzvah. The Rambam, by contrast, considers it one dimension of the mitzvah of establishing the calendar. [This command can be interpreted to mean, "Take heed] that this month falls in the spring season. Were the month [of Adar] not to be added [from time to time], there are times when Pesach would fall in the summer, and times [when it would fall] in the rainy season.
[An extra month is added,] making the year full, because of three factors: a) the vernal [spring] equinox;5In astronomical terms, the vernal equinox is defined as the entry of the sun into the constellation of Aries the ram (Chapter 9, Halachah 3). b) the ripening6We have translated the Hebrew word אביב as "ripening," as in Exodus 9:31. Because the agricultural cycle was so much an integral part of the calendar, the word אביב also means "spring" in Hebrew. [of the barley crop], and c) the blooming of the fruit trees.What is implied? When the court calculates7The calculations that the court would consider are outlined in Chapter 9. and determines that the vernal equinox will fall on the sixteenth of Nisan or later, the year is made full. The month that would have been Nisan is made the second Adar, and thus Pesach will fall in the spring. This factor [alone] is sufficient for the court to make the year full;8The Ra'avad (in his gloss on Halachah 16), the Ramah and others take issue with the Rambam on this point, maintaining that even when Pesach falls before the vernal equinox, another factor is necessary for a leap year to be declared. other factors need not be considered.
Similarly, if the court sees that [the barley crop] has not ripened, but that it is late in sprouting, or that the fruit trees that usually bloom at the time of the Pesach holiday have not bloomed, these two factors are sufficient,9Both these factors are, however, necessary. Neither in their own right is sufficient. and the year is made full, even though the vernal equinox will fall before the sixteenth of Nisan.10Based on Sanhedrin 13a,b, the Ramah (cited in the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh on Halachah 15) notes that our Sages required that the festival of Sukkot occur after the autumnal equinox. If the vernal equinox falls on the fifteenth of Nisan, it is possible that the autumnal equinox will not take place until the twenty-first of Tishrei, six days after Sukkot begins.Several different perspectives are offered to resolve this point. Among them: The Or Sameach maintains that the Rambam's text originally contained a reference to the autumnal equinox, and it was omitted by the later printers. Aruch HaShulchan, by contrast, maintains that, according to the Rambam, the entire discussion in Sanhedrin is not accepted as halachah. We are not at all concerned with the autumnal equinox; all that is significant is that Pesach fall after the vernal equinox.[The reason the year is] made full [because of these factors] is so that there will be [an abundant quantity] of ripened [barley] accessible, so that the wave offering of the omer can be brought from it on the sixteenth of Nisan,11See Leviticus 23:9-14; Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:3. and so that the fruits will bloom, as they always do in the spring.
There are three territories that are of consequence regarding the ripening [of the barley]: Judea, Transjordan, and the Galilee. If [the barley] ripened in two of these lands, but not in the third, the year is not made full.12The climates of these lands are different, and it is possible that the barley will have ripened in one land, but not in the others. If, however, [the barley] ripened in one of these lands, but not in the other two, the year is made full if the fruit trees have not bloomed.These are the primary grounds for making the year full, so that the years will follow the solar calendar.13As opposed to the factors mentioned in the following halachot.
There are other factors for which the court makes [the year full] in the case of necessity.14I.e., these factors are not associated with the juxtaposition of the lunar and solar calendars, but rather related to the celebration of the pilgrimage festival of Pesach in a complete manner. Among them: that the roads are not suitable,15Because they were damaged by the rains. and it is impossible for the people to make the pilgrimage. [In such an instance,] the year is made full, [to allow time for] the rains to stop and the roads to be fixed.That the bridges have been destroyed and there are rivers interrupting [the roads], and preventing the people [from continuing their journey]. The year is made full, so that the bridges can be fixed, lest the people endanger themselves and die.That the ovens for the Paschal sacrifice were destroyed by the rains,16The ovens were earthenware, and could be damaged by substantial rains. and thus there will be no place for [the people] to roast their Paschal offerings. We therefore make the year full, so that the ovens can be built and can dry [in the sun].That Jews from the diaspora who have left their homes have not arrived in Jerusalem. We make the year full, so that they will have the time to reach [Jerusalem].17The Jerusalem Talmud (Sanhedrin 1:2) states that an effort should be made to enable the entire Jewish people to celebrate the pilgrimage festivals in Jerusalem.
We do not, however, make the year full because of snow, nor because of a cold climate,18Rashi, Sanhedrin 12a, writes that these factors will make the people's journey to Jerusalem uncomfortable, but will not prevent them from making the journey. nor because of Jews from the diaspora who have not yet left their homes.[Similarly, the year is not made full] because of ritual impurity - e.g., when most of the people or most of the priests are impure.19In his commentary on the tractate of Sanhedrin (one of the few tractates of the Gemara on which the Rambam wrote a commentary), the Rambam quotes Rav Hai Gaon as explaining that this instance refers to a situation in which the people were impure because of contact with a human corpse, and no ashes from the red heifer remained to purify them. One might think that the year should be made full to enable the priests enough time to offer a new red heifer and prepare ashes. Therefore, our Sages feel it necessary to explain that this measure is not taken, and in this instance the Paschal sacrifice should be offered by a priest in a state of ritual impurity. The year is not made full so that they will be able to purify themselves and offer [the Paschal sacrifice] in a state of ritual purity.20On the one hand, an individual who is ritually impure may not offer the Paschal sacrifice at its appropriate time, but instead should offer it a month later, on Pesach Sheni. On the other hand, when the majority of the Jewish people, or the majority of the priests, are impure, the sacrifice should be offered in a state of ritual impurity. (See Hilchot Korban Pesach 7:1; Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:16.) Instead, they should offer [the sacrifice] while ritually impure. Nevertheless, if the year has been made full because of ritual impurity, it may be left full.
There are factors that, in and of themselves, are never sufficient cause to make the year full. They are, however, mentioned as contributing factors when a year must be made full so that [Pesach will fall after] the vernal equinox, because of [the barley that has not] ripened, or the fruit trees.These factors are: That young goats or lambs have not been born, or are merely few in number, or that young doves have not [matured to the point where they can] fly.We do not make the year full so that the goats and the lambs will be available for the Paschal sacrifices, and the doves will be available for the pilgrimage sacrifice,21Our Sages interpret Deuteronomy 16:16, "You shall not appear before God empty-handed," as obligating a person to bring an olah ("burnt") offering on the pilgrimage festivals. The Rambam maintains that doves could be brought for these offerings. (See Hilchot Chaggigah 1:1.) Other authorities differ, as explained in the commentaries on that halachah. or for those individuals22E.g., a woman who gives birth (Leviticus 12:8 , zavim (Leviticus 15:14 , and zavot (Leviticus 15:29 . It was customary for people living far from Jerusalem to delay offering the sacrifices they were obligated to bring until the pilgrimage festivals. who are obligated to bring doves as a sacrifice. Nevertheless, these are mentioned as contributing factors [to make] the year [full].
What does mentioning them as contributing factors [to make] the year [full] imply? The court says: "This year must be made full because the equinox falls late, or because [the barley] has not ripened and the fruit trees have not bloomed,23By mentioning both factors (the barley and the fruit trees), the Rambam indicates that he does not follow the perspective suggested by Rashi (Sanhedrin 11a), which states that the lack of lambs or doves coupled with either a delay in the ripening of the barley or the blooming of the fruit trees is sufficient cause to make the year full. and also because the young goats are small and the doves are frail."
The year can be made full only by [judges] who were invited [to participate in the deliberations].24See Sanhedrin 11a, which relates that Rabban Gamliel once invited seven members of the Sanhedrin to participate in the deliberations regarding whether or not to make a year full. He requested that they meet him in the loft of the court early the following morning. When an additional member of the court came, Rabban Gamliel protested and taught the Sages this halachah. What is implied? The head of the High Court25For a leap year can be declared only by the High Court, or by a court deputized by the High Court (Chapter 5, Halachah 1). tells [several] members of the court, "Be present at a particular place, where we will make calculations and decide whether or not it is necessary to make the year full" It is only those who were invited who [have the authority to] make [the year] full.How many [judges participate in the deliberations whether] to declare a leap year? We begin with three judges from the High Court who have received semichah. Should two [of these judges] say, "There is no need to sit to decide whether or not [the year] should be made full" [their opinion is accepted]. [Although] one [judge] says that they should continue their deliberations, his statements are of no consequence.If two [of these judges] say, "There is a need to sit [further] to decide whether or not it is necessary to make [the year] full" and the other [judge] says that they should not continue their deliberations, we add two of the judges who had been invited previously, and the discussion of the matter [is continued].
Should two [judges] say that it is necessary to make [the year] full, and three say that there is no necessity, [the opinion of] the two is of no consequence. If three [judges] say that it is necessary to make [the year] full, and two say that there is no necessity, two more [judges] who were invited are added to the court, and the subject is debated.These seven [judges should] arrive at a conclusion. If they all agree to make the year full, or not to make the year full, their decision is followed. If there is a difference of opinion among them, we follow the majority, whether to make the year full, or not to make the year full.It is necessary that the head of the High Court - i.e., the one who presides over the seventy-one [judges of the Sanhedrin] - be one of these seven. If [the three original judges] conclude26When there are fewer than seven judges in the court, a leap year is instituted only when the decision to do so is unanimous. Only when the court is expanded to include seven judges is a majority ruling accepted as binding (Rabbenu Chananel, Sanhedrin 10b). that it is necessary for the year to be made full, it should be made full, provided the nasi27I.e., the head of the court. is among the three, or consents [to their ruling].Concerning the institution of a leap year, the opinions of the lesser judges should be offered first.28Lest the lesser judges be intimidated after hearing the decision of the head of the court, and refrain from expressing their own opinion. Concerning the sanctification of the new month, we begin from the head of the court.29For the matter is more of a formality; the head of the court merely pronounces the month as sanctified.
Neither a king30Based on this ruling, Rabbi Akiva Eiger questions why King Chizkiyah was able to institute a leap year, as related in Pesachim 4:10. nor a High Priest should be [included in the group entrusted with deciding] whether or not to institute a leap year. A king [should not be included, lest he be influenced] by consideration for his soldiers and his wars.31Rashi (Sanhedrin 18b) states that the king would pay his soldiers a yearly salary, and therefore, by instituting an extra month, he would gain.The B'nei Binyamin explains that there is also a reason for a king to desire to refrain from instituting an extra month. Bridegrooms, those who have built new homes, and those who have planted vineyards are freed from army service for a year. If a leap year is instituted, they benefit. Therefore, if a sizable portion of the population fell into these categories, and men were required for the army, it would be preferable for the king not to institute a leap year.A High Priest should not be included because of the cold - i.e., he may choose not to institute a leap year so that Tishrei will not fall in the winter, and he would [thereby not] have to immerse himself five times on Yom Kippur [in such weather].
If the head of the High Court, the nasi, was on a distant journey, [the court] may institute a leap year only with the proviso that the nasi will consent. If the nasi comes and consents, the year is full. If he does not consent, it is not full.A leap year may be instituted only in the territory of Judea, for the resting place of the Divine Presence32I.e., the Temple in Jerusalem. Curiously, however, it does not appear that the Rambam requires the proceedings to be carried out in the Temple, or even in Jerusalem. is there, as [implied by Deuteronomy 12:5]: "And you shall seek out his dwelling" If a leap year is instituted in the Galilee, the year remains full.A year should be made full only during the day.33Sanhedrin 11b states that there is an equation between the institution of a leap year and the sanctification of the new moon. As mentioned in Chapter 2, Halachah 8, the new moon can be sanctified only during the day.Based on the equation between these two practices, the Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 4) questions the law mentioned previously: Why may the moon be sanctified throughout Eretz Yisrael (Chapter 1, Halachah 8) if a leap year may be instituted only in the territory of Judea? If it is made full during the night, it is not full.
The court has the authority to calculate, institute, and decide which year(s) shall be full whenever it desires, even several years in advance.34Sanhedrin 12a relates that once, when Rabbi Akiva was imprisoned by the Romans, he instituted three leap years for the future. Nevertheless, a particular year is not declared a full year until after Rosh Hashanah, at which time a public statement [can be] made [to the effect that] the year has been made full.35Shorshei HaYam cites the fact that the year can be declared a leap year well in advance, as support for the Rambam's thesis (Halachah 2) that the fact that Pesach would be celebrated before the vernal equinox is, by itself, sufficient cause to declare a leap year. At the beginning of the year, it is impossible to know the state of the barley harvest, or the fruit trees.[A leap year is announced at such an early date] only in a pressing situation.36Rashi (Sanhedrin, ibid.) relates that this refers to a situation when it was feared that the Romans would prevent the leap year from being instituted if the court waited for the usual time.Note the Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 4), which explains that an early declaration should be made only in a pressing situation. The court may, however, calculate months and even years in advance, even in cases where the situation is not pressing. If the situation is not pressing, the announcement that a leap year has been instituted is not made until the month of Adar. [At that time, the court announces,] "This year is a leap year, and the following month is not Nisan, but rather the second Adar" If a court announces before Rosh HaShanah, "The year to come will be a leap year" this announcement does not make the year a leap year.
If the thirtieth day of Adar arrived without the year having been declared a leap year, it should never be made a leap year.37I.e., although, as the Rambam continues, if they instituted a leap year on this date their ruling would be binding, at the outset they should not take such a step.Pesachim 4:10 relates that declaring a leap year on this date was one of the three acts performed by King Chizkiyah that did not find favor in the eyes of the Sages. For that date is fit to be Rosh Chodesh Nisan, and once Nisan begins without the year having been declared a leap year, [the court] no longer has that option. If, however, they declared a leap year on the thirtieth of Adar, their ruling is binding.If witnesses came after the leap year had been declared and testified regarding [the sighting of] the moon, the court sanctifies the new month on the thirtieth day, and makes it the Rosh Chodesh of the second Adar.38Retroactively, it appears that the thirtieth day was fit to be Rosh Chodesh Nisan, and therefore the institution of the leap year would not have been effective. Nevertheless, since in actual fact, the declaration of the leap year preceded the sanctification of the new month, it is effective. If they had sanctified the new month on the thirtieth day before they declared a leap year, they would not have been able to declare the leap year. For a leap year may not be declared in Nisan.
A leap year may not be declared in a year of famine39Sanhedrin 12a credits Elisha the prophet with the institution of this prohibition. when everyone is hurrying to the granaries to partake [of the new year's harvest] and derive vitality. [In such a situation,] it is impossible to prolong the time when the prohibition against eating from the new harvest [is in effect].40The prohibition of chadash prevents one from partaking of grain from the new harvest until the offering of the omer of barley on the sixteenth of Nisan (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 10:2-5). When the previous year has been plagued with famine, it is undesirable to keep this prohibition in effect any longer than necessary.We do not declare the Sabbatical year41The Rambam follows the opinion in Sanhedrin (loc. cit.), which forbids instituting a leap year only in the Sabbatical year. Another opinion forbids instituting a leap year in the year following the Sabbatical year. a leap year, because everyone is entitled to take the crops that grow on their own.42Our translation follows the commentary of the Perush, which explains that according to the Torah, all agricultural labor is forbidden in the Sabbatical year. It is, nevertheless, permitted to take crops that grow from seeds strewn by the wind or that grow from other causes that did not result from conscious human labor. Although our Sages forbade benefitting from such crops for personal use, it was from these crops that the grain used for the omer offering and the two loaves of bread were harvested.The Sages forbade using these crops for personal use. Nevertheless, since the prohibition did not originate in the Torah, our Sages feared that it would not be observed by the common people and the crops would not remain for these sacrifices.Significantly, Rashi and others offer a second rationale for this practice, that our Sages did not want to prolong a year when it was forbidden to do agricultural work. Therefore, grain will not be available to offer the omer [of barley] and the two loaves of bread [offered on Shavuot].43See Leviticus 23:17. As the verse states, this offering and the omer must be from the harvest of the new year. It was customary to make the year preceding the Sabbatical year a leap year.44So that the farmers would have an extra month to work the land and gather its crops (Rashi, Sanhedrin, loc. cit.).
It appears to me45This expression indicates a ruling that the Rambam derives from his own logic without an explicit source in the works of our Sages. The Or Sameach cites a passage (Sanhedrin 26a), which appears to indicate that it is impossible to declare a Sabbatical year a leap year. There are, however, other interpretations of that passage. (See Tosafot, loc. cit..) that our Sages' statement that a leap year should not be declared in a year of famine and in the Sabbatical year means that a leap year should not be declared because of the condition of the roads or the bridges, or because of factors of this nature. If, however, it is appropriate to declare a leap year because [Pesach will fall before] the vernal equinox, because [the barley has not] ripened, or because the fruit trees [have not bloomed], a leap year is declared always.46It appears that the Rambam's logic is that since according to the Torah, it is necessary to declare a leap year under such circumstances, the leap year should be declared. There is no obligation from the Torah to declare a leap year, because of problems with the roads or because of the other circumstances mentioned in Halachah 5. The Sages prescribed ordaining a leap year in these circumstances out of consideration for the people. In a Sabbatical year or a year of famine, the considerations mentioned in the previous halachah override those that would ordinarily require the year to be declared a leap year.Significantly, the Ra'avad, the Ramah, and others do not accept the distinction made by the Rambam, and maintain that a Sabbatical year and a year of famine should never be declared leap years.
When the court institutes a leap year, they write a letter to all [the people in] distant places, notifying them that a leap year has been instituted, and the reason for which it was instituted.These letters were written in the name of the nasi.47The Rambam's statement is based on the narrative in Sanhedrin 11b, which relates that Rabban Gamliel sent letters to Jews throughout the diaspora notifying them of the declaration of a leap year. They would say, "Let it be known that I and my colleagues have agreed to add to this year this many days" - for it was possible for them to declare a month of twenty-nine days or a month of thirty days.[The intent is that] the court had the option of notifying the people in the outlying areas that the month would [probably] be either full or lacking.48Since through calculations, it is possible to know whether or not it is likely for the moon to be sighted on the thirtieth night, the court would notify the people in the outlying areas accordingly. This notification would, however, be conditional on the actual sighting of the moon. [In fact, however,] the determination of whether the month is full or lacking is dependent on the sighting of the moon.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
All the statements made previously regarding the [prerogative to] sanctify Rosh Chodesh because of the sighting of the moon, and [to] establish a leap year to reconcile the calendar or because of a necessity, apply to the Sanhedrin in Eretz Yisrael. [For it is they] alone, or a court of judges possessing semichah that holds sessions in Eretz Yisrael and that was granted authority by the Sanhedrin, [who may authorize these decisions].1The Ramban [in his gloss on Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 153)] differs and explains that although it was necessary for the judges who established the calendar to have semichah, there was no necessity that this function be carried out by the Sanhedrin or a court deputized by it.[This concept is derived] from the command given Moses and Aaron [Exodus 12:2]: "This month shall be for you the first of months" The Oral Tradition as passed down, teacher to student, from Moses our teacher [throughout the generations, explains that] the verse is interpreted as follows:2This explanation was recorded for posterity in Rosh HaShanah 21b. This testimony is entrusted to you and those [sages] who arise after you and who function in your position.3I.e., to the Sages of the Sanhedrin, who preserve the tradition of the Jewish court as initiated by Moses and Aaron.When, however, there is no Sanhedrin in Eretz Yisrael, we establish the monthly calendar and institute leap years solely according to the fixed calendar that is followed now.
This concept is a halachah communicated to Moses on [Mount] Sinai:4In the Introduction to his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam defines a halachah communicated to Moses on [Mount] Sinai as a law that is neither explicitly stated nor alluded to in the Written Law, but communicated through the Oral Tradition.See also the statements of the Ramban (loc. cit.), who objects to the Rambam's statements, and asks which source states that this is a halachah communicated to Moses on Mount Sinai. When there is a Sanhedrin, the monthly calendar is established according to the sighting of the moon. When there is no Sanhedrin, the monthly calendar is established according to the fixed calendar that we follow now, and the sighting of the moon is of no consequence.When the fixed calendar is followed, there are times when the day established [as Rosh Chodesh] will be the day on which the moon is sighted, and there are times when the sighting will either precede or follow it by a day.5As explained in Chapter 6, the fixed calendar is based on the mean motion of the sun and the moon - i.e., their average rate of progress in the heavens. As explained in Chapter 11 onwards, the progress of the sun, and to an even greater extent that of the moon, deviates from this mean from time to time. Although ultimately these deviations will balance out, at any given time the day established as Rosh Chodesh may be before or after the day on which the moon can be sighted. It is, however, an extremely extraordinary phenomenon for [the day established as Rosh Chodesh] to be a day after the sighting [of the moon], [and this is possible only] in the lands that are west of Eretz Yisrael.6As explained in Chapter 18, Halachah 13, in the lands west of Eretz Yisrael the moon is sighted earlier than in Eretz Yisrael.
When did the entire Jewish people begin using this calendar? At the conclusion of the Talmudic period, when Eretz Yisrael was in ruin, and an established court no longer remained there.7Based on the Rambam's statements in Sefer HaMitzvot (loc. cit.), the Chatam Sofer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 234) explains that the Rambam's intent is that, from that time onward, a formal court no longer held sessions in Eretz Yisrael; the land, however, remained populated by Jews. (See the notes on Halachah 5.) In the era of the Sages of the Mishnah, and in the era of the Sages of the Gemara until the time of Abbaye and Ravvah,8This concept is derived from Rosh HaShanah 21a, which states that Ravvah fasted two days on Yom Kippur, because he did not know which day was established by the court in Eretz Yisrael. [the people] would rely on the establishment [of the calendar] in Eretz Yisrael.9This refers to the establishment of the fixed calendar by Rabbi Hillel (Hillel II), approximately two generations after the composition of the Jerusalem Talmud.Most commentaries assume that the Rambam's intent is that until the time of Rabbi Hillel (not Hillel the Great, but a descendant of his, who lived several hundred years afterwards), the court sanctified the moon based on the testimony of witnesses. Rav Kapach objects to this interpretation, noting that the sanctification of the moon required judges with semichah, and it appears that the practice of semichah had been nullified prior to this time.Noting the precise words used by the Rambam, "[The people] would rely on the establishment [of the calendar] in Eretz Yisrael," Rav Kapach explains that the sanctification of the moon based on the testimony of witnesses had ended several generations previously, with the cessation of the practice of semichah. Nevertheless, the international Jewish community would look to the court in Eretz Yisrael for the establishment of the calendar. For the family of the Nesi'im had a private tradition regarding the calculation of the calendar. Nevertheless, at the time of Rabbi Hillel, this practice was also discontinued, and a fixed calendar was established that did not require the authority of any particular court.
When the Sanhedrin functioned and the calendar was established based on the sighting [of the moon], the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael and, [similarly, the inhabitants of] all the places where the messengers of Tishrei10See Chapter 3, Halachot 11-13. would arrive, would celebrate the holidays for one day only.The inhabitants of the distant places that were not reached by the messengers of Tishrei would celebrate two days because of the doubt involved. For they did not know the day that the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael established as [the beginning of] the new month.
In the present era, when the Sanhedrin no longer exists, and the court of Eretz Yisrael establishes [the months] according to the [fixed] calendar,11Implicit in the Rambam's words is a concept explained in greater detail in Halachah 13: The determination of the calendar depends on the establishment of the calendar by the court in Eretz Yisrael. according to law, it would be appropriate for [Jews] throughout the world to celebrate the holidays for one day alone.12As prescribed by the Torah. Once the date on which the festivals should be celebrated could be universally known because of the fixed calendar, the safeguard of celebrating the holidays for two days was no longer necessary. For [the inhabitants of] the distant regions of the diaspora and the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael rely on the same [fixed] calendar and establish [the festivals] accordingly. Nevertheless, the Sages ordained [that the inhabitants of the diaspora] retain the custom of their ancestors.13Beitzah 4b explains that this rule was ordained lest the gentile authorities oppress the Jewish people and prevent the inhabitants of the diaspora from communicating the tradition of the calendar to their descendants. They would then have to rely on information conveyed from Eretz Yisrael again.
Therefore, [the inhabitants of] all the places that the messengers of Tishrei would not reach in the era when the messengers were sent out should celebrate two days even in the present era, just as they did when the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael established [the calendar] according to the sighting of the moon.In the present era, the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael continue their custom and celebrate one day;14See, however, Halachot 11 and 12. for they never celebrated two days. Thus, our celebration of the second day of the holidays in the diaspora at present is a Rabbinic institution.15I.e., originally, the second day of the holidays was observed because of the doubt of the day on which to observe the Torah's commandment. In the present era there is no longer any doubt, and the observance of the second day of a holiday has the status of a Rabbinic ordinance.
[Even] when the calendar was established based on the sighting of the moon, the majority of the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael would celebrate Rosh HaShanah for two days, because of the doubt involved.16To explain: Generally, the court would endeavor to structure the calendar so that the moon would be sighted on the thirtieth night of Elul. In expectation of the probability that the following day would be declared Rosh HaShanah, the people would observe all the holiday prohibitions and sound the shofar on the thirtieth day. Nevertheless, since it was possible that the moon had not been sighted, the people outside the immediate surroundings of Jerusalem would observe the following day as well.See the Jerusalem Talmud (Eruvin 3:9) which states that the observance of Rosh HaShanah for two days was ordained by "the prophets of the earlier generations." Sotah 48b states that this term refers to the prophets of the First Temple era. They would not know the day on which the court established the new month, because the messengers would not depart on the holiday.17See Chapter 3, Halachah 8.
Moreover, even in Jerusalem, where the court would hold session, there were many times when the holiday of Rosh HaShanah was celebrated for two days. For if witnesses did not arrive on the thirtieth day [following Rosh Chodesh Elul], the day on which they had awaited [the arrival of] witnesses would be regarded as holy,18As mentioned above, except for the offering of the Rosh HaShanah sacrifices, the thirtieth day following Rosh Chodesh Elul was always observed as Rosh HaShanah in expectation of the arrival of witnesses. and the following day would be regarded as holy.19For it would actually be observed as Rosh HaShanah.Since [there were times when] they would observe [Rosh HaShanah for] two days even when they sanctified the months according to the sighting [of the moon], [our Sages] ordained that even the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael20Including even the inhabitants of Jerusalem. should always celebrate [Rosh HaShanah] for two days in the present era, when [the holidays] are established based on the fixed calendar. Thus, even [the observance of] the second day of Rosh HaShanah in the present era is a Rabbinic ordinance.
The celebration of the holidays for one or two days is not dependent on geographic distance [alone]. What is implied?If a place is located within a five-day - or less - journey from Jerusalem, and thus it was surely possible for the messengers to reach them, we do not postulate that the inhabitants celebrate only one day. For we have no way of knowing whether or not the messengers [of the High Court] would journey to this place.21As the Rambam continues to explain, the determining factor is not the geographic distance of a place from Jerusalem, but rather the custom followed in this place at the time when the High Court sent out messengers. Perhaps the messengers did not journey to this place because it was not populated by Jews at that time. [And if] it became populated by Jews after it [had become customary] to establish [the festivals] according to the fixed calendar, they [would be] obligated to celebrate two days.Alternatively, [perhaps the messengers did not reach there,] because there was a blockade on the way, as existed between Jerusalem and the Galilee during the time of the Mishnah,22See Bava Batra 38a and Ketubot 17b, which tell of a time when a blockade prevented communication between Jerusalem and the Galilee. or perhaps the Samaritans would prevent the messengers from passing through their [territory].
If the matter were dependent on geographic distance alone, all the inhabitants of Egypt would observe the holidays for only one day, for it is possible for the messengers of Tishrei to reach them. The distance between Jerusalem and Egypt via Ashkelon is a journey of eight days or less. Similar concepts apply regarding the majority of Syria. One thus can conclude that the matter is not dependent solely on geographic distance.
Thus, the principles governing this matter can be summarized as follows: Whenever the distance between Jerusalem and a particular place exceeds a ten-day journey, the inhabitants should observe [the holidays] for two days, as was their previous custom. For the messengers sent out for Tishrei [cannot be guaranteed] to reach places other than those within a ten-day journey from Jerusalem.23For the messengers were forbidden to travel on Rosh HaShanah, Yom Kippur, and the two Sabbaths between Rosh HaShanah and Sukkot. In the years when Rosh HaShanah is observed on the Sabbath, the messengers could proceed a further day. Nevertheless, since this is not so in the majority of the years, a ten-day journey is accepted as the standard measure.[The following rules apply when, by contrast,] places are a ten-day journey or less from Jerusalem, and thus it is possible that the messengers could have reached them: We see whether that place is [located in the portions of] Eretz Yisrael that were inhabited by Jews during the time the calendar was established on the basis of the sighting [of the moon] during the second conquest [of the land] - e.g., Usha, Shefaram, Luz, Yavneh, Nov, Tiberias, and the like. [The inhabitants of these places] should celebrate only one day.If the place is part of Syria24Note Hilchot Terumah 1:3, which defines Syria as referring to lands conquered by King David before the entire territory of Eretz Yisrael proper had been conquered. Therefore, it was not considered part of the Holy Land with regard to most ritual questions according to the Torah itself. Nevertheless, the Rabbis extended many of the laws applying to Eretz Yisrael to this territory as well. - e.g., Tyre, Damascus, Ashkelon,25The inclusion of Ashkelon, which is located to the southwest of Eretz Yisrael, in Syria clearly indicates that the Rambam is referring to the halachic conception of the latter term, and not the geographic one, since Syria is to the northeast of Eretz Yisrael.There is, however, a slight difficulty with the Rambam's statements: In Hilchot Terumah 1:9, he describes Ashkelon as being part of the diaspora.and the like - they should follow the custom of their ancestors. If [the custom was to celebrate] one day, [they should celebrate] one day. [If the custom was] two days, [they should celebrate] two days.
When a place is located within a journey of ten days or less from Jerusalem, and it is part of Syria or the diaspora, and [its inhabitants] have no [established] custom conveyed [from previous generations], they should celebrate two days, as is customary in the world at large. [The same rules apply to] a city that was created in the desert of Eretz Yisrael, or a city first populated by Jews in the present era.26Based on this halachah, according to the Rambam, most Jews living in Eretz Yisrael today should celebrate the holidays for two days. Indeed, the Eretz Tzvi, a text that documents the prevailing customs in Eretz Yisrael before the waves of European immigration, states that in cities like Ramlah, that did not have an existing custom dating back to the Talmudic period, the holidays would be celebrated for two days, as the Rambam states.It was not until the resettlement of Eretz Yisrael in the present era that such cities began observing the holidays for only one day. The source for this practice is the commentary of the Ritba (Rosh HaShanah 16b), who states that, in the present era, it is the geographic definitions of Eretz Yisrael and the diaspora that determine whether or not one should celebrate one day.[It must be emphasized that even according to the Ritba, it is questionable whether the inhabitants of areas of the Negev below Beersheba should celebrate the holidays for only one day. For these places are also beyond the geographic limits of Eretz Yisrael of the Talmudic period.][At present,] the celebration of the second day of a holiday is always a Rabbinic institution. This applies even to the celebration of the second day of Rosh HaShanah, which is observed by all Jews in the present era.
The calculations that we follow in the present era, every individual in his community, to ascertain which day is Rosh Chodesh and which day is Rosh HaShanah, do not determine [the calendar], nor do we rely on these calculations. For we do not institute leap years or establish the monthly calendar in the diaspora. We rely on the calculations of the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael and their establishment of the calendar.The reason we make calculations is merely for the sake of information. For we know that the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael rely on the same calendar. Thus, our calculations are intended to determine the day that the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael establish as Rosh Chodesh or a festival. For it is the establishment of the calendar by the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael that establishes a day as Rosh Chodesh or a festival, not our calculations of the calendar.27The Rambam's statements in this halachah are a reiteration of the principles he expresses in Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit. Citing Isaiah 2:3, "Out of Zion shall come forth the Torah," the Rambam emphasizes that the determination of the calendar is solely the province of the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael.Until the time of Rabbi Hillel, the court of Eretz Yisrael determined the calendar through their independent calculations. Even after the court ceased to function and the fixed calendar was adopted, the determination of the calendar still depends on the establishment of the calendar in Eretz Yisrael. The only difference is that from the time of Rabbi Hillel onward, instead of determining the calendar independently, the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael would rely on the fixed calendar.For this reason, the Rambam points to a Divine covenant insuring that there will always be Jews living in our Holy Land. For were there not to be any Jews living in Eretz Yisrael, heaven forbid, we would not be able to determine the calendar. (See Chatam Sofer, Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 234).

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
When [the new moon] was sanctified [based on the testimony of witnesses regarding] the sighting of the moon, the court would calculate the time of the conjunction of the sun and the moon in an exact manner, as the astronomers do.1The term conjunction refers to the point when the sun, the moon and the earth are positioned in that order in a direct line. Therefore, as seen from the earth, the moon does not reflect the light of the sun. [When the sun and the moon have the same latitude (see Chapter 16) - i.e., when they are in the same plane - a conjunction is the cause of a solar eclipse. Ordinarily, however, there is a difference in latitude, and an alignment of this nature does not cause an eclipse.] [This enabled them] to know whether or not the moon would be sighted.The first level of these calculations represent approximations of the time of the conjunction, and their accuracy is not great. This approximation of the time of the conjunction is calculated according to the mean rates of movements.2Our translation differs from the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah, and is based on the version found in authoritative manuscripts and early printings.The term mean rate of movement refers to the average movement of the sun or the moon in angular degrees over a particular period. To explain: It was easy to calculate the number of conjunctions between one solar eclipse and another. Afterwards, this number would be multiplied by 360 (the number of degrees in a circle) and then divided by the number of years, months, days, or hours (depending on the mean one wanted to reach) that had passed between the two eclipses.In fact, however, the sun - and to a much greater extent, the moon - would deviate from this mean rate of movement - i.e., the position in which they are located in the heavens differs from the position that would be reached by calculating the mean rate of progress. As is explained in the succeeding chapters, there are various ways of correcting and adjusting these mean calculations so that the actual position of these celestial bodies can be determined. The time of the conjunction as calculated in this manner is referred to as the molad.The essentials of the calculations that are used when a court to sanctify [the new moon based on the testimony of witnesses of] the sighting [of the moon] does not exist - i.e., the calculations we use today - are referred to as ibbur. To explain:
Day and night are constantly considered a twenty-four hour composite, [on the average:] twelve [hours] of daylight and twelve [hours] of night. An hour can be divided into 1080 units. This number was chosen because it can be divided in half, into fourths, eighths, thirds, sixths, ninths, and tenths.3The only integer that cannot be divided into this sum is seven. The commentaries have noted that the number 360 also can be divided into all the fractions mentioned by the Rambam and question why he did not use this smaller figure. Each of these fractions contains many of these units.
According to this calculation, [the interval] between one conjunction of the moon and the sun and the subsequent conjunction according to their mean movement is twenty-nine full days, twelve hours of the thirtieth day, and 793 units of the thirteenth hour. This is the interval between one conjunction and the next, [and thus,] the length of a lunar month.
[Accordingly,] an [ordinary] lunar year, which includes twelve of these months, would include three hundred fifty-four days, eight hours, and eight hundred seventy-six units.A leap year, which would include thirteen of these months, would include three hundred eighty-three days, twenty-one hours, and five hundred eighty-nine units.A solar year is three hundred sixty-five days and six hours.4See Chapter 9, Halachah 1, which explains that there are two views concerning whether this is an approximation or an exact figure. See also Chapter 10, Halachah 6. Thus, a solar year exceeds an [ordinary] lunar year by ten days, twenty-one hours, and two hundred and four units.
When the days of a lunar month are counted in groups of seven, according to the weekly cycle, there is a remainder of one day, twelve hours, and 793 units (in numerical terms, 1 - 12 - 793). This is the remainder for a lunar month.Similarly, when the days of a lunar year are counted in groups of seven, according to the weekly cycle, there is a remainder of four days, eight hours, and 876 units (in numerical terms, 4 - 8 - 876). This is the remainder for an ordinary lunar year. The remainder for a leap year will be five days, twenty-one hours, and 589 units (in numerical terms, 5 - 21 - 589).
When you know the time of the conjunction [of the sun and the moon] for any particular month, and add 1 - 12 - 793, you will arrive at the time of the conjunction of the following month. Thus, you will be able to determine on which day of the week and at which hour it will take place, and how many units of that hour will have passed.5As mentioned above, the Rambam is speaking about an average figure. Accordingly, this figure alone is not sufficient for the calculations of when the moon can be sighted. It is useful for structuring the fixed calendar, as explained in this and the following chapter.
What is implied? If the conjunction [of the moon and the sun] for the month of Nisan takes place on Sunday, five hours and 107 units after sunrise (in numerical terms 1 - 56Kinat Eliyahu suggests that the Rambam should have stated 1 - 17, since five hours after sunrise is seventeen hours after the beginning of the day. - 107), by adding the remainder for a lunar month, 1 - 12 - 793, you will be able to determine that the conjunction for the month of Iyar will take place on Tuesday night, five hours and 900 units after nightfall (in numerical terms, 3 - 5 - 900). One may follow this same method [of calculation] month after month for eternity.
Similarly, if you know the time of the conjunction for a particular year and you add its remainder - either the remainder of an ordinary year or the remainder of a leap year - to the time of the conjunction, you will determine the time of the conjunction of the following year. This method [of calculation] may be followed year after year for eternity.The first conjunction from which we begin, the conjunction of the first year of creation, was on Monday night, 5 hours and 204 units after nightfall7Tosafot, Rosh HaShanah 8 a,b, explains that this follows the view of Rabbi Eliezer (Rosh HaShanah 10b), who states that the world was created in Tishrei. According to this conception, the conjunction for Rosh HaShanah, the day of Adam's creation, was the fourteenth hour of Friday (the second hour after sunrise). Since the first day of creation was the twenty-fifth of Elul, the year prior to that of Adam's creation is also significant. To calculate the conjunction of that year, we subtract the remainder of an ordinary year - 4 days, 8 hours, and 876 units - from six days and fourteen hours. This produces the figure cited by the Rambam. (in numerical terms, 2 - 5 - 204). This is the starting point for these calculations.
In all the calculations to determine the time of the conjunction, when the remainder [of one period] should be added to another remainder, [the following principles should be adhered to:] When a sum of 1080 units is reached, it should be counted as an hour, and added to the number of the hours. When a sum of twenty-four hours is reached, it should be counted as a day, and added to the number of days. When the number of days is greater than seven, [all multiples of] seven should be subtracted from the sum, and the remainder be focused on.For the purpose of our calculations is not to know the number of days, but rather to know on which day of the week, and at what hour and after how many units will the conjunction take place.
[The fixed calendar is structured in] a nineteen-year cycle, including seven leap years and twelve ordinary years. This is called a machzor.Why was this [structure] chosen? Because when you total the number of days in twelve ordinary years and seven leap years together with their hours and their units, counting all [sums of] 1080 units as an hour, [all sums of] twenty-four hours as a day, and adding them to the number of days, the total will equal nineteen solar years, each of these years being 365 days and six hours.The difference between the days of the solar calendar [and the lunar calendar] will be only one hour and 485 units (in numerical terms, 1 - 485).8As mentioned in Halachah 4, each ordinary lunar year is 10 days, 21 hours, and 204 units shorter than a solar year. Thus, the difference between the 12 ordinary lunar years of a nineteen-year cycle and the corresponding solar years is 130 days, 14 hours, and 288 units.A lunar leap year is 18 days, 15 hours, and 589 units longer than a solar year. Thus, the difference between the seven leap years of a nineteen-year cycle and the corresponding solar years is 130 days, 12 hours, and 883 units. When this sum is subtracted from the figure mentioned in the previous paragraph, the remainder mentioned by the Rambam is reached.As explained in Chapter 10, Halachah 1, there is another reckoning, which maintains that the nineteen-year cycle produces a more exact interrelation between the two calendars.
Thus, in such a [nineteen-year] cycle, the months are lunar months, and the years are solar years. The seven leap years in each cycle should be the following: The third year of the cycle, the sixth year, the eighth year, the eleventh year, the fourteenth year, the seventeenth year, the nineteenth year9By structuring the pattern in this manner, an interrelation [albeit not a totally exact one] is established between the lunar and solar calendars in each of the years. After several years in which the number of days of the solar calendar exceeds those of the lunar calendar, a leap year reverses that pattern and establishes an approximate equivalence. In this way, we ensure that the Pesach is always celebrated after the vernal equinox. (in numbers, 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, 19).
When you add the remainders of each of the twelve ordinary years, [the remainder of each year] being 4 - 8 - 876, and the remainders of the seven leap years, [the remainder of each year] being 5 - 21 - 589, and then divide the entire sum in groups of seven, there is a remainder of two days, sixteen hours, and 595 units (in numerical terms, 2 - 16 - 595). This is the remainder of a [nineteen-year] cycle.
When you know the time of the conjunction of the beginning of a [nineteen-year] cycle, by adding 2 - 16 - 595 to it you will be able to determine the beginning of the next [nineteen-year] cycle, and similarly all the [subsequent nineteen-year] cycles for eternity. As stated above, the conjunction [marking] the beginning of the first [nineteen-year] cycle took place on 2 - 5 - 204. [The expression,] the conjunction of a year refers to the conjunction of the month of Tishrei for that year.10This point of clarification is necessary, because there are certain halachic matters regarding which Nisan is considered the beginning of the year.
Using the above method, it is possible to know the conjunction [marking] the beginning of any particular year, or any particular month, whether for the years that have passed or for the years to come.What is implied? One should take the number of years that have passed until Tishrei of the [desired] year and group them in nineteen- year cycles. Thus, one will be able to determine the number of nineteen-year cycles that have passed and the number of years that have passed within the [nineteen-year] cycle that has not been completed [until the desired year]. One should add 2 - 16 - 595 for each cycle, 4 - 8 - 876 for every ordinary year of the cycle that has not been completed, and 5 - 21 - 589 for every leap year [of the cycle that has not been completed].One should then add together the entire sum, calculating [the groups of 1080] units as hours, the [groups of 24] hours as days, and the groups of seven days [as weeks]. [By adding] the remainder of the days, hours, and units [to 2 - 5 - 204], one can determine the time of the conjunction of the desired year.
The time of the conjunction of a year determined through the above method is the conjunction of Rosh Chodesh Tishrei. By adding 1 - 12 - 793 to this figure, one can determine the conjunction of Marcheshvan, and by adding 1 - 12 - 793 to [the conjunction of] Marcheshvan, one can determine the conjunction of Kislev. Similarly, one can determine the conjunction of all subsequent months for eternity.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
[Rosh Chodesh is generally instituted on the day of the conjunction. Nevertheless,] Rosh Chodesh Tishrei1Which is also Rosh HaShanah. should never be established on a Sunday, a Wednesday, or a Friday - in symbols, אד"ו - although, according to these calculations, [the conjunction for the month will occur on these days]. Instead, when the conjunction for the month of Tishrei occurs on any of these three days, Rosh Chodesh should be established on the following day.2The Rambam mentions the reason for postponing Rosh Chodesh in Halachah 7.What is implied? When the conjunction occurs on Sunday, Rosh Chodesh Tishrei should be established on Monday. When the conjunction occurs on Wednesday, Rosh Chodesh Tishrei should be established on Thursday. When the conjunction occurs on Friday, Rosh Chodesh Tishrei should be established on the Sabbath.3The first day of Rosh HaShanah is therefore celebrated frequently on Monday, Thursday, and the Sabbath, for the holiday is held on these days when the conjunction falls on the day itself or on the previous day. The first day of Rosh HaShanah is rarely celebrated on Tuesday, for the probability of the conjunction falling on that day is merely one out of seven, half that of the other days.
Similarly, if the conjunction [for the month of Tishrei]4The principle mentioned in this halachah - and indeed, in the entire chapter - applies to Rosh Chodesh Tishrei alone, and not to the other months. takes place at noon or after noon, Rosh Chodesh should be established on the following day.5This condition is referred to as a molad zaken, literally, "an aged conjunction." The rationale for postponing Rosh HaShanah in such a situation can be explained as follows: In principle, Rosh Chodesh is dependent on the sighting of the moon, not on the conjunction. As is explained in the subsequent chapters of the text, the new moon does not become visible until several hours after the conjunction between the moon and the sun. Thus, if the conjunction takes place after noon, it is impossible for the moon to be sighted on that day. Therefore, Rosh HaShanah is celebrated on the following day. (See Rosh HaShanah 20b and commentaries.)There is a slight difficulty in the Rambam's statements, for based on Chapter 15, Halachah 2, it would appear that at certain times it is possible to sight the moon only five hours after conjunction.What is implied? When the conjunction takes place on Monday, six hours after daybreak or later, Rosh Chodesh is established on Tuesday. If, however, the conjunction takes place before noon, even if only a single unit prior, Rosh Chodesh is established on the day of the conjunction, provided that day is neither Sunday, Wednesday, nor Friday.
When the conjunction takes place at noon or after noon, and [Rosh Chodesh Tishrei would be] postponed to the following day - if that following day is either Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday, Rosh Chodesh is postponed again, and is established on the third day after the conjunction.What is implied? If the conjunction takes place on the Sabbath after noon (in numbers, 7 - 186I.e., after the eighteenth hour of the seventh day.), in such a year Rosh Chodesh should be established on Monday.7It should not be established on the Sabbath, because of the principle of molad zaken. Nor should it be established on Sunday, as stated in Halachah 1. Similarly, if the conjunction takes place on Tuesday at noon or after noon, Rosh Chodesh should be established on Thursday.
In an ordinary year, when the conjunction [of the month] of Tishrei falls on the night of the third day,8I.e., the night between Monday and Tuesday. nine hours and 204 units (in numbers, 3 - 9 - 204) or more after nightfall, Rosh Chodesh is postponed, and instead of being established on Tuesday, it is established on Thursday.9The rationale for the postponement of Rosh HaShanah in such a situation can be explained as follows: As explained in the following chapter, the maximum length of a lunar year is 355 days. As mentioned previously, 4 days, 8 hours, and 876 units is the remainder of a normal year. To calculate the conjunction of Tishrei in the following year, this figure should be added to 3 - 9 - 204 (the day and the time mentioned by the Rambam above). The result is 12:00 noon on the Sabbath.As explained above, when the conjunction takes place at 12:00 noon or later, the celebration of Rosh HaShanah is postponed to the following day. In this instance, however, the following day is Sunday, and Rosh HaShanah never begins on that day. Thus, the holiday would have to be celebrated on Monday. If Rosh HaShanah had been celebrated on Tuesday of the previous year, there would have been a six-day difference between the days on which the holiday was celebrated in these two successive years, producing a year of 356 days, one day longer than the maximum length of an ordinary year. To avoid this, Rosh HaShanah is not celebrated on Tuesday. Since it also is never celebrated on Wednesday, it is postponed until Thursday, producing a lunar year of 354 days (Tur, Orach Chayim 428).
A similar situation [may arise] in a year that follows a leap year: If the conjunction for Tishrei takes place on Monday, three hours and 589 units or more after daybreak (in numbers, 2 - 1510For three hours after daybreak is 15 hours after the beginning of the day. - 589), Rosh Chodesh is not established on Monday, but on Tuesday.11The rationale for the postponement of Rosh HaShanah in such a situation can be explained as follows: As explained in the following chapter, the minimum length of a lunar leap year is 383 days. As mentioned previously, the remainder of a leap year is five days, twenty-one hours, and 589 units. When, in an effort to calculate the time of the conjunction of the leap year, this figure is subtracted from 2 - 15 - 589 (the day and the time mentioned by the Rambam), the result is Tuesday at noon.As mentioned, when the conjunction takes place at 12:00 noon or later, the celebration of Rosh HaShanah is postponed to the following day. In this instance, however, the following day is Wednesday, and Rosh HaShanah never begins on that day. Thus, in the leap year, Rosh HaShanah began on Thursday. If Rosh HaShanah were celebrated on Monday in the year after the leap year, this would produce only a four-day difference between the days on which the holiday was celebrated in these two successive years, causing the length of the year to be only 382 days. To avoid this, in the year following the leap year Rosh HaShanah is celebrated on Tuesday, rather than on Monday, causing the leap year to be 383 days long (Tur, Orach Chayim 428).
If, however, the conjunction of an ordinary year occurs [even] one unit earlier - i.e., were it to be 3 - 9 - 203 or earlier - [Rosh Chodesh] should be established on Tuesday, [rather than postponed until Thursday as mentioned above].Similarly, if the conjunction of a year following a leap year occurs [even] one unit earlier - i.e., were it to be 2 - 15 - 588 or earlier - [Rosh Chodesh] should be established on Monday.Thus, the way to determine [the day on which] Rosh Chodesh Tishrei will be established according to these calculations is as follows: One should first determine the day [of the week], the hour of the day - or night - and the number of units of the hour when the conjunction takes place. The day of the conjunction will be the day of Rosh Chodesh, except in the following instances:a) [The conjunction] takes place on Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday;b) The conjunction takes place at noon or after noon;c) In an ordinary year, [the conjunction] takes place on the night of the third day, after 204 units of the tenth hour have passed, or later [that day];d) In an ordinary year that follows a leap year, the conjunction takes place on Monday past 589 units of the fourth hour after daybreak has passed or later [that day].If the conjunction occurs in one of these four instances, [Rosh Chodesh] is not established on the day of the conjunction, but rather on the day that follows, or on the day following that, as explained.
Why is [Rosh HaShanah] not established [on the day of the conjunction] when it falls on Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday? Because these calculations determine the conjunction of the sun and the moon only according to their mean [rate of] progress, and do not [necessarily] reflect the true position [of the sun and the moon in the celestial sphere], as explained. Therefore, they instituted that [on] one day [Rosh Chodesh] would be established and on the following day it would be postponed, so that they would ascertain the day when the true conjunction takes place.12The Rambam's statements have stirred the attention - and often the indignation - of the Ra'avad and other commentaries, because they appear to ignore the explanations given by Rosh HaShanah 20a why Rosh HaShanah never begins on these days. The Talmud states that if Rosh HaShanah falls on either Wednesday or Friday, Yom Kippur will fall on either Friday or Sunday, and thus there would be two consecutive days, Yom Kippur and the Sabbath, when it would be forbidden to bury the dead. In the Talmudic era, this could have caused a corpse to deteriorate, detracting from its honor and respect.Alternatively, the Sages state that if Rosh HaShanah fell on any of these three days, there would be two successive days when it would be forbidden to pick fresh vegetables, and the people would be unable to celebrate the festivals or the Sabbath properly.Sukkah 43a gives another reason why Rosh HaShanah is not held on Sunday: were this to be the case, Hoshana Rabbah, the seventh day of Sukkot, would fall on the Sabbath. In such an instance, restrictions were placed on the willow ritual in the Temple. (See Hilchot Shofar, Sukkah V'Lulav 7:21-22.) To avoid such an instance, the Sages structured the calendar so that Rosh HaShanah never falls on Sunday.In defense of the Rambam's position, it must be noted that both earlier (Rabbenu Chanan'el) and subsequent (the P'nei Yehoshua) Talmudic commentaries understood the reasons given by the Talmud as being merely the external dimension of the rationale for the calendar's adjustment, while the inner meaning is associated with the actual position of the sun and the moon in the heavenly sphere.Even according to this perspective, there is, however, a difficulty with the Rambam's statements. Although it is correct that the true positions of the sun and the moon often differ from the position determined by calculating their mean movement, the concept of postponing the celebration of Rosh HaShanah on these three days appears arbitrary and without any obvious connection to the movement of these bodies in the celestial sphere. The commentaries note that explanations why Rosh HaShanah is not celebrated on these days are found in the Kabbalah.What is implied? [When according to our calculations, the conjunction occurs on] Tuesday, we establish [Rosh Chodesh]. [When it occurs] on Wednesday, we postpone it. [When it occurs] on Thursday, we establish [Rosh Chodesh]. [When it occurs] on Friday, we postpone it. [When it occurs] on the Sabbath, we establish [Rosh Chodesh]. [When it occurs] on Sunday, we postpone it. [When it occurs] on Monday, we establish [Rosh Chodesh].
This same principle, that the calculations are based on the mean rate of progress, is also the motivating factor for the other four reasons for the postponement [of Rosh Chodesh]. As proof of this, there are times when [according to the calculations] the conjunction takes place on Tuesday, and [Rosh Chodesh] is postponed until Thursday,13The instance mentioned in Halachah 4. and yet the moon will not be seen Thursday night, nor even Friday night. This indicates that the true conjunction of the sun and the moon did not take place until Thursday.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
A lunar month is twenty-nine and one half days, and 793 units, as we have explained.1Chapter 6, Halachah 3. It is impossible for Rosh Chodesh to begin in the middle of the day - i.e., that a portion of the day would be part of the previous month and a portion of the day would be part of the following month - as [implied by Numbers 11:20]: "For a month of days...." According to the Oral Tradition,2Megillah 5a. this was interpreted [to mean], "You count the days of a month; you do not count the hours [of a month]."
Therefore, some lunar months are established as lacking [a day], and others as full. A month that is lacking has only twenty- nine days, even though a lunar month is several hours longer. A full month is thirty days, even though a lunar month is several hours shorter. In this manner, the months will be calculated according to complete days, not according to hours.
If a lunar month were exactly twenty-nine and a half days [long], the years [would be divided evenly] into full and lacking months, and there would be exactly 354 days to a lunar year. Thus, there would be six full months and six lacking months. It is the units that exist in every month that exceed the half day - which ultimately add up to hours and days - that cause certain years to have more lacking months than full months, and other years to have more full months than lacking months.
According to this reckoning, the thirtieth day of the month is always established as Rosh Chodesh. If the month is lacking, the thirtieth day will be Rosh Chodesh of the coming month.If the month is full [the coming month will have two days that are Rosh Chodesh]. The thirtieth day will be Rosh Chodesh, since a portion of it is [fit to be] Rosh Chodesh. [Nevertheless,] it will be counted as the completion of the previous month, which was full. The thirty-first day also will be Rosh Chodesh, and the reckoning [of the days of the coming month] will start from it. It is the day established [as Rosh Chodesh].Thus, according to this calculation, there are some months that have only one day Rosh Chodesh, and other months that have two days Rosh Chodesh.
The following is the order of the full and lacking months according to [our] fixed calendar: Tishrei is always full. Tevet is always lacking. From Tevet on, there is one full month and one lacking month in sequence.What is implied? Tevet is lacking; Shevat is full; Adar is lacking; Nisan is full; Iyar, lacking; Sivan, full; Tammuz, lacking; Av, full; Elul, lacking. In a leap year, the first Adar is full,3This supports the Rambam's contention that it is the first Adar that is the extra month of the year. (See the notes on Chapter 4, Halachah 1.) and the second Adar is lacking.
Two months remain: Marcheshvan and Kislev. Sometimes they are [both] full; sometimes they are [both] lacking; and sometimes Marcheshvan is lacking and Kislev is full.A year in which both of these months are full is called a year of complete months. A year in which both these months are lacking is called a year of lacking months. And a year in which Marcheshvan is lacking and Kislev is full is called a year whose months [proceed] in order.4For all the months of the year from Marcheshvan onward proceed in sequence, one full and one lacking.
The way to know whether the months of a year will be lacking, will be complete, or will [proceed] in order [can be explained] as follows: First, determine the day on which Rosh HaShanah will fall in the year about whose months you desire to know, as explained in Chapter 7. Then determine the day on which Rosh HaShanah will fall in the year that follows.Afterwards, count the number of days between them without including the day on which Rosh HaShanah falls in either of these years. If there are only two days between them,5The Rambam gives examples in Halachah 9 to illustrate this situation and those that follow. When there are two days between the days on which Rosh HaShanah is celebrated in successive years, the year is 50 weeks and three days - i.e., 353 days - long. the months of the year will be lacking. If there are three days between them,6When there are three days between the days on which Rosh HaShanah is celebrated in successive years, the year is 50 weeks and four days - i.e., 354 days - long. the months of the year will proceed in order. And if there are four days between them,7When there are four days between the days on which Rosh HaShanah is celebrated in successive years, the year is 50 weeks and five days - i.e., 355 days - long. The remainder of an ordinary lunar year is slightly more than four days, producing a year whose months proceed in order. Frequently, however, the year will contain an extra day, if, because of the reasons mentioned in the previous chapter, the celebration of Rosh HaShanah is postponed. Similarly, it may lack a day, because the celebration of Rosh HaShanah was postponed in the previous year. the months of the year will be complete.
When does the above apply? When the year in question is an ordinary year. When, however, [the year in question] is a leap year [different rules apply]: If there are only four days between the day on which [Rosh HaShanah] is established [in the leap year] and the day on which it will be established in the following year, the months of the year will be lacking.8In such a situation, there will be 54 weeks and five days in the year, a total of 383 days. If there are five days between these [two days], the months of the year will proceed in order. And if there are six days between them, the months of the year will be complete.
What is implied? If we desire to know the order of the months of the present year, and [we know the following]: Rosh HaShanah falls on Thursday; it is an ordinary year; and in the following year Rosh HaShanah falls on Monday, there are three days between them and the months of the year proceed in order.9For there are three days - Friday, the Sabbath, and Sunday - between the days on which Rosh HaShanah is celebrated in the years in question.If Rosh HaShanah falls on Tuesday in the following year, the months of the year will be complete.10For there are four days - Friday, the Sabbath, Sunday, and Monday - between the days on which Rosh HaShanah is celebrated in these successive years. If Rosh HaShanah falls on the Sabbath in the present year, and on Tuesday in the following year, the months of the year will be lacking.11For there are only two days between them. Similar concepts should be applied regarding the calculation [of the order of the months] of a leap year, as was explained.
There are certain indications upon which one can rely, so that one will not err regarding the calculation of the order of the months of a year. These principles are based on the fundamental principles of the fixed calendar and the determination of the days on which Rosh HaShanah will be established and those that will cause it to be postponed, as we explained previously.Whenever Rosh HaShanah is celebrated on a Tuesday, [the months of] the year will [proceed] in order. [This applies regardless of whether the year] is an ordinary year or a leap year.12As mentioned, Rosh HaShanah cannot fall on Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday. Therefore, in an ordinary year, if Rosh HaShanah falls on a Tuesday, the following year it cannot fall on a Thursday, for then there would be only one day between them, producing a year of only 352 days. Nor can it fall on a Monday, for then the year would be 356 days long. Thus, the only day on which it can fall is the Sabbath, producing a year of 354 days. In such a year, the months proceed in order.When Rosh HaShanah falls on Tuesday in a leap year, it cannot fall on Thursday or the Sabbath in the following year, for that would produce a year that is too short (380 or 382) days. Nor can it fall on Tuesday itself, for Rosh HaShanah falls on Tuesday only when the conjunction takes place not later than Tuesday, before noon. When the remainder of a leap year - 5 days, 21 hours, and 589 units - is added to noon time on Tuesday, the result is that the conjunction of the following year will take place on Sunday. Since Rosh HaShanah is never celebrated on Sunday, the holiday will be postponed until Monday. Thus, the length of the leap year will be 384 days, the length of a year whose months proceed in order.Whenever Rosh HaShanah is celebrated on the Sabbath or on a Monday, [the months of] the year will never [proceed] in order. [This applies regardless of whether the year] is an ordinary year or a leap year.13For the months of an ordinary year to proceed in order, the year must be 354 days long. That means that if Rosh HaShanah fell on the Sabbath, it would have to fall on Wednesday in the following year, which is impossible. Similarly, if Rosh HaShanah fell on Monday, it would have to fall on Friday in the following year, which is also impossible.For the months of a leap year to proceed in order, the year must be 384 days long. That means that if Rosh HaShanah had fallen on the Sabbath, in the following year it would have to fall on Friday, which is impossible. Similarly, if Rosh HaShanah had fallen on Monday, in the following year it would have to fall on Sunday, which is also impossible.[The following rules apply when] Rosh HaShanah falls on a Thursday. If the year is an ordinary year, it is impossible for its months to be lacking.14When the months of an ordinary year are lacking, the year has only 353 days. Thus, if Rosh HaShanah fell on Thursday, it would have to fall on Sunday in the following year, which is impossible. If it is a leap year, it is impossible for its months to proceed in order.15When the months of a leap year are lacking, the year has 383 days. Thus, if Rosh HaShanah fell on Thursday, it would have to fall on Wednesday in the following year, which is impossible.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
[There is a difference of opinion among] the Sages of Israel concerning the length of a solar year. Some Sages1Shemuel (Eruvin 56a). maintain that it is 365 days and 1/4 of a day - i.e., six hours. Others maintain that it is slightly less than that figure.2Rav Ada (Ibid.). His opinion is discussed in the following chapter. There is also a difference of opinion among the wise men of Greece and Persia concerning this matter.3Ptolemy and Albatani, astronomers whose opinions were valued by the Rambam, from Greece and Arabia respectively, both maintain that the length of a solar year is less than 365 days and six hours. There is, however, a difference between the figures each of them suggests. According to contemporary science, the length of a tropical solar year is 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 45 1/2 seconds. It is decreasing at the rate of 0.530 second per century.
According to the opinion that [a solar year] is [exactly] 365 and 1/4 days, there will be a remainder of one hour and 485 units after every nineteen-year cycle, as we mentioned.4Chapter 6, Halachah 10.Between the start of each of the successive seasons of the year, there will be ninety-one days and seven and one-half hours. When you know the date and the hour of the beginning of one season, you can calculate [the beginning of] the following season by [adding the above amount]. Similarly, you can calculate the beginning of the following season, and continue forever.
The equinox of Nisan (spring) [takes place] at the hour and the unit when the sun enters the beginning of the constellation of Aries. The solstice of Tammuz (summer) [takes place] when the sun is located in the beginning of the constellation of Cancer. The equinox of Tishrei (autumn) [takes place] at the hour and the unit when the sun enters the beginning of the constellation of Libra. The solstice of Tevet (winter) [takes place] when the sun is located in the beginning of the constellation of Capricorn.According to this calculation, in the first year of creation the vernal (spring) equinox took place seven days, nine hours, and 642 units before the conjunction of the month of Nisan, in numbers, 7 -9 - 642.5This figure is based on the following principles: The times of the seasons are calculated according to the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua, who maintains that the world was created in Nisan. Although the lunar calendar is calculated according to the opinion of Rabbi Eliezer, who maintains that the world was created in Tishrei, our Sages did not see a contradiction in interrelating the two conceptions, as we will continue to explain.The conjunction of the month of Tishrei is the hour of man's creation, the fourteenth hour of Friday, the sixth day of creation. Based on this figure, by subtracting six times 1 day, 12 hours, and 793 units (the remainder of a lunar month), we can calculate that the conjunction of the month of Nisan - six months before creation - took place on Thursday, nine hours and 642 units after nightfall.The vernal equinox is calculated according to the conception that the world was created in Nisan. The sun was created in the first hour of the fourth day of creation. This is considered the first vernal equinox. Thus, the autumnal equinox (half a year later) took place on Wednesday, three hours after daybreak, one day and twenty-three hours before the conjunction of Tishrei.Since there is a difference of five days, ten hours, and 642 units between six months according to the lunar calendar, and half a year according to the solar calendar, it follows that the conjunction of Nisan was seven days, nine hours, and 642 units after the vernal equinox (Perush).
The method of calculating [the beginning of] the seasons can be explained as follows. First, it is necessary to calculate the number of [nineteen-year] cycles that have passed until the [nineteen-year] cycle in question. Afterwards, add one hour and 485 units for every [nineteen-year] cycle. Afterwards, group all the units into hours, and all the hours into days. [Once a] total [has been reached], subtract seven days, nine hours, and 642 units [from it].6For the calculations will be based on Rosh Chodesh Nisan, which took place this amount of time after the vernal equinox. Add the remainder to [the time of] the conjunction of Nisan in the first year of the [nineteen-year] cycle in question, and you will be able to know the hour and the date of the the vernal equinox of the first year of this cycle.7A significant point arises from these statements, when one calculates the progression of the date and time of the vernal equinox by adding one hour and 485 units for each nineteen-year cycle. It follows that within the entire six millennia of the world's existence, the vernal equinox will have advanced approximately fifteen days. Thus, from the standpoint of the solar calendar, it will always be possible for Pesach, the fifteenth of Nisan, to occur in the spring. From this date, you can calculate [the beginnings of] all the subsequent seasons [by] adding ninety-one days and seven and one- half hours for every season.If you desire to know [the time and the date of] the vernal equinox of a particular year within a given [nineteen-year] cycle, [the following procedure should be used:] Add one hour and 485 [units] for every [nineteen-year] cycle. For each complete year that has passed within the [nineteen-year] cycle [under discussion], add ten days, twenty-one hours, and 204 units,8The difference between a lunar year and a solar year, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 4., and then group the entire sum [into days and hours].9I.e., calculate every group of 1080 units as an hour, and every group of 24 hours as a day.Afterwards, subtract seven days, nine hours, and 642 units [from this sum]10By making this subtraction, one bases the calculation on the conjunction of the month of Nisan, and not on the time of the first vernal equinox, which preceded that conjunction by this number of days and hours. and divide the remainder into lunar months of 29 days, 12 hours, and 793 units.11Until this point in the calculation, the Rambam has not taken into consideration the existence of leap years. He does this now by grouping the remainder into months and subtracting the complete months. The number of complete months subtracted represents the number of leap years that have passed in the nineteen-year cycle. [The number of days, hours, and units that] remain [after all the complete] lunar months [have been calculated] should be added to [the day and the time of] the conjunction of Nisan in that year. [In this manner,] you will be able to determine the date and the time of the vernal equinox of the year desired.According to this calculation, the vernal equinox will always take place either at nightfall, at midnight, at daybreak, or at noon.12There are 30 hours between the time of the equinox (or solstice) of one year and the next. Since the first vernal equinox took place at nightfall between Tuesday and Wednesday, the second vernal equinox took place at midnight between Wednesday and Thursday, the third at daybreak on Friday, and the fourth at noon on the Sabbath. Similarly, in subsequent years, the time of the equinox will continue to advance in six (i.e., 30) hour intervals according to such a pattern. The summer solstice will always take place at either 7:30 PM, 1:30 AM, 7:30 AM, or 1:30 PM.13There is a difference of seven and a half hours between the time of the vernal equinox and the time of the summer solstice. Since the first vernal equinox took place at nightfall, the first summer solstice took place at 1:30 AM. Afterwards, the time of the summer solstice advances in six- (i.e., 30-) hour intervals every year, in a manner parallel to the progression of the vernal equinox, as described in the previous note. The autumnal equinox will always take place either at nine or at three o'clock, either in the day or the night.14The first autumnal equinox took place at 9 AM. Afterwards, the time of the equinox has advanced in six-hour intervals, as explained. The winter solstice will always take place either at 10:30 PM, 4:30 AM, 10:30 AM, or 4:30 PM.15The first winter solstice took place at 4:30 PM. Afterwards, the time of the solstice has advanced in six-hour intervals, as explained.If you desire to know the day of the week and the hour of the equinox, [the following procedure should be used:] Count the number of complete years that have passed from the year of creation until the desired year, and divide them into groups of twenty- eight.16This number is chosen because after twenty-eight years, the equinox takes place on the same day of the week and the same hour as it did originally. This figure can be calculated as follows: 1 and 1/4 days (the difference between the time of the equinox in two successive years) times 28 equals 35 days. Thirty-five days are five full weeks.Based on this calculation, it is each twenty-eight years that the sun returns to its original position at the time of creation. To commemorate this occurrence, a special blessing, Birkat HaChamah, is recited. (See Hilchot Berachot 10:18.) Add one day and six hours17The difference in the time of the equinox from one year to the next. for each year remaining. Total the sum [of the hours and the days], and then add three days. Afterwards, divide the days into groups of seven. The remainder of the days and the hours should be added to the time of nightfall on the first day of the week.18I.e., the night between the Sabbath and Sunday. The result will be [the day and the time] on which the vernal equinox will occur.Why is it necessary to add three days? Because the first equinox of the year of creation took place at the beginning of the fourth day.19I.e., the night between Tuesday and Wednesday. By making this addition, it is possible for these calculations to start from the beginning of the week.
What is implied? If a person desires to know the day and the time of the vernal equinox of the year 4930 after creation,20The commentaries understand this as an indication that this portion of the Mishneh Torah was composed during that year. [the following procedure should be used:] [That number] should be divided by 28, leaving a remainder of one year, thus producing the figure of one day and six hours. By adding three days to this figure, it can be determined that the vernal equinox will take place on the night of the fifth day at midnight.By adding seven and one-half hours to this figure, it can be determined that the summer solstice will take place on Thursday, an hour and one half after daybreak. By adding seven and one-half hours to this figure, it can be determined that the autumnal equinox will take place on Friday, at nine hours after daybreak. By adding seven and one-half hours to this figure, it can be determined that the winter solstice will take place on the night of the sixth day, four and one half hours after nightfall.Similarly, by adding seven and one-half hours to this figure, it can be determined that the vernal equinox of the following year will take place on Friday, at daybreak. In this manner, it is possible to calculate [the time of the beginning of all] the seasons forever.
[The following procedure should be used] if one desires to know the date of the month on which the vernal equinox will fall this year:21The date of the equinox also can be determined by the calculations mentioned in Halachah 4. In this and the following halachot, however, the Rambam offers a simpler calculation, which uses approximations, but ultimately enables one to arrive at the same result. First, determine the day of the week on which [the equinox] will fall. Then determine the day [of the week] on which Rosh Chodesh of Nisan will fall, and how many complete years have passed within the nineteen-year cycle. Add eleven days for every year,22The Rambam is using an approximation. The difference between a lunar year and a solar year is ten days, twenty-one hours, and 204 units. However, to simplify the calculation, the Rambam rounds off the figure to eleven days. and then add seven days to this sum in the present time.23I.e., in the Rambam's time. The figure of seven days is reached as follows: In the year 4930, 259 nineteen-year cycles had passed. When an hour and 485 units are added for every nineteen-year cycle, a total of 15 days, 15 hours, and 335 units is obtained. Since the first equinox took place more than seven days before the conjunction of Nisan, eight days are subtracted from this figure, leaving a remainder of approximately seven days. Divide the sum by thirty,24To account for any leap years. Here, too, the Rambam is rounding off the figure; the length of a lunar month is slightly less. and begin counting the remainder of days from Rosh Chodesh Nisan.If the date coincides with the day of the week on which the equinox falls, this is sufficient. If not, add one, two, or three days to this number until you reach the day [of the week] on which the equinox falls.25Since the calculation suggested by the Rambam contains several approximations, it may not be exact, and days may have to be added to reconcile the discrepancy. If the year in question is a leap year, begin counting from Rosh Chodesh of the second Adar.26There will be more than thirty days remaining. Therefore, the reckoning should be made from Rosh Chodesh Adar. When a day is determined through this calculation, the equinox will take place on that date.
What is implied? Should we desire to know the date of the vernal equinox of the year 4930, which is the ninth year of the two- hundred-sixtieth [nineteen-year] cycle, [the following procedure should be used:] We have already determined that Rosh Chodesh Nisan will take place on Thursday, and that the equinox will take place on Thursday.27Further calculations are necessary, for in this instance, it is impossible that the equinox will take place on the first of the month, the eighth, or the fifteenth.Since this is the ninth year of the [nineteen-year] cycle, there are eight complete years [to take into consideration]. When eleven days are added for every year, we reach a sum of 88. When seven is added, the total will be 95. When this number is divided by 30, there will be a remainder of five.When we add five days to Rosh Chodesh Nisan, which is Thursday, we reach Monday. Since we know that the equinox will not fall on Monday, but rather on Thursday, we continue adding days until Thursday, the day of the equinox. Thus, we can determine that this year the vernal equinox will take place on the eighth of Nisan. A similar process can be followed [to determine the date of the equinox] every year.
Although we said that one should continue to add days until one reaches the day of the week on which the equinox takes place, one should never have to add more than one, two, or three days28I.e., although the calculation mentioned by the Rambam operates using approximations, the difference between these approximations and the actual data will hardly ever exceed three days. - or in a most unusual case - four days.29The maximum difference between the approximations employed by the Rambam and the actual data is three and one half days. Thus, it is possible, but highly improbable, that there be a four-day difference. If you find it necessary to add any more days than this, know that you have made an error in your calculations, and you should recalculate carefully.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
According to the opinion among the Sages of Israel that a solar year is less than [365 and] one-quarter [days], there is a view that [the length of the solar year] is 365 days, 5 hours, 997 units, and 48 moments. A moment is a seventy-sixth portion of a unit.According to this reckoning, the difference between a solar year and a lunar year will be 10 days, 21 hours, 121 units, and 48 moments (in numbers, 10 - 21 - 121 - 48). [According to this calculation,] there will be no remainder at all after a [nineteen-year] cycle. Instead, after every [nineteen-year] cycle, a perfect correspondence will be established between the solar years and the combination of ordinary and full lunar years.
According to this calculation, there are ninety-one days, seven hours, 519 units, and thirty-one moments (in numbers, 91 - 7 - 519 - 31). When you know the date and the time of the beginning of any particular season, you can calculate [the date and the time of the beginning of] the subsequent season according to the seasons of the year, in a way resembling the calculations [that follow the opinion that a solar year is 365 and] 1/4 days.
According to this calculation, the vernal equinox of the first year of creation was nine hours and 642 units1This differs from the figure given in Chapter 9, Halachah 3. The reason for this difference is that Rav Ada's calculations (the figures mentioned in this chapter) follow Rabbi Yehoshua's view, which maintains that the world was created in Nisan. In contrast, Shemuel's calculations (those mentioned in Chapter 9) depend more on the view of Rabbi Eliezer, who maintains that the world was created in Tishrei. (in numbers, 9 - 642) before the conjunction of the month of Nisan. Similarly, in every first year of a [nineteen-year] cycle, the vernal equinox is nine hours and 642 units before the conjunction of the month of Nisan.
When you know which is the first year of a [nineteen- year] cycle, [you will be able to calculate the beginning of every subsequent season] by adding 91 days, 7 hours, 519 units, and 31 moments for each and every season until the end of the [nineteen- year] cycle.
If you desire to know when the vernal equinox [of a given year] will fall according to this calculation, first determine how many complete years have passed within this [nineteen-year] cycle. For each year, add the remainder of a year 10 [days], 21 [hours], 121 [units], and 48 moments.[Afterwards,] group all the moments as units, all the units as hours, and all the hours as days, as done when calculating the conjunction. Subtract nine hours and 642 units from the entire sum,2So that the calculation will begin from the day of the conjunction of Nisan. and divide the remainder by the length of a lunar month.3Thus accounting for all the leap years that have passed within the nineteen-year cycle. The remainder that is less than the length of a lunar month should be added to the time of the conjunction of Nisan of the year in question. The vernal equinox of that year will take place on the moment arrived at according to these calculations.
It appears to me that [the Sages] relied on this calculation [of the length] of the seasons regarding the institution of a leap year, in the era when the High Court held sessions and would institute a leap year because of the time [when the equinox was scheduled to occur] or for other reasons. For this calculation is more accurate than the former one. It shares a greater resemblance to the data explained by the astronomers than the first opinion, which considered a solar year to be 365 and 1/4 days.
Both these calculations that we have explained are approximations, based on the mean rate of progress of the sun, and not on its actual position [in the celestial sphere]. When one considers the actual position of the sun at these times, the vernal equinox will take place approximately two days before the time determined by either of these calculations.4As mentioned previously, and as is explained in the subsequent chapters, the mean position or the mean rate of progress of a body in the celestial sphere refers to the average of its monthly or yearly cycle. In actual fact, there are slight inconsistencies between the position of any of these bodies according to these calculations and its actual position as observed in the celestial sphere. Until this point, the Rambam has relied on the mean rate of progress of the celestial bodies for his calculations. In the subsequent chapters, he explains how their exact position in the celestial sphere can be determined. [This applies both] according to the opinion that [a solar year is] exactly [365 and] 1/4 days, and according to the opinion that [a solar year is] less than [365 and] 1/4 days.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
As stated in the laws mentioned previously,1E.g., Chapter 1, Halachah 6; Chapter 2, Halachah 4; Chapter 6, Halachah 1. the court made precise calculations and knew whether or not the [new] moon would be visible. Accordingly, we are assured that anyone with a proper spirit and heart, who desires words of wisdom and probes to grasp the mysteries, will wish to know the methods of calculation used to determine whether or not the [new] moon would be visible on a particular night.2This concept, the calculation of the place and position of the new moon, and the determination of when it will be visible, is the subject of this and the following eight chapters. In the present chapter, the Rambam outlines the general principles and ground rules governing his calculations.
There are many differences of opinion among the sages of the nations of the previous eras who studied astronomy and mathematics, with regard to these methods of calculation.3See Chapter 17, Halachah 24, where the Rambam states that in this text he refers to the works of Greek scientists, because the books written by the Sages of Israel on the subject were not available to him. In the following halachah, however, he mentions having accepted traditions from the Rabbis. Great wise men have blundered regarding these matters. Concepts were hidden from them and doubts arose [in their minds].There are those who have made many calculations, but have not been able to find the correct approach to determine when the moon becomes visible. Rather, they plunged into the mighty waters, to return with merely a potsherd in their hands.4The poetic wording is borrowed, out of context, from Bava Kama 91a.
Over the course of history, through much research and investigation, several sages have discovered the proper methods of calculation. We also possess traditions regarding these principles that we have received from the sages, and proofs that were not written in texts that are of common knowledge. For these reasons, I have considered it proper to explain a method of calculation that will be available for anyone whose heart spurs him to approach the task and perform it.5The latter phrase is borrowed, also out of context, from Exodus 36:2.
A person should not regard these calculations lightly, because they are not required in the present age, for these methods are indeed abstract and deep matters. They constitute the mystery of the calendar, which was known [only] to great sages, who would not convey these matters to [most] other people, but only to ordained and perceptive [sages].6I.e., to receive this knowledge, one had to have received semichah as described in Hilchot Sanhedrin, Chapter 4. Nevertheless, not all the Sages who received semichah were privileged to this knowledge.The calendar that is employed in the era when there is no court to determine [the months according to the testimony of] witnesses, and which we use at present [is], by contrast, [a simple matter that] can be appreciated even by school children in three or four days.
A wise man of the gentile nations or a sage of Israel who studied Greek wisdom may meditate on the methods of calculation I have used to determine the appearance of the moon and may detect a slight approximation [and imprecision] with regard to certain matters. He should not presume that we have overlooked this point and were not aware that there was an approximation regarding that matter.Instead, he should assume that whenever we were not exact, it was because our mathematical calculations proved that [this inaccuracy] did not affect the knowledge of the time when the moon would become visible, and thus it was not significant. Therefore, we were not precise regarding this matter.
Similarly, should a person see that [our use of] one of the methods leads to a minor inadequacy that is inappropriate for this method of computation, [he should realize] that this was intentional. For this method produced an advantage from another perspective that will produce a correct result - [albeit] through approximate calculations - without requiring lengthy computations. Thus, a person who is not practiced in such matters will not be flustered by complex computations that are of no avail with regard to the visibility of the moon.
The [following] fundamental principles must be known by a person as a prelude to all astronomical computations, whether for the purpose of determining the visibility [of the moon] or for other purposes:The heavenly sphere7This term is used, because from man's perspective, the earth appears flat and the heavens appear as a sphere that revolves around him, only half of which is visible at any given time. is divided into 3608The number 360 was chosen because it can be divided by all the cardinal integers except for seven (Perush). degrees [and twelve constellations].9One corresponding roughly to each of the months of the year. Each constellation includes thirty degrees, beginning with the constellation of Aries the ram.10For the year begins in spring, and during the spring the sun is located in the constellation of Aries. Every degree contains sixty minutes, every minute sixty seconds, and every second sixty thirds. You may continue and divide into further fractions to the extent that you desire.
Therefore, were you to calculate that a particular star's position in the heavenly sphere is seventy degrees, thirty minutes and forty seconds, you would know that this star is located in the constellation of Gemini the twins, in the middle of the eleventh degree. For the constellation of Aries includes thirty degrees, and the constellation of Taurus the bull includes thirty degrees. Thus, there remain ten and one half degrees of the constellation of Gemini, plus forty seconds of the next degree.
Similarly, were you to calculate that a particular star's position in the heavenly sphere is 320 degrees, you would know that this star is located in the constellation of Aquarius the water bearer, in its twentieth degree. The same applies to all other calculations.The order of the constellations is the following: Aries the ram, Taurus the bull, Gemini the twins, Cancer the crab, Leo the lion, Virgo the virgin, Libra the balance, Scorpio the scorpion, Sagittarius the archer, Capricorn the goat, Aquarius the water-bearer, Pisces the fishes.11See Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 3:7, which states that these constellations appeared in these forms at the time of the flood, and then they were given these names. At present, the stars have changed position somewhat, and some creativity is required to perceive how the images suggested by these names are appropriate for these constellations.
In all calculations, when you collect fractions or add numbers, each integer should be added to its kind, the seconds to the seconds, the minutes to the minutes, and the degrees to the degrees. When calculating seconds, they should be grouped in sets of sixty [or less]. Whenever sixty seconds are reached, they should be considered a minute and added to the sum of the minutes.When calculating minutes, they should be grouped in sets of sixty [or less]. Whenever sixty minutes are reached, they should be considered a degree and added to the sum of the degrees.When calculating degrees, they should be grouped in sets of 360. If a sum above 360 is reached, the remainder after 360 has been subtracted is the figure that is of consequence.
In all computations, whenever you desire to subtract one number from another, should the second number be greater than the first number, even if it is merely one minute greater, it is necessary to add 360 degrees to the first number so that it is possible to subtract the [greater] number from it.
What is implied? When it is necessary to subtract two hundred degrees, fifty minutes and forty seconds - in symbols 200° 50' 40" - from one hundred degrees, twenty minutes and thirty seconds - in symbols 100° 20' 30" - [one should follow this procedure]:[First,] one adds 360 to 100, producing a sum of 460. Afterwards, one begins to subtract the seconds. Since it is impossible to subtract 40 from 30, it is necessary to convert one of the 20 minutes into 60 seconds. When added to 30, this produces a sum of 90. [From the 90] subtract 40, producing a total of 50 seconds.Afterwards, one must subtract 50 minutes from the 19 [remaining], for one of the minutes has already been converted into seconds. Since 50 cannot be subtracted from 19, one must convert a degree into 60 minutes. When this figure is added to 19, it produces a sum of 79. When 50 is subtracted [from 79], a total of 29 minutes remain.Afterwards, one must subtract the 200 degrees from the 459 decrees, for one of the degrees has already been converted into minutes. Thus 259 degrees remain. In symbols [the remainder is] 259° 29' 50". All other subtractions should be performed following a similar method.
The sun, the moon, and the remainder of the seven stars,12The Rambam appears to be referring to his statements in Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 3:1, which relate that there are nine spheres in which the stars revolve: The moon revolves in the first, then Mercury, Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, and then Saturn. In the eighth sphere revolve all the stars that are visible, and the ninth sphere includes and encircles all existence. each proceeds at a uniform speed in its orbit. They are never inclined to heaviness, nor to lightness. Rather, the speed at which they proceed today is the same speed at which they proceeded yesterday. And tomorrow, and indeed on every other day, they will proceed at this speed.Although the orbits in which they all travel encircle the earth,13The Rambam is following the theory of an earth-centered universe. The term "center" must, however, be understood loosely, because the earth does not lie at the exact center of all these spheres. the earth is not at the center of [their orbits].
Therefore, if one measured the progress [of any of these stars] against the sphere that encompasses the world in which the earth is the center - i.e., the sphere of the constellations - its [rate of] progress [would appear to] change.14The early astronomers realized that at some given times, the sun appears to travel faster or slower than at others - i.e., the pace at which it appears to proceed in the heavens varies between approximately 1 1/2 degrees per day and 58 1/2 minutes per day. Similarly, they saw that at different times of the year, the sun appears larger or smaller. By postulating that the earth was not the center of the sun's orbit, they were able to resolve these anomalies. Its rate of progress in the sphere of the constellations on one day could appear less or more than its progress on the previous day or on the following day.15Were the earth to lie at the center of all the planets' orbits, the speed at which the planets progress would not only be uniform, it would appear uniform. Since the earth is not in the center, although the planets are proceeding at a uniform pace, this does not always appear to be the case.
The uniform speed at which a planet, the sun, or the moon progresses is referred to as its mean motion.16See the notes on Chapter 6, Halachah 1. The progress that [this celestial body appears to make] in the sphere of the constellations that is sometimes greater and sometimes less [than its actual rate of progress] is referred to as its true motion. This determines the true position of the sun17I.e., the angular location in the heavenly sphere at which the sun can be found. The stars cannot be seen during the daytime. Hence, we cannot actually see the constellations in which the sun is located. Throughout this text, the term "the position of the sun" generally refers to the angular position of the celestial sphere that is just below the horizon when the sun sets. or the true position of the moon.18The place of the moon in the heavenly sphere can be seen at night. It is possible for us to determine its angular position in comparison to the constellations of the Zodiac.
We have already stated that the calculations that we explain in these laws are intended solely to determine the visibility of the [new] moon. Therefore, we have established the starting point from which we will always begin these calculations: the eve of Thursday,19I.e., Wednesday night. the third of Nisan, of the present year, the seventeenth year of the 260th [nineteen-year] cycle - i.e., the year 4938 since creation20This year corresponds to 1178 C.E. There are several other dates cited within the Mishneh Torah with regard to the composition of that text. - which is the year 1489 with regard to contracts,21In Talmudic times, legal contracts were dated from the year when Alexander the Great ascended to the throne. and 1109 years after the destruction of the Second Temple. This is the year that will be referred to as the starting point in these calculations.
Since the sighting of the moon is significant only in Eretz Yisrael as explained,22For the New Moon can be sanctified only in Eretz Yisrael, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 8. all our calculations are centered on the city of Jerusalem and locations within six or seven days' journey [from it. [In these places,] the moon is frequently sighted, and the people come and give testimony in the court.23The positive value of testimony from locales of more than a day's journey is mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachot 15-18.This location is situated approximately 32 degrees north of the equator,24More precisely, Jerusalem is 31° 47' north of the equator. [and the surrounding areas extend] from 29° to 35° [north]. Similarly, in longitude, it is situated approximately 24 degrees west of the center of the populated area,25The populated area refers to the land mass of Europe and Asia, for at the time the Rambam wrote his text, America had not been discovered. The center of the populated area refers to a line approximately 90° east of "western edge of civilization". Thus, Jerusalem, which is 66° east of "western edge of civilization," is 24° west of this line.The significance of the latitude and longitude of Jerusalem with regard to these calculations is mentioned in Chapter 17. [and the surrounding areas extend] from 21° to 27° [west].

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
The mean distance traveled by the sun in one day - i.e., in twenty-four hours - is 59 minutes and 8 seconds; in symbols 59' 8".1Since the sun travels throughout the entire 360° sphere over the course of a solar year, and a year is slightly longer than 365 days, the daily distance the sun travels is slightly less than one degree - more precisely, 59 minutes, 8 seconds and 19.8 thirds. Although the Rambam does not mention the thirds in this figure, he includes them in his subsequent calculations. Thus, in ten days, it travels 9 degrees, 51 minutes and 23 seconds,2When performing simple multiplication, the sum appears to be three seconds less. These three seconds have been added because of the inclusion of the multiples of the thirds, as mentioned in the previous note. Similarly, in subsequent calculations the Rambam also adds the multiples of the thirds. in symbols 9° 51' 23". In one hundred days, it travels 98 degrees, 33 minutes and 53 seconds, in symbols 98° 33' 53".The remainder [of the degrees] traveled [by the sun] over the course of one thousand days - after all the multiples of 360 have been subtracted, as explained3See Chapter 11, Halachah 10. - is 265 degrees, 38 minutes and 50 seconds, in symbols 265° 38' 50". The remainder [of the degrees] traveled [by the sun] over the course of ten thousand days is 136 degrees, 28 minutes and 20 seconds, in symbols 136° 28' 20".In this manner, one can multiply [the mean distance of a day] and calculate the distance [traveled] by the sun over any number of days. Similarly, if one would like to make pre-calculated figures for the mean distance for two days, for three days, for four days, up to ten days, one may do so. Similarly, if one desires to make pre-calculated figures for the mean distance for twenty days, for thirty days, for forty days, until one hundred days, one may do so. These figures become evident once one knows the mean distance for a single day.It would be proper for one to know and have prepared the mean distances traveled by the sun in 29 days, and in 354 days, [the latter] being the number of days in a lunar year when the months follow a regular pattern. This is called a regular year.4See Chapter 8, Halachah 6, which explains that a year in which all the months follow in order, one full and one lacking, is referred to as a regular year.When you have these figures prepared, it will be easy to calculate the visibility of the moon. For there are 29 full days from the night when the moon was sighted in one month to the night that it may be sighted in the following month. Similarly, each and every month, there will be a difference of 29 days [between the nights on which the moon may be sighted], no more and no less.5A lunar month is slightly longer than 29 days. Therefore, potential witnesses endeavor to sight the moon in the heavens on the night between the twenty-ninth and thirtieth days. [This is what concerns us,] for our sole desire in these calculations is to know [when the moon] will be sighted.6Indeed, many of the subsequent calculations mentioned by the Rambam may be accurate only on the first night of the month and may not be accurate on the subsequent nights.Similarly, [the difference in the sun's position] between the night when the moon will be sighted in a particular month one year and the night when it will be sighted [in that month] the following year will be that of a regular year, or that of a regular year plus one day.7The one day is added when both the months of Marcheshvan and Kislev are full. The commentaries raise the question why the Rambam does not mention the possibility of the year being lacking a day, as occurs when Marcheshvan and Kislev are both lacking.The mean distance traveled by the sun in one month is 28 degrees, 35 minutes and one second, in symbols 28° 35' 1". The distance it travels over the course of a regular [lunar] year is 348 degrees, 55 minutes and 15 seconds, in symbols 348° 55' 15".
There is one point in the orbit of the sun around the Earth - and similarly, in the orbits of the remainder of the seven stars [around the Earth] - when [the sun or] that star will be furthest removed from the Earth.8As stated in Chapter 11, Halachah 13, the Earth is not in the exact center of the orbits of the sun, the moon, or the other five planets. Therefore, there is one point in their orbits where they are furthest removed from the Earth. The knowledge of the location of this point is significant in calculating the true position of the sun, as will be explained in the following chapter. With the exception of the moon, that point in the orbit of the sun and, similarly, in the orbit of the other planets rotates in a uniform pattern, traveling about one degree in seventy years.9As the Rambam mentions in Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 3:3, not only do the sun and the stars move in their orbits, the orbits themselves move in the heavens. This movement can be seen most clearly by charting the movement of the apogee, the point in the orbit furthest from the Earth. The movement of the sun's orbit and similarly, that of the other stars, is relatively slow. The moon's orbit, by contrast, is moving at a much faster pace, as mentioned in the notes on Chapter 14, Halachah 1. This point is referred to as the apogee.Accordingly, in ten days, the apogee of the sun travels one and a half seconds - i.e., [a second and] thirty thirds. Thus, in one hundred days, [the apogee] travels fifteen seconds. In one thousand days, it travels two minutes and thirty seconds, and in ten thousand days, 25 minutes. In twenty-nine days, it travels four seconds and a fraction. In a regular year, it travels 53 seconds.As mentioned, the starting point for all our calculations is the eve of Thursday, the third of Nisan, 4938 years after creation. The position of the sun in terms of its mean distance on this date was 7 degrees, 3 minutes and 32 seconds in the constellation of Aries, in symbols 7° 3' 32". The apogee of the sun at this starting point was 26 degrees, 45 minutes and 8 seconds in the constellation of Gemini, in symbols 26° 45' 8".10Since more than 800 years have passed since the composition of the Mishneh Torah, the apogee of the sun has moved approximately twelve degrees and is presently located in the constellation of Cancer.Accordingly, if you desire to know the position of the sun according to its mean distance at any given time, you should calculate the number of days from the starting point mentioned until the particular day you desire, and determine the mean distance it traveled during these days according to the figures given previously, add the entire sum together, accumulating each unit of measure separately. The result is the mean position of the sun on that particular day. For example, if we desired to determine the mean position of the sun at the beginning of the eve of the Sabbath on the fourteenth of the month of Tammuz of the present year, the starting point [for these calculations, we should do the following]: Calculate the number of days from the starting point until the date on which you desire to know the position of the sun. [In this instance,] it is one hundred days. The mean distance the sun travels in one hundred days is 98° 33' 53". We then add that to the starting point, which is 7° 3' 32", and arrive at a total of 105 degrees, 37 minutes and 25 seconds, in symbols 105° 37' 25". Thus, the sun's mean position at the beginning of this night will be 15 degrees and 37 minutes of the sixteenth degree in the constellation of Cancer.At times, the sun will be located in the mean [position] that can be determined using the above methods of calculation at the beginning of the night, and at times an hour before the setting of the sun, or an hour afterwards.11Since, as explained in the previous chapter, the mean distance does not represent the place where the sun can actually be seen in the sky, there will be a slight discrepancy. The mean position represents the sun's position at 6 PM. During the summer months, the sun will reach that position before sunset, and during the winter months, it will reach that position after sunset. This [lack of definition concerning] the sun's [position] will not be of consequence with regard to calculating the visibility [of the moon], for we will compensate for this approximation when calculating the mean position of the moon.12See the conclusion of Chapter 14.One should follow the same procedure at all times - for any date one desires, even if it is one thousand years in the future. When [the mean distance traveled by the sun] is calculated and the remainder [after all the multiples of 360 have been subtracted] is added to [the figures of] the starting point, you will arrive at the mean position.The same principles apply regarding the mean position of the moon, or the mean position of any other planet. Once you know the distance it travels in a single day, and you know the starting point from which to begin [calculations], total up the distance it travels throughout as many years or days as you desire, add that to the starting point, and you will arrive at its position according to its mean distance.The same concepts apply regarding the apogee of the sun. Add to the starting point the distance it travels over the course of days or years, and you will know the position of the apogee of the sun for the day you desire.Similarly, if you desire to establish another date as the starting point instead of the date which [we have chosen] to begin in this year, [choosing] a year that will be the beginning of a particular nineteen-year cycle, or that will be the beginning of a new century, you may. Similarly, if you would like to use as a starting point a date in the past, before the date given above, or a date many years in the future, the path [to arrive at such a starting point] is well known.How is this figure to be calculated? We have already established the mean distance traveled by the sun in a regular year, in twenty- nine days, and in a single day. It is known that a year whose months13I.e., both Marcheshvan and Kislev. See Chapter 8, Halachot 6-10, for the ground rules regarding the determination of when a year is regular, when its months are full, and when they are lacking. are full is one day longer than a regular year. Similarly, a year whose months are lacking is one day shorter than a regular year. With regard to a leap year,14See Chapter 6, Halachah 11, which relates that seven of the years in a nineteen-year cycle are leap years, and states which of these years will be leap years. if its months are regular, it will be thirty days longer than a regular year. If its months are full, it will be thirty-one days longer than a regular year. If its months are lacking, it will be twenty-nine days longer than a regular year.Since these principles are already established, it is possible to calculate the mean distance traveled by the sun for as many years or as many days as you desire, and add it to [the mean position of the sun on the date established previously as] the starting point, and you will be able to determine the mean [position of the sun] for any future date. Afterwards, you can use that date as a starting point.[Conversely,] you may subtract the mean [distance traveled by the sun over the course of a particular period] from [the mean position of the sun on the date established previously as] the starting point, and you will be able to determine the mean [position of the sun] for any past date. Afterwards, you can use that date as a starting point.The same principles also apply with regard to the mean position of the moon or any of the other planets, if [their mean positions on any particular date] are known to you. It also should be apparent that just as it is possible to determine the mean position of the sun for any future date, so too, it is possible to determine its mean position for any previous date.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
[The following method should be used] if you wish to know the true position1As stated in Chapter 11, the true position of the sun refers to the position at which it is seen in the heavenly sphere. The difference between the sun's true position and its mean position stems from the fact that the Earth is not located at the exact center of the sun's orbit. of the sun on any particular day you desire: First, it is necessary to calculate the mean position of the sun through the methods of calculation we have explained. Then calculate the position of the apogee of the sun.2The method through which both these figures can be calculated is stated in the previous chapter. Afterwards, subtract the apogee of the sun from the mean position of the sun. The remainder is referred to as the course of the sun.3I.e., the path the sun has traveled in its orbit from the apogee until it reached its present position.
[The next step is] to calculate the angular distance of the course of the sun.4The course of the sun is an arc extending from the mean position of the sun to its apogee. The angular distance of the course is derived by drawing straight lines from the mean position and the apogee to the center of the sun's orbit.If the apogee of the sun were located at O°, the angular distance of the course and the sun's mean position would be the same. Since, however, the apogee also moves within the heavenly sphere, there is a variance between these two figures. If the angular distance of the course is less than 180 degrees, one should subtract5Before the sun reaches the perigee, the point in its orbit that is closest to the Earth, its true position will always be less than its mean position. Hence, the angle referred to as the angle [determined by the] course must be subtracted from its mean position to arrive at the true position. the angle [determined by the] course6The angle [determined by the] course refers to the extent of the deviation between the position of the sun that can be observed in the sky and its mean position. The manner of determining this figure is described in Halachah 4.To express these concepts in geometric terms: The sun's true position represents the angle at which it can be found in the sphere of the heavens of which the Earth is the center (c). When the angle that is called the angle [determined by the] course (a) is added to this angle, the sum is equivalent to the angle of the course of the sun (b).How is this figure derived? Refer to the accompanying diagram: The sum of the angles of the triangle a, c, and d equals 180°, and the angles b and d equal 180°. Hence, b equals c a.Thus, the true position of the sun is equivalent to its mean position minus the figure referred to as the angle [determined by the] course. Thus, when the course is less than 180 degrees, the sun's true position is always a small amount less than its mean position. from the sun's mean position. If the angular distance of the course is more than 180 degrees, one should add7When the sun passes the perigee, its true position will always be greater than its mean position. Hence, the angle referred to as the angle [determined by the] course must be added to its mean position to arrive at the true position.Why is this so? Refer to the following diagram: d refers to the true position of the sun, b to its mean position and a to the angle referred to as the angle [determined by the] course. E to its true position minus 180° and f refers to its mean position minus 180°. a + f + c equals 180. E + c equals 180. Thus, a + f equals e. Hence, the mean position plus the angle [determined by the] course will be equal to the true position. the angle [determined by the] course to the sun's mean position. The figure remaining after making this addition or subtraction represents [the sun's] true position.
If the course [of the sun] is an even 180 degrees or an even 360 degrees, there will be no angle [determined by the course to add or to subtract]. Instead, the [sun's] mean position is its true position.8I.e., when the sun is at the apogee or perigee, there will be one straight line between the Earth (the center of the heavenly sphere), the center of the sun's orbit, and the actual position of the sun.
What is the angle [determined by the] course? If the course is ten degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 20 minutes.If the course is twenty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 40 minutes.If the course is thirty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 58 minutes.If the course is forty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 15 minutes.If the course is fifty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 29 minutes.If the course is sixty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 41 minutes.If the course is seventy degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 51 minutes.If the course is eighty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 57 minutes.If the course is ninety degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 59 minutes.If the course is one hundred degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 58 minutes.9The largest angle determined by the course is when the angular distance of the course itself is 96 degrees - i.e., shortly after the mean position of the sun passes directly above the center of its orbit. After this point is reached, the angle begins to decrease.Significantly, the rate of the decrease does not correspond exactly to the rate of increase as the angles approach 96 degrees. The reason for this difference is that, as stated above, the position of the Earth is not at the center of the sun's orbit. Hence, at 100 and 80 degrees, although the mean position of the sun has moved an equal distance from the center of its orbit, it has moved different distances from the Earth.If the course is one hundred ten degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 53 minutes.If the course is one hundred twenty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 45 minutes.If the course is one hundred thirty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 33 minutes.If the course is one hundred forty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 19 minutes.If the course is one hundred fifty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 1 degree and 1 minute.If the course is one hundred sixty degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 42 minutes.If the course is one hundred seventy degrees, the [resulting] angle will be 21 minutes.If the course is an even one hundred eighty degrees, it has no measure. Instead, its mean position is its true position, as we explained.
[The following procedure should be used] if the course [of the sun] is greater than one hundred eighty degrees: One should subtract the course from three hundred sixty degrees and [calculate the resulting] angle accordingly.10Thus, our computations will be based on the negative of the angle measured previously. To put the Rambam's statements in layman's terms: The angle formed will be the same regardless of whether the mean position of the sun is measured in an increase from O° or a decrease from 360°.What is implied? If the course is 200 degrees, that figure should be subtracted from 360 degrees, leaving a remainder of 160 degrees. Since you already know that the [resulting] angle of a course of 160 degrees is 42 minutes, that same figure will be the [resulting] angle of a course of 200 degrees.
Similarly, if the course was three hundred degrees, one should subtract that figure from three hundred sixty, leaving a remainder of sixty. Since you already know that the [resulting] angle of a course of 60 degrees is 1 degree and 41 minutes, that same figure will be the [resulting] angle of a course of 300 degrees. Similar procedures should be followed in calculating other figures.
[How is the angle determined by the course calculated] when the course is [an intermediate figure - e.g.,] 65 degrees? You already know that the [resulting] angle of 60 degrees is 1 degree and 41 minutes. And you know that the [resulting] angle of 70 degrees is 1 degree and 51 minutes. Thus, there are ten minutes between these [two] measures. Thus, [an increase of] a degree [of the course] will bring an increase of a minute [in the resulting angle]. Thus, the [resulting] angle of a course of 65 degrees will be 1 degree and 46 minutes.11Although the correspondence between the angular length of the course and the angle [determined by the] course is not uniform over a large span, within a span of ten degrees the difference between the actual figure and the approximation arrived at by the Rambam is not of consequence.
Similarly, if the course was 67 degrees, the [resulting] angle would be 1 degree and 48 minutes. A similar procedure should be followed regarding any course that has both units and tens, both for calculations regarding the sun and for calculations regarding the moon.
[To apply these principles]: Should we desire to know the true position of the sun at the beginning of Friday night, the fourteenth of Tammuz for this present year: First, we should calculate the mean position of the sun for this time, which is, as explained,12Chapter 12, Halachah 2. 105° 37' 25". We should then calculate the apogee of the sun at this time, which is 86° 45' 23". When the apogee is subtracted from the mean position, the remainder, the course [of the sun], will be 18 degrees, 52 minutes and 2 seconds, in symbols 18° 52' 2 ".With regard to the course [of the sun], the minutes are of no consequence. If they are less than thirty, they should be disregarded entirely. If they are more than thirty, they should be considered an additional degree and added to the sum of the degrees. Accordingly, it should be considered as if there are 19 degrees in this course. The [resulting] angle of such a course can be calculated to be 38 minutes in the manner that we explained.
Since the course is less than 180 degrees, the [resulting] angle [of the course], 38 minutes, should be subtracted from the mean position of the sun, leaving a remainder of 104 degrees, 59 minutes and 25 seconds, in figures 104° 59' 25". Thus, the true position of the sun at the beginning of this night will be fifteen degrees less 35 seconds in the constellation of Cancer.One need not pay attention to the seconds at all, neither with regard to the position of the sun, nor with regard to the position of the moon, nor in any other calculations regarding the sighting [of the moon]. Instead, if the number of seconds is approximately13The commentaries have questioned the Rambam's use of the word "approximately." Our bracketed additions are made in that light. thirty [or more], they should be considered a minute, and added to the sum of the minutes.
Since you are able to calculate the location of the sun on any desired date, you will be able to calculate the true date of the equinox or solstice for any equinox or solstice you desire,14The calculation of the equinoxes and solstices is significant with regard to the determination of the calendar, as explained in Chapters 9 and 10. Since the vernal (spring) equinox takes place when, according to the sun's true motion, it enters the constellation of Aries, the date on which that takes place can be calculated for any particular year. Similarly, the summer solstice takes place when, according to the sun's true motion, it enters the constellation of Cancer, and that date can be calculated. Similar concepts apply regarding the autumnal equinox and the winter solstice. whether for the equinoxes or solstices that will take place in the future, after the date we established as a starting point, or for the equinoxes or solstices that have taken place in previous years.

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
There are two mean rates of progress [that are significant] with regard to the moon, for the moon revolves in a small orbit that does not encompass the earth. Its mean progress within this orbit is referred to as the mean within its path.The small orbit [within which the moon revolves] itself rotates in a larger orbit that encompasses the earth.1As mentioned in Chapter 11, the rate of the advance of the sun, the moon, and the other planets does not appear to be uniform. For the sun, the deviation is relatively minor and can be resolved by postulating that the Earth is not at the center of the sun's orbit. The deviations of the moon from its mean rate of advance, however, are larger than that of the sun, and more irregular. (According to modern science, these deviations result from the gravitational pull of the sun and other celestial bodies.)To resolve this difficulty, some ancient astronomers (Ptolemy and Aristotle, among others) postulated that with regard to the moon, two orbits were involved: One orbit encompassed the Earth, although the Earth was not at its center. Around this orbit existed one (and according to some opinions, more than one) smaller orbit, within which the moon rotated. This smaller orbit is referred to as an epicycle. Because of the moon's position in this smaller orbit, it would appear to be either ahead of or behind the mean position of the center of this orbit. The mean progress of the small orbit within the large orbit that encompasses the earth is referred to as the moon's mean. The rate of progress for the moon's mean in one day is 13 degrees, 10 minutes and 35 seconds, in symbols 13° 10' 35".2This refers to the rate of progress that is apparent to an observer on the Earth. In theory, however, this figure is a result of two different motions. The entire orbit of the moon is moving in the heavens. (The orbit of the sun is also moving, as reflected in the movement of the sun's apogee, as mentioned in Chapter 12, Halachah 2. The sun's orbit is moving at a very slow pace, one and a half seconds a day. In contrast, the moon's orbit moves much faster, slightly more than 11 degrees each day. This movement is from east to west, opposite to the movement of the heavenly sphere.)Within this larger orbit revolves the epicycle, the smaller orbit around which the moon revolves. The epicycle is revolving at approximately 24 1/2 degrees a day, from west to east. Thus, an observer on the Earth would see the epicycle as moving 13 degrees and a fraction (i.e., 24 1/2 - 11 1/5) forward (eastward) in the heavenly sphere every day, as the Rambam states.
Thus, its progress in ten days will be 131 degrees, 45 minutes and 50 seconds, in symbols 131° 45' 50". The remainder [of the sum]3I.e., after the multiples of 360 have been subtracted.of its progress in one hundred days will be 237 degrees, 38 minutes and 23 seconds, in symbols 237° 38' 23".4It appears that the Rambam has added three seconds. This addition was made because the rate of progress also includes three thirds not mentioned in the original figure, but included in this calculation.The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in one thousand days is 216 degrees, 23 minutes and 50 seconds, in symbols 216° 23' 50". The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in ten thousand days is 3 degrees, 58 minutes and 20 seconds, in symbols 3° 58' 20".The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in twenty-nine days is 22 degrees, 6 minutes and 56 seconds, in symbols 22° 6' 56".5On this basis, we can understand why a lunar month is slightly longer than 29 1/2 days. The mean distance traveled by the sun in 29 days is approximately 28 1/2 degrees (Chapter 12, Halachah 1), approximately 6 1/2 degrees more than the remainder of the progress of the moon's mean. This distance (and the additional approximately almost half a degree traveled by the sun during this time) is travelled by the moon's mean in slightly longer than twelve hours on the following day.The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in a regular year is 344 degrees, 26 minutes and 43 seconds, in symbols 344° 26' 43". Following these guidelines, you can multiply these figures for any number of days or years you desire.
The distance travelled by the mean within its path in a single day is 13 degrees, 3 minutes and 54 seconds, in symbols 13° 3' 54".6This distance is figured east to west, opposite to the movement of the heavenly sphere. Thus, its progress in ten days will be 130 degrees, 39 minutes and no seconds, in symbols 130° 39'. The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in one hundred days will be 226 degrees, 29 minutes and 53 seconds, in symbols 226° 29' 53".7It appears that the Rambam has subtracted seven seconds. This subtraction was carried out because his figure for the rate of progress had been rounded off. In fact, the rate is seven thirds less than the figure mentioned originally. The lack of these thirds was taken into consideration in this calculation.The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in one thousand days is 104 degrees, 58 minutes and 50 seconds, in symbols 104° 58' 50". The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in ten thousand days is 329 degrees, 48 minutes and 20 seconds, in symbols 329° 48' 20".The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in twenty-nine days is 18 degrees, 53 minutes and 4 seconds, in symbols 18° 53' 4".
The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in a regular year is 305 degrees, no minutes and 13 seconds, in symbols 305° 13".8Although we have followed the standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah and included this paragraph in Halachah 4, it is clearly part of the previous halachah.The position of the moon's mean on Wednesday night, [the third of Nisan, 4938,] the starting point for these calculations, was 1 degree, 14 minutes and 43 seconds, in figures 1° 14' 43", in the constellation of Taurus. The mean within its path at this date was 84 degrees, 28 minutes and 42 seconds, in symbols 84° 28' 42".Since you know the mean rate of progress for the moon's mean, and you know its position on the date of the starting point, you [will be able to calculate] the position of the moon's mean on any date that you desire, as you did with regard to the mean position of the sun.After calculating [the position of] the moon's mean on the beginning of the night that you desire, [the next step in calculating where the moon can be sighted] is to focus on the sun and see the constellation in which it will be located [at that time].9As mentioned in Chapter 12, Halachah 2, and notes, the sun does not always reach its mean position at sunset. In the summer, when the days are longer, it reaches its mean position slightly earlier, and in the winter slightly later. In the following halachah, the Rambam states the values that allow us to compensate for these differences.
If the sun is located between midway in the constellation of Pisces and midway in the constellation of Aries, the moon's mean should be left without emendation.10This corresponds to the month of Nisan, the time of the vernal equinox, when the sun sets at approximately 6 PM. Hence, there is no need to adjust the position of the moon's mean. If the sun is located between midway in the constellation of Aries and the beginning of the constellation of Gemini, 15 minutes should be added to the moon's mean.11This corresponds to the beginning of the summer, when the days are longer. Since the moon is moving slightly more than thirteen degrees per day away from the sun, its rate of progress per hour is thus slightly more than 30 minutes. When the sun's rate of progress per hour - for it is moving (eastward) in the same direction as the moon - is also taken into consideration, it is proper to consider the moon's progress as thirty minutes per hour. Thus, the Rambam is saying that in these months, the sun will set approximately half an hour after 6 PM. If the sun is located between the beginning of the constellation of Gemini and the beginning of the constellation of Leo, 30 minutes should be added to the moon's mean.12This corresponds to the middle of the summer, the longest days of the year. To compensate for the further delay in the setting of the sun, an additional fifteen minutes should be added to the moon's mean. [It must be noted that the number 30 in our translation is based on authentic manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. Most of the standard published texts mention 15 minutes in this clause as well.] If the sun is located between the beginning of the constellation of Leo and midway in the constellation of Virgo, 15 minutes should be added to the moon's mean.13At this time of year, the summer days are beginning to become shorter. Hence, an adjustment of only fifteen minutes is necessary.If the sun is located between midway in the constellation of Virgo and midway in the constellation of Libra, the moon's mean should be left without emendation.14This corresponds to the month of Tishrei, the time of the autumnal equinox, when the sun sets at approximately 6 PM. Hence, there is no need to adjust the position of the moon's mean. If the sun is located between midway in the constellation of Libra and the beginning of the constellation of Sagittarius, 15 minutes should be subtracted from the moon's mean.15This represents the beginning of the winter, when the sun sets at an earlier time. Hence, rather than add minutes to the moon's mean, we subtract them. If the sun is located between the beginning of the constellation of Sagittarius and the beginning of the constellation of Aquarius, 30 minutes should be subtracted from the moon's mean.16This period represents the middle of the winter, the shortest days of the year. To compensate for the further precipitance of the setting of the sun, an additional fifteen minutes should be subtracted from the moon's mean. [It must be noted that, in this instance as well, the number 30 in our translation is a deviation from the standard published texts, based on authentic manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah.] If the sun is located between the beginning of the constellation of Aquarius and midway in the constellation of Pisces, 15 minutes should be subtracted from the moon's mean.17At this point, the days are beginning to get longer. Therefore, only a fifteen-minute adjustment is necessary.
The figure that remains after these additions or subtractions have been made, or when the mean was left without emendation, is the mean of the moon approximately 20 minutes after the setting of the sun18This is the time when the stars begin to appear in Eretz Yisrael. for the time when this mean was calculated. This is referred to as the mean of the moon at the time of the sighting.

=== 15 | chapter 15 ===
If you desire to know the true position of the moon1I.e., the location of the moon as it appears in the sky. on any particular date, first calculate the mean of the moon at the time of the sighting for the desired date. Then calculate the mean of the [moon within its] path and the sun's mean [position] for that date. Subtract the sun's mean from the moon's mean and double the remainder.2The Rambam is following the notion that the Earth does not lie at the center of the moon's orbit. Hence, like the sun, the moon has an apogee and a perigee.Also of significance here is the fact that, as mentioned in the notes on the previous chapter, the orbit of the moon is moving from east to west at a relatively fast pace, 11 degrees, 12 minutes and 19 seconds per day.A conjunction refers to the time the sun, the moon, and the Earth are aligned in a straight line. Accordingly, the sun's rays are reflected back without being observed from the Earth, and the moon is therefore not seen in the heavens. At the time of the conjunction, the moon is always at its apogee.(This can be explained as follows: When the moon is aligned directly between the sun and the Earth, it is at the point in its orbit that is closest to the sun. Therefore, the gravitational pull of the sun draws the moon away from the Earth.)As the moon continues in its orbit, after the conjunction, it and its apogee move away from the sun in opposite directions. Significantly, the angular distance traveled by the moon and its apogee from the sun is the same.To explain: The moon's mean is moving at rate of 13 degrees, 10 minutes and 35 seconds per day from west to east. Since the sun is also moving from west to east at the rate of 59 minutes and eight seconds per day, every day the moon will have traveled 12 degrees, 11 minutes and 27 seconds from the sun. Its apogee is moving from east to west at a speed of 11 degrees, 12 minutes and 19 seconds per day. When the sun's mean motion is added to that figure, the same total, 12 degrees, 11 minutes and 27 seconds, is reached. Thus, the double elongation, which is calculated by doubling the angular distance between the moon's mean and the sun's mean, represents the angular distance between the moon's mean and the apogee of its orbit.(The moon also reaches its apogee when it is full. At this point, the sun, the Earth, and the moon are aligned in a straight line, and the gravitational pull of the sun draws the Earth away from the moon. According to contemporary science, however, these two figures are not alike, and the apogee reached at conjunction is greater than the apogee reached at a full moon.) The resulting figure is referred to as the double elongation.
As mentioned previously, the intent of all the calculations in these chapters is to know how to sight the moon. [In this context, the size of this double elongation is significant.][To explain:] It is impossible for this double elongation to be less than five degrees3At this time, the mean position of the moon will have moved 2 1/2 degrees from the mean position of the sun. Unless it moves that distance, its crescent will be too small to be noticed in the sky. This distance will be covered by the moon in slightly less than five hours. Thus, within five hours of the conjunction of the sun and the moon, it will be possible to sight the new moon.The commentaries have noted a slight incongruity between the Rambam's statements here and his statements at the beginning of Chapter 17, where he states that the longitude at the night of the sighting of the moon will not be less than nine degrees nor more than twenty-four degrees. There is a difference of approximately seven degrees between these two figures. They attempt to resolve this discrepancy by stating that in this chapter the Rambam is speaking in terms of mean distance, while in Chapter 17 he is speaking in terms of true distance. At times, there can be as great as a seven-degree fluctuation between the two figures (Perush, Ralbach). or more than 62 degrees4At this time, 61 hours will have passed since the time of the conjunction, and the moon will have moved 31 degrees from the sun. Under such circumstances, the crescent of the moon will be large enough to be openly visible to all, and no calculations will be necessary. on the night the moon is to be sighted. Its measure will never exceed or fall short of these numbers.
Accordingly, it is necessary to contemplate [the length of] this double elongation. If the double elongation is five degrees or near that measure, there is no need to be concerned with an increase, and its measure need not be increased. If [the length of] the double elongation is between six and eleven degrees, one should add one degree to the mean of the [the moon] within its path.5The difference between the true position of the moon and its mean position depends on the progress of the moon in its epicycle - i.e., the mean of [the moon] within its path, which is moving at approximately 13 degrees a day from east to west, as stated in the previous chapter. The Rambam is stating that a further adjustment is necessary, depending on the distance between the moon and the sun.During the first days of the month, as the distance between the sun and the moon increases, the moon's progress in its epicycle will vary from its standard rate of progress. According to the medieval science, this variation depends on the movement of the nekudah hanochachit, the point opposite the center of the moon's orbit. According to modern science, this difference depends on the gravitational pull of the sun and other celestial bodies.If [the length of] the double elongation is between twelve and eighteen degrees, one should add two degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path. If [the length of] the double elongation is between nineteen and 24 degrees, one should add three degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path. If [the length of] the double elongation is between 25 and 31 degrees, one should add four degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path. If [the length of] the double elongation is between 32 and 38 degrees, one should add five degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path.If [the length of] the double elongation is between 39 and 45 degrees, one should add six degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path. If [the length of] the double elongation is between 46 and 51 degrees, one should add seven degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path. If [the length of] the double elongation is between 52 and 59 degrees, one should add eight degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path. If [the length of] the double elongation is between 60 and 63 degrees, one should add nine degrees to the mean of [the moon] within its path.The mean of [the moon] within its path that results after these additions have been made is referred to as the correct course.
After the angular distance of the correct course is calculated,6I.e., the progress of the moon in its epicycle. [the following procedure should be carried out]: If [the result] is less than 180 degrees, the angle of the course7This refers to the angle between the line extending from the mean position of the moon to the Earth and the line extending from the adjusted position of the moon in its epicycle to the Earth. should be subtracted8When the correct course is less than 180 degrees, the angular distance between the moon's actual position and its mean is less than the mean distance. Hence, a subtraction should be made. from the mean of the moon at the time of the sighting. If [the result] is more than 180 degrees, the angle of the course should be added9When the correct course is more than 180 degrees, the angular distance between the moon's actual position and its mean is more than the mean distance. Hence, an addition should be made. to the mean of the moon at the time of the sighting.The figure that remains after this addition or subtraction is made is the true position of the moon at the time of sighting.
Know that if the correct course is an even 180 degrees or 360 degrees, there is no angle of the course. Instead, the mean position of the moon at the time of sighting is the true position of the moon at that time.
What is the angle of its course? If the correct course is ten degrees, its angle will be 50 minutes. If the correct course is twenty degrees, its angle will be 1 degree and 38 minutes. If it is 30, its angle will be 2 degrees and 24 minutes. If it is 40, its angle will be 3 degrees and 6 minutes.10The angle of the course of the moon is far larger than the angle of the course of the sun. The rationale for this difference is easily explainable. The moon is far closer to the Earth than the sun. Therefore, the angle between the two lines extending from either end of the course to the Earth will be greater. If it is 50, its angle will be 3 degrees and 44 minutes. If it is 60, its angle will be 4 degrees and 16 minutes.If it is 70, its angle will be 4 degrees and 41 minutes. If it is 80, its angle will be 5 degrees. If it is 90, its angle will be 5 degrees and 5 minutes. If it is 100, its angle will be 5 degrees and 8 minutes.11The line from the Earth to the moon's mean varies only slightly, while the line from the Earth to the true position of the moon changes to a far greater degree as the moon proceeds along its epicycle, changing the size of the angle of the course. The angle of the course will be largest when the angle between the line extending from the Earth to the true position of the moon and the line extending from the true position of the moon to its mean position is ninety-six degrees - i.e., when these two lines are almost directly perpendicular to each other.(The reason the largest angle is not at a direct 90-degree angle is that the line to the moon's mean is drawn from the center of the Earth, and the true position takes into consideration the fact that we are looking at the moon from the surface of the Earth, which is removed from its center.) If it is 110, its angle will be 4 degrees and 59 minutes. If it is 120, its angle will be 4 degrees and 40 minutes.12Our translation is based on the authentic manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text reads 4 degrees and 20 minutes.If it is 130, its angle will be 4 degrees and 11 minutes. If it is 140, its angle will be 3 degrees and 33 minutes. If it is 150, its angle will be 213Here, also, there is a printing error in the standard printed texts of the Mishneh Torah, and those texts read 3 degrees. degrees and 48 minutes. If it is 160, its angle will be 1 degree and 56 minutes. If it is 170, its angle will be 59 minutes. If it is an even 180 degrees, [the course] will not have an angle. Instead, as stated above, the moon's mean position will be identical with its true position.
If the correct course is more than 180 degrees, you should subtract it from 360 to obtain its angle14For the same angle is produced regardless of whether one makes an increase or a decrease from 180° or 360°., as you did for the course of the sun.15See Chapter 13, Halachot 5-6.Similarly, if the correct course includes units as well as tens, you should [calculate the average increase per degree and add the proportionate amount to the lower figure]. The procedure used to calculate the angle of the course for the course of the sun should be used to calculate the angle of the correct course [of the moon].16See Chapter 13, Halachah 7.
What is implied? Should we desire to know the true position of the moon on Friday night, the second of Iyar in the present year - the starting point for these calculations - the number of complete days that have passed from the date that is the starting point until the date on which we desire to know the true position of the moon is 29. One should [first] calculate the mean position of the sun for that night; this is 35 degrees, 38 minutes and 33 seconds, in symbols 35° 38' 33".You should then calculate the mean of the moon at the time of the sighting, which is 53 degrees, 36 minutes and 39 seconds, in symbols 53° 36' 39". Afterwards, calculate the mean of [the moon] within its path for this time, which is 103 degrees, 21 minutes and 46 seconds, in symbols, 103° 21' 46". Then subtract the mean position of the sun from the moon's mean, producing a remainder of 17 degrees, 58 minutes and six seconds. This is the elongation. Doubling this figure produces a double elongation of 35 degrees, 56 minutes and 12 seconds, in symbols 35° 56' 12". Therefore, five degrees should be added to the course, as mentioned. Thus, the correct course will be 10817In the standard printed texts of the Mishneh Torah, there is a printing error, and those texts read 180 degrees. degrees and 21 minutes. As mentioned above with regard to the sun,18See Chapter 13, Halachah 9. the minutes are of no consequence in the calculation of the course.
When calculating the angle for a course of 108, the result is 5 degrees and one minute. Since the correct course is less than 180 degrees, this figure should be subtracted from the moon's mean, leaving a remainder of 48 degrees, 3519Here also there is a printing error in the standard published text, which reads 33 minutes. minutes and 39 seconds.The seconds should be rounded off and considered to be a minute. Accordingly, the true position of the moon at this time will be 18 degrees and 36 minutes of the nineteenth degree in the constellation of Taurus, in symbols 18° 36'.In a similar manner, it is possible for you to calculate the true position of the moon at the time of sighting for any date that you desire from the beginning of this year that was chosen as the starting point until the end of all time.

=== 16 | chapter 16 ===
The orbit in which the moon revolves [intersects] the orbit in which the sun revolves at an angle,1More specifically, as mentioned in Halachah 9, the maximum angular distance between the two orbits is 5 degrees. [so that] a portion of [the moon's orbit] is inclined to the north of the sun's orbit and a portion is inclined south of the sun's orbit.2The importance of the concept the Rambam introduces here, the difference in latitude between the planes of the orbits of the sun and the moon, becomes significant in the following chapter.To explain briefly: In the previous chapters, it was explained that the visibility of the moon depends upon the distance in longitude between it and the sun. At the time of conjunction, the sun and the moon are at the same longitudinal point. Therefore, they set at the same time. As the difference in longitude between them increases, the crescent of the moon grows and the time of its setting becomes later, increasing the chances of its visibility.Nevertheless, the moon's latitude also affects its visibility. The greater the latitude of the moon [i.e., its inclination from the orbit of the sun] the larger its crescent will appear. Also, a northerly latitude causes the moon to set later and thus makes it easier to be sighted. A southerly latitude, by contrast, causes the moon to set earlier and thus makes sighting it more difficult. There are two points, one opposite the other, at which these orbits intersect.3The difference in latitude between the orbits of the sun and the moon explains why there is not a lunar eclipse at every full moon, and why there is not a solar eclipse at every conjunction - although at the time of the full moon, the sun, the earth and the moon are aligned in a single line, and at the time of conjunction, the sun, the moon and the earth are aligned in a single line.Although the longitude of the sun and the moon is the same at these times, since their latitudes are different, the moon's shadow does not interfere with the light of the sun at a conjunction, and the earth's shadow does not prevent the light of the sun from reaching the moon at a full moon. Only when a conjunction or a full moon takes place at (or near) the point where the orbits of the moon and the sun intersect does an eclipse take place.When the moon is at one of these points, it is revolving in the same plane as the sun. As the moon departs from these points, it is proceeding either to the north or to the south of the sun.The point in the moon's [orbit] at which it begins to be inclined to the north of [the plane of] the sun's [orbit] is referred to as the head, while the point [in its orbit] from which it begins to be inclined to the south of [the plane of] the sun's [orbit] is referred to as the tail.*This head revolves at a uniform pace,4Because of the revolution of the head, the determination of the moon's longitude will require several stages of computation. [proceeding] in opposition to the movement of the sphere of the constellations5I.e., the head revolves from east to west. without increase or decrease - i.e., it moves from [the constellation of] Pisces to [the constellation of] Aquarius. It continuously follows [this pattern].
The mean movement of the head in one day is 3 minutes and 11 seconds.6As evident from the later figures given by the Rambam, this number is an approximation, and the actual figure is several thirds less. Thus, its movement in ten days is 31 minutes and 47 seconds; its movement in one hundred days is 5 degrees, 17 minutes, and 43 seconds, in symbols 5° 17' 43". In one thousand days, its movement is 52 degrees, 57 minutes and 10 seconds, in symbols 52° 57' 10". The remainder [of the sum] of its progress in ten thousand days is 169 degrees, 31 minutes and 40 seconds, in symbols 169° 31' 40".Thus, the distance it travels in twenty-nine days is 1 degree, 32 minutes and 9 seconds, in symbols 1° 32' 9". Its progress in a regular year is 18 degrees, 44 minutes and 42 seconds, in symbols 18° 44' 42". The mean position of the head on Thursday night [of the present year,] the starting point for these calculations, is 180 degrees, 57 minutes, and 28 seconds, in symbols 180° 57' 28".7The Rambam is giving a negative figure here, his intent being 360° - 180° 57' 28. In positive terms, it would be a position of 179° 2' 32.
If you desire to calculate the position of the head at any given date, [you should follow this procedure:] First, calculate the mean progress of the head as you calculated the mean of the sun and the mean of the moon. [Afterwards,] subtract this mean from 360 degrees,8This subtraction is necessary, since, as mentioned above, the head revolves from east to west, opposite to the direction of the heavenly sphere as a whole.Thus, we begin with a negative value as a starting point and add to it the distance traveled by the head. When that total is subtracted from 360, we have a positive figure that is the true position of the head. The reason the Rambam uses a negative figure for his starting point is that as the numbers increase, it is easier to add the mean distance traveled by the head to the starting point of 180° 57' 28 and subtract the total from 360, than to define the starting point in positive terms and subtract the mean progress from it. and the remainder will be the location of the head at that time. The tail's position will always be the [place in the moon's orbit] directly opposite it.
What is implied? Let us suppose that we desired to know the location of the head on Friday night, the second of Iyar of this year - the starting point for these calculations. There are 29 complete days between the night of the starting point and the date for which we desire to know the location of the head.
We should then calculate the mean of the head according to the familiar manner, adding its distance traveled in 29 days to the starting point. Thus, the mean of the head is 182 degrees, 29 minutes and 37 seconds, in symbols 182° 29' 37". This mean should be subtracted from 360, leaving a remainder of 177 degrees, 30 minutes and 23 seconds, in symbols 177° 30' 23".This is the location of the head. The seconds are of no consequence. Thus, the position of the head will be 27 degrees and 30 minutes within the constellation of Virgo. The position of the tail will be [directly] opposite it: 27 degrees and 30 minutes within the constellation of Pisces.
There will always be an even half of the celestial sphere between the position of the head and the position of the tail. Therefore, whenever the head is in a particular constellation, the tail will be seven constellations further in the order of constellations, at the same position with regard to degrees and minutes. For example, if the head is ten degrees within a particular constellation, the tail will be ten degrees within the seventh constellation from it.
After having established the position of the head, the position of the tail, and the true position of the moon, consider [these three figures]: If the position of the moon is the same, both in degrees and in minutes, as its head or tail, then the moon will not be inclined to the north or the south.9As mentioned previously, the head and the tail are the positions where the moon's orbit intersects with that of the sun. Thus, if the moon is at the head or the tail, it is not at all inclined.If the position of the moon has passed10We have used a non-literal translation of the word ינפל in this and the following sentence based on the context in this halachah. the head11I.e., the difference between the position of the moon and the position of the head is less than 180 degrees, as stated in Halachah 10. and it is proceeding in the direction of the tail, know that the moon will be inclined to the north of the [plane] of the sun's [orbit]. If the position of the moon is before the tail12I.e., the difference between the position of the moon and the position of the head is more than 180 degrees, as stated in Halachah 10. and it is proceeding in the direction of the head, know that the moon will be inclined to the south of the [plane] of the sun's [orbit].
The inclination of the moon to the north or to the south is referred to as the moon's latitude.13The Hebrew term רחב הירח literally means "the width of the moon." It was given this name because its range from 0° to 5° is far less than that of the longitude of the moon, ארך הירח, the angular distance between the moon and the sun, which ranges from 0° to 360°. If the moon's incline is northerly, it is referred to as a northerly latitude. If the moon's incline is southerly, it is referred to as a southerly latitude. If the moon is positioned at either [the head or the tail], it has no latitude, as explained above.
The moon's latitude14According to contemporary science, the Rambam is making an approximation, for the latitude of the moon can reach 5 degrees and 9 minutes. will never exceed five degrees, whether to the north or to the south. This is the pattern it follows. [The moon] begins at the head and diverges slightly [from the sun's orbit, as it proceeds on its own orbit]. [The size of] this divergence continues to increase until it reaches five degrees.15As indicated from Halachah 11, this is the mid-point between the head and the tail, 90° and 270°. At this point, [the moon] begins to come slightly closer [to the sun's orbit], until it has no latitude at all when it reaches its tail.[After it reaches the tail, the moon] will again begin to diverge slightly [from the sun's orbit], until this divergence reaches five degrees. It will then begin to approach [the sun's orbit], until ultimately it has no latitude at all.
[The following procedure should be applied] if you desire to determine the latitude of the moon, and to [know] whether it is northerly or southerly: First, calculate the position of the head and the true position of the moon at the desired date. Then subtract the position of the head from the true position of the moon. The remainder is referred to as "the course of the latitude."16I.e., the distance the moon has traveled in its orbit from the head to its present position.If the course of the latitude is between one degree and 180 degrees, the latitude of the moon is northerly. If course of the latitude is more than 180 degrees, the latitude of the moon is southerly. If [the course] is an even 180 degrees or an even 360 degrees, the moon does not have any latitude at all.Afterwards, determine the size of the angle of the course of the latitude17This refers to the angle between the plane of the sun's orbit and the position of the moon in its orbit. - i.e., the extent to which the moon is inclined to the north or to the south. This figure is referred to as the moon's southerly latitude or northerly [latitude], as we explained.
How large is the angle of the course of the latitude? If the course of the latitude is ten degrees, its angle will be 52 minutes. If the course is twenty degrees, its angle will be one degree and 43 minutes. If the course is thirty degrees, its angle will be 2 degrees and 30 minutes.If the course is forty degrees, its angle will be 3 degrees and 13 minutes. If the course is fifty degrees, its angle will be 3 degrees and 50 minutes. If the course is sixty degrees, its angle will be 4 degrees and 20 minutes. If the course is seventy degrees, its angle will be 4 degrees and 42 minutes. If the course is eighty degrees, its angle will be 4 degrees and 55 minutes. If the course is ninety degrees, its angle will be 5 degrees.18As stated above, this is the greatest latitude reached.
If [the course of the latitude] has both units and tens, you should [calculate the average increase per degree and add the proportionate amount to the lower figure], as was done with regard to the course of the sun and the course of the moon.19See Chapter 13, Halachah 7, and Chapter 15, Halachah 7.What is implied? When the course of the latitude is 53 degrees, [the size of the angle should be determined as follows]. It has already been established that when the course is 50 degrees, its angle is 3 degrees and 50 minutes. When the course is 60 degrees, its angle is 4 degrees and 20 minutes. Therefore, there is a difference of 30 minutes between them, 3 minutes for each degree. Accordingly, [when] calculating the angle for a course of 53 degrees, [the result] will be 3 degrees and 59 minutes. A similar process should be followed with regard to all other figures.
Since you know the angles for all the values of the course of the latitude until ninety degrees, as was mentioned, you will be able to know the angle for all possible values of the course. For if the course is between 90 and 180 degrees, subtract the course from 180 and find the angle for the remainder.20For, as mentioned above, 90 degrees is the even mid-point of the course, and its angle increases and decreases in the same proportions as one approaches or leaves that point.
21In the standard printed texts of the Mishneh Torah, there is a printing error, and the concluding phrase from the chapter was added here by mistake.Similarly, if the course is between 180 and 270 degrees,22At 270°, as at 90°, the course reaches its maximum latitude, 5 degrees. subtract 180 from [the course] and find the angle for the remainder.23For, as mentioned above, the course begins to increase as it progresses after reaching its tail in the same proportions as it increases as it progresses from its head.
Similarly, if the course is between 270 and 360 degrees, subtract [the course] from 360 and find the angle for the remainder.24For the rate of the angular decrease from 270 to 180 is equivalent to the rate of decrease from 90 to 180.
What is implied? If the course is 150°, subtract 150 from 180, leaving 30. As mentioned previously, the angle [of a course] of 30 [degrees] will be 2 degrees and 30 minutes. Thus, the angle [of a course] of 150 [degrees] also will be 2 degrees and 30 minutes.
If the course is 200°, subtract 180 from 200, leaving 20. As mentioned previously, the angle [of a course] of 20 [degrees] will be 1 degree and 43 minutes. Thus, the angle [of a course] of 200 [degrees] also will be 1 degree and 43 minutes.
If the course is 300°, subtract 300 from 360, leaving 60. As mentioned previously, the angle [of a course] of 60 [degrees] will be 4 degrees and 20 minutes. Thus, the angle [of a course] of 300 [degrees] also will be 4 degrees and 20 minutes. A similar process should be followed with regard to all other values.
[The following procedure should be applied] if one desires to know the latitude of the moon and whether it is either northerly or southerly at the beginning of Friday night, the second of Iyar of this year: It has already been established that the true position of the moon on this night is 18 degrees and 36 minutes within the constellation of Taurus, in symbols 18° 36". [Similarly, it has been established that] the position of the head at that time is 27 degrees and 30 minutes within the constellation of Virgo, in symbols 27° 30'.[To arrive at the latitude,] you must subtract the position of the head from the position of the moon, leaving a course of the latitude of 231 degrees and 6 minutes, in symbols 231° 6'. [As mentioned,] the minutes are of no consequence with regard to the course. Therefore, according to the principles explained in this chapter, the angle of this course will be 3 degrees and 53 minutes. This is the latitude of the moon at the beginning of this night. It is southerly, for the course is larger than 180 degrees.

=== 17 | chapter 17 ===
All the principles we have explained above were intended so that you will be ready and prepared to know [how] to sight [the moon]. When you desire to know [how to sight the moon on a particular night], calculate the true position of the sun, the true position of the moon, and the position of the head [of the moon's orbit] for the time of the sighting [of the moon].Afterwards, subtract the position of the sun from the position of the moon. The remainder is referred to as the first longitude.
After having determined the position of the head and the moon's position,1Our translation is based on authentic manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah and early printings. There is a printing error in the standard published text. you will be able to determine the moon's latitude and whether this latitude is northerly or southerly. This figure is referred to as the first latitude. Be careful with regard to [these two symbols,] the first longitude and the first latitude, and have them at hand [for later calculations].
Consider the first longitude:2In this instance as well, our translation is based on authentic manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah and early printings. There is a printing error in the standard published text, where the words "and the first latitude" were added unnecessarily. If the figure you arrive at is equal to nine degrees or less, know that it will definitely be impossible for the moon to be sighted on that night throughout Eretz Yisrael; no other calculation is necessary.If the first longitude is more than fifteen degrees, know that the moon will definitely be sighted throughout Eretz Yisrael; no other calculation is necessary.3Note the apparent contradiction to the figures the Rambam mentions in Chapter 15, Halachah 2, and the resolution suggested in Note 4 of that chapter.If the first longitude is between nine and fifteen degrees, it will be necessary for you to make further calculations to know whether the moon will be sighted or not.
When does the above apply? When the true position of the moon is located [in the area] between the beginning of the constellation of Capricorn and the end of the constellation of Gemini.4In these months, the ecliptic (the plane of the sun's orbit as extended to the celestial sphere) is inclined to the north. After the conjunction, the moon proceeds away from the position of the sun. When the inclination of the ecliptic is northward, this movement places it in a more northerly position. Therefore, the moon will set later than would be foreseen otherwise, resulting in a greater possibility of seeing the new moon.As mentioned in the notes of Chapter 16, as the longitude of the moon increases, seeing the moon also becomes easier. In these months, however, a lesser longitude is required. If, however, the position of the moon [is located in the range] between the beginning of the constellation of Cancer and the end of the constellation of Sagittarius, and the first longitude is ten degrees or less,5In these months, the ecliptic is inclined to the south. As the moon proceeds away from the position of the sun after conjunction, it will be in a more southerly position in these months. Therefore,the moon will set earlier than would be foreseen otherwise, resulting in a lesser possibility of seeing the new moon. To compensate for this difference, a greater longitude is required. know that it will definitely be impossible for the moon to be sighted on that night throughout Eretz Yisrael; no other calculation is necessary.If the first longitude6Our translation is based on authentic manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah and early printings. There is a printing error in the standard published text, and the word "latitude" was added unnecessarily. is more than twenty-four degrees, know that the moon will definitely be sighted throughout Eretz Yisrael; no other calculation is necessary.If the first longitude is between ten and twenty-four degrees, it will be necessary to make further calculations to know whether or not the moon will be sighted.7To summarize the Rambam's statements to this point: When the longitude of the moon (the angular distance between the moon and the sun) is minimal, the moon's crescent will be small and the interval between the time of its setting and that of the sun will be small. Hence, it is unlikely that the moon will be sighted.When the longitude of the moon is greater, the size of the moon's crescent will increase, as will the interval between the time of its setting and that of the sun. Accordingly, the possibility of sighting the moon will increase.When the longitude is significantly large, it is obvious that the moon will be seen and no other calculations are necessary. When, however, the longitude is of intermediate size, there is a question whether the moon will be seen. The resolution of this question depends on the inclination of the ecliptic and the latitude of the moon - i.e., the angle - and the direction of that angle - to which the moon is inclined from the plane of the sun.[In this context, it is worthy to mention a question raised by several contemporary commentaries on Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh: Seemingly, there is a direct connection between the concepts mentioned at the conclusion of Chapter 15 and those mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. Why does the Rambam interpose the discussion of the moon's latitude (the subject matter of Chapter 16, which becomes relevant only in subsequent halachot) between them?]
These are the [further] calculations [necessary to determine] the sighting of the moon: Consider the constellation in which the moon is located.8The sighting adjustment for longitude is based on two different factors: a) whether the constellation is inclined to the north or to the south as it intersects the horizon of Jerusalem, and b) the extent of the southerly position of that constellation.To explain: The constellations intersect the horizon at different angles, reflecting the pattern of their inclination in the heavenly sphere. The constellations from Capricorn until Gemini intersect the horizon at a northerly angle, and the constellations from Cancer to Sagittarius intersect the horizon at a southerly angle.With regard to the second factor, all the constellations are located to the south of Jerusalem. Jerusalem is located 32 degrees north, and the constellation of Cancer, the most northerly of the constellations, is located 23 1/2 degrees north. The more northerly a constellation is located, however, the greater the need for a subtraction from its longitude. If it is the constellation of Aries, subtract9This is the constellation that the moon enters at the vernal (spring) equinox. It is inclined to the north and is not located in an extremely southerly position. Hence, a large sighting adjustment is necessary. 59 minutes from the first longitude. If it is the constellation of Taurus, subtract one degree from the longitude.10Since the constellation of Taurus intersects the horizon at a northerly inclination and it is located in a relatively northerly position, the largest adjustment is necessary. If it is the constellation of Gemini, subtract 58 minutes from the longitude.11Although this constellation is located in a very northerly position, its northerly inclination is less. Hence, a smaller subtraction is made. If it is the constellation of Cancer, subtract 5212Here, too, our translation is an emendation of the standard published text, based on authentic manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah and early printings.Although Cancer is located in the most northerly position of all the constellations, since it has a southerly inclination the sighting adjustment required is less. minutes from the longitude.If it is the constellation of Leo, subtract 43 minutes from the longitude.13This and the four constellations that follow have southerly inclinations. Hence, the figure subtracted from their longitude is less. If it is the constellation of Virgo, subtract 37 minutes from the longitude. If it is the constellation of Libra, subtract 34 minutes from the longitude.If it is the constellation of Scorpio, subtract 34 minutes from the longitude. If it is the constellation of Sagittarius, subtract 36 minutes from the longitude.14This is the smallest sighting adjustment, because this constellation is located in a more southerly position than the others with a southerly inclination. If it is the constellation of Capricorn, subtract 44 minutes from the longitude.15From this point on, the sighting adjustment increases, because these constellations have a northerly inclination. If it is the constellation of Aquarius, subtract 53 minutes from the longitude. If it is the constellation of Pisces, subtract 58 minutes from the longitude.16The commentaries have noted that although the general thrust of the adjustments suggested by the Rambam conform to the calculations of the astronomers, the exact figures he gives follow neither the classic Greek figures nor those of modern astronomy. It is possible to explain that the Rambam was speaking merely in approximations, giving us a figure useful enough to calculate the position where the moon would be sighted, but not an exact scientific measure. This theory is borne out by the fact that he does not provide different measures for northern and southern latitudes, although according to science these figures vary.The remainder after these minutes have been subtracted from the longitude is referred to as the second longitude.
Why are these minutes subtracted? Because the true position of the moon is not the place where the moon will actually be sighted [in the sky]. Instead, there is a [small] difference in both longitude and latitude.17To explain: The true position of the moon reflects the line extending from the center of the earth through the center of the moon, as it is projected against the heavenly sphere. Since Jerusalem (or for that matter, any other location on the earth's surface) is not located at the center of the earth, but rather 4000 miles away, there will be a slight difference between the line described previously and the line extending from a person standing in Jerusalem to the center of the moon, as it is projected against the heavenly sphere. The closer the moon is to the horizon, the larger the sighting adjustment that has to be made.[The same concept applies with regard to the sun. Nevertheless, since the distance between the earth and the sun is great, the angular difference between these two lines is not of consequence. The moon, by contrast, is located much closer to the earth and, at times, a difference of close to a degree can arise.]In the evening, the moon will always appear slightly closer to the horizon than it actually is - i.e., it will appear closer to the position of the sun. Therefore, the angular difference between the two lines mentioned above should be subtracted from the moon's true position. As explained above, the extent of the adjustment to be made depends on the inclination at which constellation intersects the horizon and its latitude in the heavenly sphere. This [difference] is referred to as the sighting adjustment.The sighting adjustment for the moon's longitude at the hour of the sighting of the moon18This principle applies during all the PM hours. During the AM hours, by contrast, the sighting adjustment should be added to the position of the moon (Ralbach). should always be subtracted from the longitude, as we explained.
[The latter point is not necessarily true,] by contrast, with regard to the sighting adjustment for the moon's latitude.19The sighting adjustment for the moon's latitude is derived by creating a parallax - i.e., a line directly parallel to the line running from the point of the moon's first longitude to its first latitude is drawn from the point of its second longitude. A second line is drawn from the position of an onlooker in Jerusalem through the point of the first latitude and intersecting the line of the moon's second latitude. The point where these two lines intersect is the moon's second longitude. The adjustment mentioned in the following halachah represents the angle between these two lines.If the moon's latitude is northerly, we subtract the minutes of the sighting adjustment for the moon's latitude from the moon's first latitude.20Because Jerusalem is situated in a more northerly position than all the Zodiac constellations, the moon will always appear more southerly than it actually is. Therefore, if its latitude is northerly, a subtraction is necessary. To use geometric terms: When the moon's latitude is northerly, its second latitude will always be closer to the point of its longitude than to its first latitude. If, however, the moon's latitude is southerly, we add the minutes of the sighting adjustment for the moon's latitude to the moon's first latitude.21Since the moon will always appear more southerly, an addition is required when its original latitude is southerly. In geometric terms: When the moon's latitude is southerly, its second latitude will always be further removed from the point of its longitude than its first latitude. The result after the addition or subtraction of these minutes to or from the [moon's] first latitude is referred to as the second latitude.
How many minutes are added or subtracted? If the moon is in the constellation of Aries, 9 minutes.22This is the point directly after the vernal (spring) equinox, when the sun is inclined northward and enters the northern part of its orbit. If it is in the constellation of Taurus, 10 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Gemini, 16 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Cancer, 27 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Leo, 38 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Virgo, 44 minutes.If it is in the constellation of Libra, 46 minutes.23This is the point directly after the autumnal equinox, when the sun is inclined southward and enters the southern part of its orbit. If it is in the constellation of Scorpio, 45 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Sagittarius, 44 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Capricorn, 36 minutes. If it is in the constellation of Aquarius, 2724Here, too, our translation is an emendation of the standard published text, based on authentic manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah and early printings. minutes. If it is in the constellation of Pisces, 12 minutes.
Since you know the [number of] minutes [for the adjustment] for each constellation, add or subtract them to or from the first latitude, as was explained, and arrive at the second latitude. You already know whether it will be northerly or southerly,25The Rambam is speaking about the second latitude, since it is possible for the sighting adjustment to change a northerly latitude to a southerly one. and you will know the number of degrees and minutes of this second latitude. Prepare this figure and have it at hand.
Afterwards,26The purpose of the calculations that follow (reaching a third longitude and a fourth longitude) is to calculate the time between the setting of the sun and the setting of the moon. The first longitude is sufficient to inform us whether or not the crescent of the moon will be large enough to be visible. The subsequent calculations are necessary to determine whether or not there will be sufficient time for actually sighting the moon. For when the crescent is small, it is difficult to detect unless there is ample time before it sets.The third longitude reflects the point in the celestial sphere that will set at the same time as the moon does, as seen by a person standing on the equator. This is not the point in the celestial sphere where the moon appears to be located, but rather a point in the celestial sphere that is reached by drawing a line originating at the equator, running parallel to the horizon of the equator, and extending through the center of the moon. The point where this line intersects the celestial sphere is the third longitude.The reason for associating the moon's position with the equator is to establish a connection with a standard measure of time. In Jerusalem (and for that matter, anywhere else in the northern or southern hemisphere), the apparent movement of the celestial sphere varies with the seasons. On the equator, by contrast, the movement of the celestial sphere is constant at all times, 15 minutes to the hour. you must set aside [for later use in subtracting or adding] a portion of this second latitude, because the moon fluctuates slightly in its orbit.27Cf. Proverbs 2:15. What is the size of the portion you must separate? [This depends on the position of the moon in the celestial sphere.]28The angle between each particular constellation in the celestial sphere and the equator varies. The size of the adjustment to be made for the third longitude depends on that angle.If the moon is located between the beginning of the constellation of Aries and its twentieth degree - and similarly, [when the moon is located] between the beginning of the constellation of Libra and its twentieth degree - separate two fifths of the second latitude.29These are the points in the celestial sphere that intersect the horizon of the equator at the greatest angle. Therefore, the largest adjustment is necessary.If the moon is located between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Aries and the tenth degree of the constellation of Taurus - and similarly, [when the moon is located] between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Libra and the tenth degree of the constellation of Scorpio - separate one third from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the tenth degree of the constellation of Taurus and its twentieth degree - and similarly, [when the moon is located] between the tenth degree of the constellation of Scorpio and its twentieth degree - separate one fourth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Taurus and its end - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Scorpio and its end - separate one fifth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the beginning of the constellation of Gemini and its tenth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the beginning of the constellation of Sagittarius and its tenth degree - separate one sixth of the second latitude.If the moon is located between the tenth degree of the constellation of Gemini and its twentieth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the tenth degree of the constellation of Sagittarius and its twentieth degree - separate one twelfth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Gemini and its twenty-fifth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Sagittarius and its twenty-fifth degree - separate one twenty-fourth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the twenty-fifth degree of the constellation of Gemini and the fifth degree of the constellation of Cancer - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the twenty-fifth degree of the constellation of Sagittarius and the fifth degree of the constellation of Capricorn - do not make any separation, because at this point the moon does not fluctuate at all from its orbit.30These are the points within the celestial sphere that are more or less parallel to the equator.If the moon is located between the fifth degree of the constellation of Cancer and its tenth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the fifth degree of the constellation of Capricorn and its tenth degree - separate one twenty-fourth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the tenth degree of the constellation of Cancer and its twentieth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the tenth degree of the constellation of Capricorn and its twentieth degree - separate one twelfth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Cancer and its end - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Capricorn and its end - separate one sixth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the beginning of the constellation of Leo and its tenth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the beginning of the constellation of the Aquarius and its tenth degree - separate one fifth of the second latitude.If the moon is located between the tenth degree of the constellation of Leo and its twentieth degree - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the tenth degree of the constellation of Aquarius and its twentieth degree - separate one fourth from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Leo and the tenth degree of the constellation of Virgo, and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the twentieth degree of the constellation of Aquarius and tenth degree of the constellation of Pisces - separate one third from the second latitude.If the moon is located between the tenth degree of the constellation of Virgo and its end - and similarly, [if the moon is located] between the tenth degree of the constellation of Pisces and its end - separate two fifths from the second latitude.This portion that is separated from the second latitude is referred to as the circuit of the moon.
Afterwards, go back and consider whether the latitude of the moon is northerly or southerly. If it is northerly, subtract [the adjustment referred to as] the circuit of the moon from the second longitude.31This means that when the moon's latitude is northerly, the third longitude will always be closer to the equator. If the moon's longitude is southerly, add the circuit of the moon to the second longitude.32This means that when the moon's latitude is southerly, the third longitude will always be further removed from the equator.When does the above apply? When the moon's position is located between the beginning of the constellation of Capricorn and the end of the constellation of Gemini.33These are the constellations that are inclined in a northerly direction. If, however, the moon's position is located between the beginning of the constellation of Cancer and the end of the constellation of Sagittarius,34I.e., the constellations that are inclined in a southerly direction. the opposite is true: If the moon's latitude is northerly, the circuit should be added to the second longitude,35This means that when the moon's latitude is northerly, the third longitude will always be further removed from the equator. and if the moon's latitude is southerly, the circuit should be subtracted from the second longitude.36This means that when the moon's latitude is southerly, the third longitude will always be closer to the equator.The remainder after the additions or subtractions have been made to the second longitude is referred to as the third longitude. Know that if there is no fluctuation within the circuit, and there is no figure to be separated from the second latitude,37As happens when the moon is located in the beginning of the constellations of Cancer and Capricorn. the second longitude also will serve as the third longitude, without any decrease or increase.
Afterwards, go back and see the constellation in which the third longitude - i.e., [the amended figure representing] the distance between the sun and the moon - is located:38The Rambam's intent in these sets of calculations is to reach a point on the equator that will set at the same time the third longitude sets in Jerusalem. For although the third longitude was able to relate the moon's position to the equator, it did not take into consideration the difference between the horizon of the equator and the horizon of Jerusalem. This is accomplished by drawing a line from the third longitude to the equator, which is parallel to the horizon of Jerusalem. If it is located in the constellation of Pisces or Aries, add one sixth [of its length] to the third longitude.39Two factors are significant in determining the fourth longitude: a) The angle of the constellation's inclination to the horizon of the equator. The greater the inclination of the constellation, the closer the fourth longitude will be located to the equator.b) whether the constellation is inclined to the north or to the south.If the constellation is inclined to the north, the third longitude, and hence the place on the equator parallel to it, will be located further away from the horizon, resulting in a later setting and thus an extended fourth longitude. Conversely, if the inclination is southerly, the third longitude will be located closer to the horizon, resulting in a shortened fourth longitude.Of these two factors, the latter is more significant, and causes a larger correction. To explain these factors with regard to the constellations of Pisces and Aries: These constellations are inclined to a great degree, a factor that would reduce the fourth longitude. Since, however, they are northerly inclined, and this is the stronger factor, a modest increase is required. If the [third] longitude is located in the constellation of Aquarius or the constellation of Taurus, add one fifth [of its length] to the third longitude.40These constellations are inclined to the north, and the degree of their inclination is less than that of Pisces and Aries. Hence, a greater increase is required. If the [third] longitude is located in the constellation of Capricorn or the constellation of Gemini, add one sixth [of its length] to the third longitude.If the [third] longitude is located in the constellation of Sagittarius or the constellation of Cancer, leave the third longitude as it is, without making any addition or subtraction.41Here, the constellations begin a southerly inclination. Hence, although they are more parallel to the horizon of the equator, no addition is made. If the [third] longitude is located in the constellation of Scorpio or the constellation of Leo, subtract one fifth [of its length] from the third longitude. If the [third] longitude is located in the constellation of Libra or the constellation of Virgo, subtract one third [of its length] from the third longitude.42In this instance, the degree of inclination of these constellations is great and their inclination is southerly. Both of these factors lead to a reduction in the fourth longitude. Hence, the greatest subtraction is required.The figure resulting from these subtractions or additions to the third longitude, or from leaving it without adjustment, is referred to as the fourth longitude.[Afterwards, a further correction is necessary:] Return to the first latitude,43The Ralbach questions why the Rambam refers to the first latitude. Seemingly, it would be appropriate to make this correction based on the second latitude, for there is a significant difference between it and the first latitude. According to trigonometry, it also would appear that the calculations should be based on the second latitude. and set aside two thirds [of its length]. This is called the correction [resulting from geographic] latitude.44Although the fourth longitude established a relationship between the equator and Jerusalem, it is still dependent on the third longitude, which relates to the moon and the celestial sphere as they set on the horizon of the equator. Through the correction mentioned here, we find a place on the extension of the equator that will set at the same as the moon sets in Jerusalem. Having reached this point, we can calculate the difference in time (15 degrees to the hour) between the setting of the sun and this point (which will set at the same time as the setting of the moon). Accordingly, we will be able to determine whether or not this interval will allow for the sighting of the moon.The correction for geographic longitude is reached by drawing a line from the position of the moon parallel to the horizon of Jerusalem. One might ask: If this was the Rambam's intent, why were so many intermediate steps - the definition of the second, third, and fourth latitudes - necessary? Why didn't he suggest drawing the above- mentioned line at the very beginning of his calculations?The explanation is that the Rambam allowed an individual to follow his own steps in arriving at this final figure. I.e., these lines and distances are all artificial and can be determined only by calculations. Through trigonometry, if one knows the length of one side of a triangle and two angles, or the length of two sides and one angle, it is possible to calculate the size of all three angles and all three sides. To find the line extending from the moon to the equator parallel to the horizon of Jerusalem, the Rambam had to build sets of triangles, and calculate angles based on the relationship of one triangle to another. The process he followed is reflected in the series of corrections he offers.Consider whether the latitude of the moon is northerly. If so, add the correction [resulting from geographic] latitude to the fourth longitude.45A northerly latitude means that the actual position of the moon is further removed from the horizon than the third longitude. This will result in a later setting of the moon. Accordingly, the correction based on geographic latitude will require addition to the fourth longitude. This applies regardless of whether the inclination of the constellation in which the moon is located is northerly or southerly. If the latitude of the moon is southerly, subtract the correction [resulting from geographic] latitude from the fourth longitude.46A southerly latitude means that the actual position of the moon is closer to the horizon than the third longitude. This will result in an earlier setting of the moon. Accordingly, the correction based on geographic latitude will require subtraction from the fourth longitude. This applies regardless of whether the inclination of the constellation in which the moon is located is northerly or southerly. The figure resulting from these subtractions or additions to the fourth longitude is referred to as the arc of sighting.
What is implied? For example, let us attempt to determine whether or not it will be possible to sight the moon on Friday night, the second of Iyar of this year: First, it is necessary to determine the true position of the sun, the true position of the moon, and the moon's latitude for this time47Our translation represents a correction of the standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah. according to the methods that were disclosed [in the previous chapters].The result is that the true position of the sun is seven degrees and nine minutes in the constellation of Taurus, in symbols 7° 9'. The true position of the moon is eighteen degrees and thirty-six minutes in the constellation of Taurus, in symbols 18° 36'. The moon's latitude is three degrees and fifty-three minutes, in symbols 3° 53', and it is southerly. This is the first latitude.Afterwards, you should subtract the position of the sun from the position of the moon, arriving at a remainder of eleven degrees and twenty-seven minutes, in symbols 11° 27'. This is the first longitude.Since the moon is located in the constellation of Taurus, the sighting adjustment for the longitude will be one degree. This should be subtracted from the first longitude, producing a second longitude of 10 degrees and twenty-seven minutes, in symbols 10° 27'. The sighting adjustment for the latitude is ten minutes. Since the moon's latitude is southerly, this sighting adjustment of ten minutes should be added to the moon's latitude, producing a second latitude of four degrees and three minutes, in symbols 4° 3'.Since the moon is located in the eighteenth minute of the constellation of Taurus, it is proper to set aside one fourth of the second latitude as the circuit of the moon. Thus, at this time, the circuit of the moon will be one degree and one minute. We pay no attention to the seconds.
Since the latitude of the moon is southerly and the true position of the moon is located between the beginning [of the constellation] of Capricorn and the beginning [of the constellation] of Cancer, it is correct to add the circuit of the moon to the second longitude. Thus, the third longitude will be eleven degrees and twenty-eight minutes, in symbols 11° 28'.Since this longitude is located in the constellation of Taurus, it is fitting to add one fifth to the third longitude - i.e., two degrees and eighteen minutes. Thus, the fourth longitude will be thirteen degrees and forty-six minutes, in symbols 13° 46'.We then go back to the first latitude and separate two thirds of it. Thus, the correction [resulting from geographic] latitude is two degrees and thirty-five minutes. Since the latitude is southerly, the correction [resulting from geographic] latitude should be subtracted from the fourth longitude, leaving a remainder of eleven degrees and eleven minutes, in symbols 11° 11'. This is the arc of sighting on this night.Following this process, you can determine the number of degrees and the number of minutes every night for the moon's sighting48It is possible that the Rambam's wording alludes to a concept mentioned previously, that the calculations he suggests are applicable only at the beginning of the month, when the new moon might be sighted., which you desire for all time.
After you have determined this arc [of sighting], consider it. Know [these rules]: If the arc of sighting is nine degrees or less, it is impossible for the moon to be sighted anywhere in Eretz Yisrael. If the arc of sighting is more than fourteen degrees, it is impossible49I.e., barring clouds, as explained at the beginning of the following chapter. for it not to be seen and openly revealed throughout Eretz Yisrael.
If the arc of sighting is between the beginning of the tenth degree and the end of the fourteenth degree, [the following procedure should be followed:] One should consider the arc of sighting in relation to the first longitude50As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, the first longitude gives us information regarding the size of the moon's crescent and the difference between the moon's setting and that of the sun. When the first longitude is sufficiently large or when it is sufficiently small, it is possible to determine whether or not the moon will be sighted without considering extenuating factors - e.g., its longitude, the inclination of the constellation in which it is located, and the extent of that inclination. When, however, the first longitude is of intermediate length, these extenuating factors must be considered. The establishment of a systematic method of considering these factors is the purpose of all the computations mentioned in this chapter. and determine whether or not the moon will be seen from the limits prevalent [at that time]. They are referred to as the sighting limits.
The following are the sighting limits: If the arc of sighting is between nine and ten degrees, or more than ten [degrees], and the first longitude is thirteen degrees or more, [the moon] will surely be sighted. If the arc is less than this, or if the first longitude is less than this, it will not be sighted.
If the arc of sighting is between ten and eleven degrees, or more than eleven [degrees], and the first longitude is twelve degrees or more, [the moon] will surely be sighted. If the arc is less than this, or if the first longitude is less than this, it will not be sighted.
If the arc of sighting is between eleven and twelve degrees, or more than twelve [degrees], and the first longitude is eleven degrees or more, [the moon] will surely be sighted. If the arc is less than this, or if the first longitude is less than this, it will not be sighted.
If the arc of sighting is between twelve and thirteen degrees, or more than thirteen [degrees], and the first longitude is ten degrees or more, [the moon] will surely be sighted. If the arc is less than this, or if the first longitude is less than this, it will not be sighted.
If the arc of sighting is between thirteen and fourteen degrees, or more than fourteen [degrees], and the first longitude is nine degrees or more, [the moon] will surely be sighted. If the arc is less than this, or if the first longitude is less than this, it will not be sighted. This concludes the sighting limits.
What is implied? If we were to consider the arc of sighting for Friday night, the second of Iyar of this year, we would calculate the arc of sighting to be eleven degrees and eleven minutes, as you have already determined.51See Halachot 13 and 14.Since the arc of sighting is between ten and fourteen degrees, it is necessary to consider it in relation to the first longitude. It has already been established that on this night, the [first] longitude is ten degrees and twenty seven minutes. Since the first longitude is greater than eleven [degrees], we can be assured that the moon will be sighted on that night according to the limits established. Similar procedures should be followed [on every occasion when it is necessary to consider] the arc of sighting in relation to its first longitude.
From all the above, you have seen the extent of the calculations, and the additions and the subtractions that required much effort to present a method that comes close [to being exact]52As the Rambam mentioned at the very beginning of this discussion (Chapter 11, Halachah 6), the figures that he gives are not exact. They do, however, give us sufficient information to determine when and where the moon will be sighted. without necessitating extremely complicated calculations. [This process is necessary] because the moon has major incongruities in its orbit.In this vein, our Sages said,53Rosh HaShanah 25a, commenting on Psalms 104:19. "'The sun knows the time of its setting'; the moon does not know the time of its setting." Similarly, our Sages said,54Loc. cit. "At times, its setting is prolonged, and at times, it is hastened." This is reflected in these calculations, where at times it is necessary to add, and at times it is necessary to subtract until we arrive at the arc of sighting. And as explained, at times the arc of sighting is great, and at times it is small.
The rationales for all these calculations, and the reasons why this number is added, and why that subtraction is made, and how all these concepts are known, and the proofs for each of these principles are [the subject] of the wisdom of astronomy and geometry, concerning which the Greeks wrote many books.These texts are presently in the hands of the sages. The texts written by the Sages of Israel in the age of the prophets from the tribe of Yissachar55Commenting on I Chronicles 12:32, "From the descendants of Yissachar, men who had understanding of the times...," Bereshit Rabbah 72:5 explains that the sages of the tribe of Yissachar were those responsible for the determination of the calendar. (See also the commentary of the Radak on this verse.) have not been transmitted to us. Nevertheless, since these concepts can be proven in an unshakable manner, leaving no room for question, the identity of the author, be he a prophet or a gentile, is of no concern.56The context of this commentary is not a proper place for a full discussion of the Rambam's perspective on the supposed conflicts between science and the Torah. It must be noted, however, that the statements made here, emphasizing the importance of the empirical evidence of science, should not be interpreted as indicating that the perspective science adopts at any given time should be accepted in place of the Torah's teachings. In this context, it is worthy to quote the Rambam's statements in Hilchot Shechitah 10:13:Similarly, with regard to the conditions that we have enumerated as causing an animal to be trefah (unable to live for an extended period): Even though it appears from the medical knowledge available to us at present that some of these conditions are not fatal... all that is significant to us is what our Sages said, as [implied by Deuteronomy 17:11]: "[You shall act] according to the instructions that they will give you." For a matter whose rationale has been revealed and has proven truthful in an unshakable manner, we do not rely on [the personal authority of] the individual who made these statements or taught these concepts, but on the proofs he presented and the reasons he made known.57Our translation is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah; it differs slightly from the standard printed text.

=== 18 | chapter 18 ===
It is well-known and obvious that although the calculations indicate that the moon should be sighted on [a particular] night, its sighting is [only] probable. It is, however, also possible that it will not be sighted, because it is covered by clouds, because the place [from where it could be sighted] is in a valley,1Since the moon is always low on the horizon at the beginning of the month, it is possible that the individuals dwelling in a valley will not be able to see it. For the horizon that appears to them is always higher in the sky than the actual horizon. or because there is a tall mountain in the west,2At the beginning of the month, the moon will always be sighted in the west, for it will have completed most of its daily circuit before nightfall, and will set within a few hours of the setting of the sun. blocking [view of] the people in the place [from where it could be sighted], and it will be as if they are in a valley.For the moon will not be able to be sighted by a person in a low place, even when [its crescent] is large. Conversely, it will be possible for a person on a high and lofty mountain to sight [the moon], even though [its crescent] is very small. Similarly, sighting it will be possible for a person dwelling on the seashore, or a person travelling on a ship in the Mediterranean Sea, even though [its crescent] is very small.
Similarly, in the rainy season, on a clear day, the visibility of the moon will be greater than it is in the summer. For on a clear day in the rainy season, the air is clear and the heavens appear more brilliant, because there is no dust clouding the air. In the summer, by contrast, the air is like smoke, because of the dust. Therefore, the moon will appear small.
When the two limits [mentioned] with regard to the arc of sighting and the first longitude are short, [the crescent of] the moon will be small, and sighting the moon will be possible only from a very high altitude. If the arc of sighting and the first longitude are long, and [several] degrees were added to their minimal limits, the moon will appear large. Its size and the extent of its visibility will increase according to the length of the arc [of sighting] and the first longitude.
Therefore, the court should always have its attention focused on the following two matters: a) the season when [the moon] was sighted, and b) the place [where the witnesses were located]. [The judges] should ask the witnesses, "Where were you when you saw the moon?" For if the arc of sighting was short, and according to the calculations there is only a limited opportunity to see the moon, [more care is taken regarding their testimony].For example, the arc of sighting was nine degrees and five minutes, and the first longitude was exactly thirteen degrees, and witnesses came, [claiming] that they saw [the moon]: If this occurs in the summer, or if the [witnesses] were located in a low place, we suspect [the veracity of] their [testimony] and subject them to much cross-examination.In the rainy season, or in a very high place, [under such circumstances, the moon] would surely be sighted unless clouds obscured it.
[Let us examine a hypothetical situation:] Witnesses saw the new moon at the appropriate time.3I.e., on the night between the twenty-ninth and thirtieth days of the month, as mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 4. They came [to the court], and gave testimony. The court accepted their [testimony] and sanctified this first month.Afterwards, they counted twenty-nine days from the day that was sanctified. On the night of the thirtieth, the moon was not sighted, either because sighting it was impossible, or because it was covered by clouds. The court waited the entire thirtieth day, as we have explained,4Chapter 1, Halachah 6. [but] witnesses did not arrive. [Therefore,] they added a day to the month, and thus, Rosh Chodesh of the second month was on the thirty-first day, as explained.5Ibid.
They began to count twenty-nine days from the day of Rosh Chodesh in the second [month], but the moon was not sighted. If you would say that [again] a day should be added to the month - i.e., the following day would be the thirtieth of the month, and the thirty-first day should be Rosh Chodesh of the third month [an undesirable situation would arise]. For it is possible that the moon would not be sighted on the night of the thirtieth of this month as well. Thus, [hypothetically, we could see an] ongoing [pattern, in which] a day is added and the new month begins after thirty days throughout the year. Thus, in the last month, it would be possible for the moon to be seen on the night of the twenty-fifth or the night of the twenty-sixth.6Since there are slightly more than twenty-nine and one half days in a lunar month, after an entire year the conjunction of the moon would fall approximately five and one sixth days earlier than the previous year. There could be no more ludicrous and demeaning situation than this.
Nor can one say that the [hypothetical situation described] - that the moon is never sighted throughout the year - is an infrequent occurrence [that need not be considered]. The contrary [is true]; it is very likely [to take place]. This often occurs in countries that have long rainy seasons and cloudy [skies]. For the intent is not that the moon will never be seen throughout the year, but that it will not be sighted at the beginning of the month, and will be sighted only afterwards.[In certain months] it will not be sighted, because sighting it is impossible, and in the months when sighting it is possible, it possibly will not be sighted because of the clouds, or because its [crescent] was very small, and no one focused [his attention] on sighting it.
[These difficulties were avoided due to the following] tradition which existed among our Sages, [having been] transmitted from one to another in a chain extending back to Moses our teacher: When the moon was not sighted at the beginning of the months, month after month, the court establishes [the following sequence], one full month with thirty days, one lacking month with twenty-nine days. In this manner, they would calculate and establish one full month and one lacking month - establishing these months, but not sanctifying them.7I.e., although the court would declare the beginning of a new month, they would not follow the practice of sanctifying the new month described in Chapter 2, Halachah 8. For the sanctification of the months is dependent solely on the sighting [of the moon]. At times they would have a full month follow another full month, or a lacking month follow another lacking month, depending on the results of their calculations.
The intent of their calculations is always that it is possible to sight the moon in the following month at its proper time,8I.e., on the night between the twenty-ninth and thirtieth days of the month. or on the night following the added day, but not to sight it beforehand - e.g., on the night of the twenty-eighth.Through the sighting calculations mentioned above, it is possible for you to determine when it will be possible [for the moon to be] sighted, and when it is possible that it will not be sighted. [The court] relies on [similar calculations] and [accordingly,] establishes two full months in succession, or two lacking months in succession.Never should there be fewer than four full months in a year, nor should there ever be more than eight full months.9These figures apply in the era when the moon is sanctified according to the testimony of witnesses. According to the fixed calendar we follow at present, there are never more than seven, nor fewer than five, full months. When a full month is established according to calculations, a celebratory feast is also made in honor of the full month, as mentioned previously in Chapter 3.10Halachah 7.
Whenever you find statements in the Talmud11E.g., Rosh HaShanah 20a. according to which it appears that the court relies on computations [rather than the testimony of witnesses], or that there is [a chain of tradition extending] from Moses at Sinai that this matter has been entrusted to them, and it is their decision whether to make the month lacking or full, and similarly, the fact that, during one year, Rabbi [Yehudah HaNasi] declared nine months as lacking12That year was a leap year, and Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi decided that it would be preferable for the additional month to be lacking rather than full (Arichin 9b). - these and all similar matters are dependent on this principle [and apply at] a time when the moon is not sighted at the appropriate time.
Similarly, the statements of our Sages13Rosh HaShanah, loc. cit. that a day is added to the month when necessary, applies in an instance when a full month [is declared] according to the calculations, [so that] one month is made lacking, and another month full.14Note the gloss of the Lechem Mishneh on Chapter 3, Halachah 15, which offers a different interpretation of that passage. They have the authority to declare full months in succession one after the other, and lacking months in succession.[Only] when the moon is not seen at the appropriate time does [the court] declare full months when necessary. When, however, the moon is seen at the appropriate time - its first shining after its conjunction with the sun - it is always sanctified.
All the above concepts apply when there is a court that relies on the testimony of witnesses. In the present era, by contrast, we rely solely on the calculations based on the mean [motion of the sun and the moon] that are [simple and] widespread throughout Israel, as explained [previously] in these laws.15See Chapters 6-10.
It is explained in the texts of astronomical and geometrical calculations that if the moon is sighted in Eretz Yisrael, it will be sighted in all the lands in the world that are located to the west of Eretz Yisrael and are at the same latitude.16As one moves westward, the sun sets earlier, granting more time for the moon to be seen. If the calculations indicate that the moon will not be sighted in Eretz Yisrael, sighting it is, nevertheless, possible in those lands that are west of Eretz Yisrael and at the same latitude. Therefore, the fact that the moon is sighted in a country that lies west of Eretz Yisrael is not an indication of whether [or not] the moon will be sighted in Eretz Yisrael.17In this instance, our translation follows the version of the Mishneh Torah found in authoritative manuscripts and early printings. The standard printed text differs slightly.
If, however, the moon is not sighted on the mountains of the countries located west of Eretz Yisrael that are at the same latitude, the moon surely was not sighted in Eretz Yisrael.
Similarly, if the moon was not sighted in Eretz Yisrael, it certainly was not sighted in those countries that are east of Eretz Yisrael, and at the same latitude. If [the moon] was sighted in Eretz Yisrael, however, [there is no certainty whether it will be sighted] in these easterly lands; it may be sighted, and it may not be sighted.Accordingly, if the moon was sighted in a country located to the east of Eretz Yisrael at the same latitude, the moon was surely sighted in Eretz Yisrael. If, however, the moon was not sighted in a country that lies east [of Eretz Yisrael], that is not an indication that the moon will not be sighted in Eretz Yisrael. On the contrary, it is possible that it will be sighted in Eretz Yisrael.
All the above statements apply when the countries to the west and to the east [of Eretz Yisrael] are at the same latitude as Eretz Yisrael - i.e., they are 30 to 35 degrees north [of the equator]. If they are located in a more northerly position, or in a less northerly position, different principles apply, for they are not parallel to Eretz Yisrael.In the cities that are located to the east and west [of Eretz Yisrael], the statements we made [concerning the sighting of the moon are of abstract interest only], to clarify all the laws regarding the sighting [of the moon] to make the Torah great and glorious. [The intent is not that] the people living in the east or the west should depend on [their] sighting of the moon, or that [their sighting] should be of any consequence whatsoever. Instead, we rely only on the sanctification of the moon [performed] by the court in Eretz Yisrael, as we have explained several times previously.18See Chapter 1, Halachah 8; Chapter 5, Halachah 1.

=== 19 | chapter 19 ===
Since our Sages1Rosh HaShanah 23b, cited in Chapter 2, Halachah 4. said that among the questions posed to the witnesses [in order to verify their testimony] was "In which direction was [the crescent of] the moon inclined," I feel that it is appropriate to explain how this factor can be calculated. My statements will not be exact, because [this knowledge] is of no consequence regarding the actual sighting of the moon.The starting point of these calculations is to know the degree of inclination of the constellations' [position].
The orbit of the sun that passes through the center [of the sphere] of the constellations does not pass directly through the center of the earth from east to west. Instead, it is inclined above the equator which passes through the center of the earth, [slightly] to the north and to the south. Half of it is northerly in inclination and half is southerly in inclination.
There are two points at which the orbit of the sun intersects the equator, which passes through the center of the earth: The first point is the beginning of the constellation of Aries, and the second point, opposite to [the first], is the beginning of the constellation of Libra. Thus, there are six constellations [whose positions] are inclined to the north, those between the beginning of the constellation of Aries and the end of the constellation of Virgo. And there are six [whose positions] are inclined to the south, those between the beginning of the constellation of Libra and the end of the constellation of Pisces.2In our previous notes, we explained that the constellations from Capricorn to Gemini were northerly inclined. There is no contradiction between those statements and the statements above; the difference is in the definition of the word "inclined." In the present context, the Rambam is using the word "inclined" to refer to the position of the ecliptic as it passes through these constellations: Is it located above or below the equator, and what is the extent of its variance from the equator?Previously, we had used the word "inclined" to refer to the direction of the path of movement of the stars in the sky. In the constellations from Capricorn to Gemini, as the constellations move in their orbit, they will be moving northward. Conversely, in the constellations from Cancer to Sagittarius, as the constellations move in their orbit, they will be moving southward.The inclination of the constellations can be observed by a careful observer with a field compass. In the spring and in the fall, the sun rises due east and sets due west. In the summer (i.e., when the sun is located in the constellations from Taurus to Virgo), it rises in the northeast and sets in the northwest. In the winter (i.e., when the sun is located in the constellations from Scorpio to Pisces), it rises in the southeast and sets in the southwest. Throughout the year, these constellations rise and set in the place where the sun rises and sets when it is in these constellations.
From the beginning of the constellation of Aries, the constellations' [positions] begin to be inclined slightly and diverge from the equator in a northerly direction until the beginning [of the constellation] of Cancer.The beginning [of the constellation] of Cancer is approximately twenty-three and one half degrees north of the equator. [Afterwards,] the constellations begin to proceed toward the equator slowly until the beginning [of the constellation] of Libra, which is positioned on the equator.From the beginning of the constellation of Libra, the constellations' [positions] begin to be inclined slightly and diverge from the equator in a southerly direction until the beginning [of the constellation] of Sagittarius.The beginning [of the constellation] of Sagittarius is approximately twenty-three and one half degrees south of the equator. [Afterwards,] the constellations begin to proceed toward the equator slowly until the beginning [of the constellation] of Aries.
Thus, [in their daily orbits,] the beginning [of the constellation] of Aries and the beginning [of the constellation] of Libra revolve on the equator. Therefore, when the sun is positioned in the beginning [of these constellations],3I.e., at the vernal [spring] and autumnal equinoxes. it will not be inclined either to the north or to the south. It will rise due east and set due west, and the daytime and the nighttime [hours] will be equal throughout the world.
Thus, it should be clear to you that each of the degrees [in the sphere] of the constellations is inclined to the north or to the south, and that there is a specific measure to their inclination. The greatest inclination will be no more than approximately twenty-three and half degrees.
The following represent the extent of inclination from the equator vis-a-vis the number of degrees [in the sphere of the constellations]. Beginning with the constellation of Aries: [A point located at] 10 degrees [in the celestial sphere] will be inclined 4 degrees [from the equator]. [A point located at] 20 degrees will be inclined 8 degrees. [A point located at] 30 degrees will be inclined 11 1/2 degrees.[A point located at] 40 degrees will be inclined 15 degrees. [A point located at] 50 degrees will be inclined 18 degrees. [A point located at] 60 degrees will be inclined 20 degrees. [A point located at] 70 degrees will be inclined 22 degrees. [A point located at] 80 degrees will be inclined 23 degrees. [A point located at] 90 degrees4I.e., the beginning of the constellation of Cancer. In these ninety degrees, we will have passed through three constellations, Aries, Taurus, and Gemini. will be inclined 23 1/2 degrees.
If the number [of degrees] also includes units, you should calculate [their degree of inclination] by taking an average between the two figures, as was explained with regard to [the determination of the position of] the sun and the moon.5See Chapter 13, Halachah 7, and Chapter 15, Halachah 7.What is implied? Five degrees will be inclined 2 degrees. If the number of degrees [in the celestial sphere] is twenty-three, the inclination [from the equator] will be nine degrees. This same pattern should be followed whenever calculating a number that has both units and tens.
Since you know the extent of the inclination of all the degrees from one until ninety, you will be able to calculate the degree of inclination [of the entire celestial sphere] according to the method of calculation explained with regard to the moon's latitude.6See Chapter 16, Halachah 13. For if the number is between 90 and 180, the number should be subtracted from 180.7I.e., 110° has the same degree of inclination as 70°. For the angle of inclination proceeds in an even-balanced arc with 90 degrees as its center.If the number is between 180 and 270, 180 should be subtracted from the number.8I.e., the southerly inclination beginning from the constellation of Libra parallels exactly the northerly inclination beginning from Aries. If the number is between 270 and 360, the number should be subtracted from 360.9Producing the inverse of the figures mentioned in the previous quadrant. [After these subtractions have been made], you will know the degree of inclination of the remainder, for it is the degree of inclination of the numbers mentioned previously without any addition or subtraction.
If you desire to know the number of degrees by which the moon's position deviates from the equator to the north or to the south, [you should follow this procedure]: Calculate the inclination of the degree [in the celestial sphere] that will be the true position, and see if its inclination is northerly or southerly. Afterwards, calculate the moon's first latitude and see whether it is northerly or southerly.If the moon's latitude and the inclination of the degree [in the celestial sphere where it is located] have the same direction, then they should be added together.10E.g., if they are both northerly, the moon's latitude will cause it to appear further north than the constellation in which its true position is located. If they are in different directions - i.e., one is southerly and one is northerly - the smaller figure should be subtracted from the larger one.11I.e., if the moon's true position is located in a northerly position and its latitude is southerly, the latitude should be subtracted from the angular distance of its true position. The remainder is the [angular] distance of the moon from the equator to the direction in which the larger figure was inclined.
What is implied? Let us say that we are trying to calculate the degree of inclination of the moon from the equator on the night of sighting, the second day of the month of Iyar of this year. You have already established that the angle [in the celestial sphere] at which the moon was located is the nineteenth degree of the constellation of Taurus. Thus, its inclination to the north will be approximately 18 degrees.12Actually, the true figure is a few minutes larger.The latitude of the moon is approximately four degrees to the south.13Actually, the true figure is a few minutes less. After you subtract the lesser figure from the larger one, the position of the moon will be fourteen degrees to the north of the equator, for the largest figure is the eighteen degrees north [at which the moon's true position was located]. All [of the phases] of this calculation are approximations and are not exact, because they are of no consequence regarding the sighting.
If you desire to know the direction to which the moon will appear to be inclined [when sighted, it is governed by the following principles]: Calculate [the moon's angular] distance from the equator. If it is located on the equator or within two or three degrees to the north or to the south,14The variance of two or three degrees will not produce a difference that is of consequence. it will appear due west and its crescent will appear to be pointed due east.
If [the moon] is inclined to the north of the equator, it will appear in the northwest, and its crescent will appear to be pointed southeast.
If [the moon] is inclined to the south of the equator, it will appear in the southwest, and its crescent will appear to be pointed northeast. To the extent of [the moon's] distance [from the equator], its inclination will increase.
Among the other dimensions of the examination of the witnesses is the question: "How high [in the sky did the moon] appear?" This factor can be determined by the arc of sighting. If the arc is short, the moon will appear close to the earth, and when it is long, it will appear high above the earth. The length of the arc of sighting [will determine] the height at which [the moon] will appear above the earth to the witnesses.
Thus, we have explained all the calculations necessary for the sighting [of the moon] and the examination of the witnesses, so that everything will be comprehensible to men of understanding, and they will not lack awareness of any of the Torah's paths. [Therefore,] they will not venture forth in search of it in other texts. "Seek out of the book of God, read it. None of these will be lacking" [Isaiah 34:16].15With this halachah, the Rambam explains one of his motives for the inclusion of this section in the Mishneh Torah: so that a serious student would not have to resort to other texts, particularly those of the gentile scientific community, to obtain this knowledge. In this manner, he affirms one of the purposes for the Mishneh Torah stated in its introduction, to provide a text that includes every dimension of Jewish law.
The End of the Laws of the Sanctification of the Month.
