=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
באחד באדר משמיעין על השקלים – the Jewish court sends [messengers] throughout the cities of Israel and announces that they should bring their Shekalim (i.e., one-half-shekel per adult male, as per Exodus chapter 30, verses 11-16), because on the first of Nisan, one needs to bring community sacrifices from new Terumah/priest’s due, as it is written (Numbers 28:14): “That shall be the monthly burnt offering for each new moon of the year.” Renew and bring a sacrifice from the new Terumah, for we derive the months of the year of here (Numbers 28:14) from (Exodus 12:2): “It shall be the first of the months of the year for you.” Therefore, we advance it by thirty days, which is from the first day of Adar to announce that they should bring their Shekalim.
ועל הכלאים – We announce that they should reduce the other seed until there should not remain in it one-quarter of a Kab for a Seah, as is taught in Chapter Two [Mishnah One] of Mishnah Kilayim: that every Seah that has one-quarter of a Kab from another species should reduce it, and our Rabbis explained that after the seeds have ground, even one in one-thousand one must uproot everything, for every two kinds and every one kind singly is permitted, but they forbade through mixtures – but relinquishment does not belong witht his, for specifically, when they estimate after that which has been combined at the time of seeding, there is no need other than to reduce, for according to the Torah, one in two is cancelled out, but they don’t call seeding “mixed seeds” other than because of merely appearance’s sake , one must reduce, but after they grew, there is no need for renunciation, but one must uproot everything so that nothing would remain other than one of the species.
בחמשה עשר בו קורין את המגילה בכרכין – [cities] surrounded by walls from the days of Joshua the son of Nun for since it was necessary to teach [in the Mishnah] that on the fifteenth of Adar money-changers sit in the country, it teaches also everything that they would do on that day.
ומתקנים את הדרכים ואת הרחובות – and the marketplaces that were ruined vy rains during the days of he winter, we repair them for the those who come up on Pilgrimage (i.e., at Passover, Shavuot and Sukkot). But there are those who interpret – because of the killers who murder people unintentionally that are able to flee from before the blood avenger as it is written (Deuteronomy 19:3): “You shall survey the distances, [and divide into three parts the territory of the country hat the LORD your God has allotted to you, so that any manslayer may have a place to flee to].”
ואת מקואות המים – if plastered increased in them, we clean them and if their measurement is lacking, we conduct drawn water to them and complete them according to measurement – if they had there the majority of forty Se’ah from that which was proper.
ועושים כל צרכי רבים – such as monetary cases, capital cases and laws of striping and the redemption of valuation of a person or animal dedicated to the sanctuary, property set apart for priest’s or temple use, sanctified property and the handing of the bitter water to the suspected wife and the burning of the heifer and the boring through of the Hebrew bondsman’s ear, and the purification of the leper and the sending to open cavities of collected waters in order that they be found there for the people to drink from them in the days of the summer – all of these are the needs of the many.
ומציינין את הקברות – so that they will not spread tent-like for Levitical uncleanness for Kohanim arising from their being under the same shelter over a corpse, and make them pure, and this marker is when they cleanse the plaster and pour it around the grave, but during the rainy season, the plaster is dissolved/diluted and one must go back and mark it.
ויוצאים – messengers of the Jewish court.
אף על הכלאים – for even though they announced about them on the first of Adar, they do not rely upon the announcement lest the owners did not uproot them (i.e., the mixed seeds), and they themselves go out and uproot them.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
מצרפין שקלים לדרכונות – the people of the city that gathered together their Shekels can exchange them for Darics (i.e., a Persian gold coin) and this is a gold coin as it is written in Ezra (2:69): “[In accord with their means, they donated to the treasury of the work:] gold-6,100 drachmas, [silver -5,000 minas, and priestly robes – 100],” to ease from upon them the burden/weight of the way.
שופרות – chests whose openings from the top were narrow like a Shofar whose top is narrow from the top and continues to widen in order that people would not be able to take from them anything, as it is written regarding Jehoiada (II Chronicles 24:8): “[The king (Jehoash) ordered that] a chest be made and placed [outside of the gate of the House of the LORD],” (II Kings 12:10): “[And the priest Jehoiada took a chest] and bored a hole in its lid….” They were standing in the Temple courtyard, and everyone was bringing his Shekel and giving it.
כך היו במדינה – in Jerusalem, and according to the words of Maimonides, in the rest of the cities of Israel.
בני העיר ששלחו שקליהם – by the hand of an agent to bring them to the Temple treasury (for congregational sacrifices).
אם נתרמה התרומה – as they were accustomed to donate from the baskets for the needs of the sacrifices, they would donate on what was collected and what would in the future be collected, in order hat there would be a part of a the sacrifices, even for those who had yet not given their Shekels.
נשבעין – the messengers.
לגזברים – to the treasurers, for since the Terumah had been appropriated on these monies, before they were lost, they are made as if they were in the domain of the treasurers from the time that the Terumah had been appropriated, for if they were stolen or lost, they were stolen or lost while in the domain of the treasurers; therefore, the agents swear to the treasurers and they are exempted/dismissed, for even though they don’t take an oath on the sacred property of the Temple, it is a decree of the Sages in order that they not disregard the sacred property of the Temple.
ואם לאו – that at the time when they were lost, the Terumah had not yet been appropriated, and they had not removed the monies from the baskets for what would be collected in the future, it was in the domain of the owners that they were not, therefore, the agents swear to the men of the city and are exempted, and the men of the city go back and collect [for donation] other Shekels in their place, for the first Shekalim that were lost don’t count for them.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
בשלשה פרקים בשנה תורמין את הלשכה – all of the Shekalim would be placed into one chamber in the Temple and three times a year they would take from it and place them into three baskets/funds, for each basket was from three Se’ah in order to purchase from them the community offerings and they would not take all of it at one time for the needs of the entire year, for those who lived far way had not yet brought all of their Shekalim.
בפרוס הפסח – fifteen days before the Festival [of Passover] is called “half the period of preparation,” because thirty days prior to the Festival they would ask and expound upon the laws of the Festival. And the word "פרוס" is the language of a piece, meaning one-half.
והן גרנות של מעשר – these three periods are the fixed seasons for the tithing of cattle, and these times were fixed by the Sages to tithe the cattle that had been borne, and just as the harvesting season establishes for the tithing of grain, so too, these time periods establish prohibiting eating the cattle that were born until they are tithed, but prior to this period, it is permitted to eat them, even though they haven’t been tithed, but the Sages established these three times for the tithing of cattle, in order that they would be found for those who come up making pilgrimage for the Festivals, for even though it is permitted to sell and to slaughter and to eat all the time that the harvesting season had not yet arrived, even so, people would not slaughter them until they were tithed, for it is pleasant for people to fulfill a Mitzvah with their monies in which they are not lacking anything, such as the tithing of cattle, which of itself brings tithes and they eat it as a peace-offering. If they would not tithe at these three periods, many would be prevented from selling them, because they were not tithed, and there wouldn’t be cattle available for those coming up on pilgrimage.
בן עזאי אומר בכ"ט באדר – his reason is that all of these are a condition, and their disputes are explained in the last chapter of [Tractate] Bekhorot (Chapter 9, Mishnayot 5-6).

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
התרומה מה היו עושין בה – that they placed into the boxes – what did they do with them?
וכל קרבנות הצבור – including incense.
ספיחים – grain that comes up on its own from what was fell off/dropped at the harvest, and we give payment to the guards (i.e., these men were hired to prevent people from collecting the aftergrowth) so that poor people would not glean/gather them in the Seventh year, and bring from the Omer on Passover and the two loaves on Atzeret/Shavuot, for these do not come other than from חדש/new grain and from the Land of Israel. And we give them their payment from the Terumah/sacred donations, for the needs of the sacrifice are considered like the sacrifice itself.
שומר חנם – and even though he acquired them for that which was ownerless, for when he guarded them for free and brought them, they are his. Rabbi Yosi holds that an individual sacrifice is different from the community sacrifice.
אף אתה אומר כו' – that is to say, if you admit that they don’t come other than frm the community, and if you guarded them for free and brought them, he takes possession of them. It is found that they do not come from the community [offerings] since the Rabbis hold that an individual sacrifice does not change into a community [sacrifice], and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
אלו הן הממונים – fifteen kinds of officers and appointment to authority that are considered in our Mishnah were the daily offering in the Temple. However, these men that are considered were not at the same time, but the pious and the worthy in each generation he would appoint. But my teachers explained on account that the first appointees were appointed for this – thus this was their names. Therefore, the ones who came after them were called by their name
על החותמות ועל הסלתות – it will be explained further in our Mishnah.
על הפייסות – to teach the order of the lottery, who will merit with this service, and whom with that, as is explained in the Tractate Yoma (see Chapter 2, Mishnayot 1-4).
על הקינים – those lacking atonement such as the man and/or a woman with a flux and a woman who just gave birth bring obligatory bird-offerings which are doves and pigeons – they put their monies in the shofar-shaped [chests] that are in the Temple. But those who are appointed over the shofar-shaped [chests] take the money and bring through them the bird-offerings, and someone who was wise, great in knowledge and a specialist had to be appointed, as we state in Tractate Avot (Chapter 3, Mishnah 18).
שהיה פותח דברים וכו' – This is Mordecai Bilshan that came up [to the land of Israel] from the Diaspora, and he is called this because he mixed up many languages.
על חולי מעים – because the Kohanim walk barefoot on the floor and eat a lot of meat and drink water, their intestines were ruined and they always needed a doctor to tell them: this is the good medication for the intestines.
חופר שיחין – he was appointed to dig cisterns, pits and caves, in order that water would be found to drink for those who come up [to Jerusalem] on the Pilgrimage Festivals.
גביני כרוז – that was his name of the man who would announce each morning in the Temple: “Arise, O Priests, to your Divine Service” and they would hear his voice from Jericho.
על נעילת שערים – to lock the gates in the evening and to open them in the morning.
על הפקיע – to whip the Kohanim and Levites that were found to be sleeping during their watches when they would guard the Temple at night, as we say in Tractate [Middot] (see Chapter 1, Mishnah 2, where it states that would use a stick – and not necessarily a strip of leather/strap used as a whip), whomever they would find sleeping they would beat him and burn his clothing. But in the Jerusalem Talmud, they would explain that he stripped the wicks of the Menorah and of the House of Water Drawing as we state in [Tractate Sukkah], the chapter “The flute-playing” (chapter 5) [Talmud Sukkah 51b -see Mishnah 3] – “from the warn-out pants and girdles of the Kohanim, they made wicks [and would kindle them].
צלצל – a musical instrument that has a large sound, from the language תצילנה אזניו/it will be a loud shriek in his ears, “cymbal” in the foreign language.

בית גרמו – the name of a family.
על לחם הפנים – that would be made something like a breached chest and they were artisans in his action and in his baking to detach it from the oven so that it would not break and to make it so that it would not grow moldy.
בית אבטינס – the name of a family that were experts in mixing the incense and they recognized a certain grass whose name was a smoke-raiser (name of a plant) and when they would mix it with the spices of the incense, the smoke of the incense would rise straight up like a stick.
על הפרכות – to make new hangings when they were needed.
המלביש – he was appointed to dress the Kohanim at the time of the Divine Service and to undress them after their service, and to preserve the priestly garments in the compartments that were designed for this.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
שלשה עשר שופרות – [thirteen] chests, narrow from the top and wide from the bottom curved like a Shofar because of the deceivers who would not be able to put in their hands into them to show themselves as if they are giving/putting into it, while they are taking from it, and further on, it will explain why there are thirteen chests and thirteen tables and in which location they are placed (see also Mishnah 5 in this chapter).
שלש עשרה השתחויות – and further on (Mishnah 3) it will explain where they were.
כנגד דיר העצים – a chamber/compartment (see also Tractate Middot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 4) where they would store there all the wood of the pile of wood on the altar of the Temple and it was in the northeast corner of the Women’s Court.
ששם הארון נגנז – for King Josiah commanded that it be hidden below in the curved secret and tortuous path that Solomon built at the time when he built the Temple and knew that it would eventually be destroyed. And this is what is written in II Chronicles, chapter 35, verse 3: “He said to the Levites, consecrated to the LORD, who taught all Israel, ‘Put the Holy Ark in the House that Solomon [the son of David, king of Israel] built” (also compare Talmud Yoma 53b) and with it was hidden the staff of Aaron and the bottle of Manna (which was preserved) and the flask of anointing oil.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
מעות שנמצאו. קרוב לשקלים יפלו לשקלים – for after what is near we follow, as It is written (Deuteronomy 21:3): “The elders of the town nearest to the corpse,” and the one who states majority and near, follows after the majority; our Mishnah establishes that such as a case when Shekalim and freewill donations are equivalent.
מחצה על מחצה יפלו לנדבה – for they (i.e., freewill offerings) are more stringent than Shekalim, since they are all burnt offerings, but sometimes Shekalim are brought as sin-offerings which are consumed by Kohanim. But furthermore, the remnants of the Shekalim are used for the walls of the city and its towers.
מחצה על מחצה יפלו ללבונה – for frankincense is itself a sacrifice but wood is the requirement of a sacrifice.
מחצה על מחצה יפלו לגוזלי עולה – In the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 19a), it raises an objection: it is all right if it is closer to young pigeons for burnt offerings, since according to the Torah, we follow after that which is nearer as if they are definitively from the young pigeons for burnt offerings. But, if it is half-way between them, out of doubt, we cast them in a stringency to the young pigeons for burnt offerings, but the woman who brought these monies, with what shall she gain atonement? For perhaps, they fell from obligatory bird-offerings and when you offer from them pigeon burnt-offerings, with what shall the woman gain atonement? And it (i.e., the Jerusalem Talmud) responds that the Jewish court that is appointed over the bird-offerings takes from the community [offerings] according to those monies that were found and causes them to be acquired by the owners of the monies that were found and they offer from them bird-offerings on the doubt, and the sin-offering will not be consumed.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
כל הרוקין הנמצאים בירושלם אהורים – and we do not encourage the spittle of a man or woman suffering from an emission because they defile humans and utensils because we follow after the majority.
חוץ משל שוק העליון – because heathen launderers were found there and the Sages decreed concerning the heathens that they would be like men with a flux in all their matters, and their spittle is ritually impure. But there are those who state that that since the Upper Market did not have the benefit of the crossing found there (i.e., “foot traffic”) and men and women with a flux were alone and distanced themselves from other people that were found there.
שבאמצע טמאים – because men and women with a flux are frequently there and walk in the middle of the roads, and the ritually pure individuals remove themselves to the sides of the roads – in a place where there is not much walking found, and are careful of all ritually impure that they should not come in contact with them, but at the time of the Festival, when the majority of Jews are ritually pure, the ritually impure remove themselves to the sides so that they do not defile the people, and the ritually pure walk in the middle of the roads; therefore, at the time of the Festival, the spittle that is found in the middle of the road is ritually pure, but that which is on the sides is ritually impure, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yosi.
