=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
A person who sows two species of seeds together in Eretz Yisrael1But not in the Diaspora. See Halachah 3. is liable for lashes,2I.e., he transgresses a negative commandment, included as one of the 365 negative commandments by Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 215) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 245). as [Leviticus 19:19] states: "You shall not sow your field with mixed species."3The Radbaz states that the Rambam begins Sefer Zeraim with the laws of mixed substances - although the Mishnaic order of Zeraim begins with Pe'ah because he concludes Sefer Hafla'ah (Hilchot Arachin 8:1) with the teaching that the High Court would concern itself with consecrated articles from the first of Adar onward. At that same time, they would also concern themselves with fields containing mixed substances (Shekalim 1:1). Hence, the Rambam mentions these subjects in sequence.The Radbaz notes that this prooftext is also used to derive the prohibition against grafting two species of trees together and that this prohibition applies in the Diaspora as well as in Eretz Yisrael (see Halachah 5). He explains that although the prohibition against grafting trees is derived from this verse, since an equation is established between the prohibition against grafting and the prohibition against crossbreeding animals, there are certain dimensions of that prohibition that do not apply with regard to the prohibition against planting two species of produce together.
[This prohibition, referred to as kilayim, applies whether one] sows, weeds,4For by weeding a field, one stimulates the growth of crops. Although the Rambam considers weeding a derivative of plowing and not of sowing with regard to the forbidden Sabbath labors (Hilchot Shabbat 8:1), the Kessef Mishneh (to Hilchot Shabbat) explains that, in fact, it is a derivative of both forbidden labors, because one can weed for two intents:a) to improve the appearance of the field, in which instance, it is a derivative of plowing, andb) to cause the crops to grow better, in which instance, it is a derivative of sowing. or covers seeds with earth, e.g., there was a kernel of wheat and a kernel of barley or a fava bean and a lentil, lying on the earth and one covered them with earth, whether with his hand, his foot, or with a utensil, he is liable for lashes. [This applies] whether he sows them in the earth or in a pot with a hole.5I.e., since the pot has a hole, the earth within it is considered to derive nurture from the earth and thus sowing within it is considered equivalent to sowing within the earth (Kilayim 7:8). This principle applies, not only in this context, but in many other situations involving agricultural laws. The hole must be large enough to allow a small root to pass through (Kessef Mishneh). When, by contrast, one sows them in a pot without a hole, he is liable only for stripes for rebellious conduct.6The punishment given for transgressing Rabbinic prohibitions. Since the pot did not have a hole, the person is not liable for the violation of a Scriptural commandment. Nevertheless, our Sages prohibited sowing seeds in this manner (see Menachot 70a) and hence, doing so incurs this liability.
It is forbidden to sow kilayim7This applies to mixed species of seeds. With regard to mixed species in a vineyard, see Chapter 5, Halachah 5. for a gentile.8I.e., even in a field belonging to a gentile. For a gentile's acquisition of property in Eretz Yisrael does not nullify the holiness of the land (see Hilchot Terumah 1:10). Hence, all of the mitzvot and prohibitions that apply previously continue to apply. See Turei Zahav 297:1. It is, by contrast, permitted to tell a gentile to sow mixed species of seeds for his own sake.9We find several instances where a prohibition exists in telling a gentile to perform a forbidden act (Hilchot Shabbat 6:1; Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 16:13; Hilchot Sechirut 13:3; see also Halachah 6). Thus the Ra'avad differs concerning this issue and maintains that making such statements to a gentile is forbidden. Both the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that, we are speaking about an instance where the gentile is planting the mixed species in his own field. Hence, in this instance, since the gentile is acting for his own sake, there is no prohibition involved in the Jew telling the gentile to plant the mixed species. The Tur (Yoreh De'ah 296), however, interprets the Rambam as granting permission to tell a gentile to sow mixed species in the Jew's field, but differs with that ruling himself.It is forbidden for a person to maintain mixed species of seeds in his field. Instead, he must uproot them. If he maintains them, he is not liable for lashes.10If, however, he performs a deed that maintains the forbidden produce, he is liable for lashes (Jerusalem Talmud, Kilayim 8:1). This is the manner in which the Kessef Mishneh resolves the Ra'avad's objections to the Rambam's ruling. It is permitted for a Jew to sow mixed species of seeds by hand in the Diaspora.11There is not even a Rabbinic prohibition against doing so. It is even permitted to mix seeds at the outset and then sow them. These concepts [have been communicated] by the Oral Tradition.
The prohibition against mixed species of seeds involves only plants that are fit for human consumption.12The Kessef Mishneh cites sources (including Chapter 5, Halachah 18) which indicate the intent is not that the produce is not fit for human consumption, but rather that it is not fit for human use. Even if it is ordinarily used as animal fodder, it is still fit to be considered as a mixed substance. This interpretation is cited by the Turei Zahav 297:2. Grasses that are bitter and similar roots that are fit only for medicinal purposes and the like are not included in the prohibition against mixtures of seeds.
[Grafting] a mixture of trees is included in the prohibition: "You shall not sow your field with mixed species." What is implied? When a person grafts a tree [of one species] unto a tree [of another species], e.g., he grafted a branch of an apple tree to an esrog tree or one from an esrog tree to an apple tree, he is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law in any place, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in the Diaspora.13For, as mentioned above, this restriction is derived from an association with the prohibition against cross-breeding different species of animals. Similarly, if a person grafts a vegetable to a tree or a tree to a vegetable, he is liable for lashes in every place.14The Radbaz maintains that it is, however, permitted to graft a vegetable to a vegetable in the Diaspora, but not in Eretz Yisrael. The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 295:3), however, also forbid grafting two species of vegetables together. Similarly, they forbid grafting a fruit-bearing tree onto a non-fruit-bearing tree.
It is forbidden for a Jew to allow a gentile to graft different species of trees together for [the Jew].15Two explanations are given for this prohibition:a) a gentile is forbidden to graft different species of trees together (Hilchot Melachim 10:6). Hence, having him perform the act is "placing a stumbling block in the path of the blind."b) Since it is forbidden to do anything to maintain a forbidden graft, it is also forbidden to give instructions for such a graft to be made.It is permitted to sow the seeds of produce and the seeds of a tree together.16The Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 295) emphasizes that, according to the Rambam, this leniency applies even in Eretz Yisrael. This runs contrary to the view of the Tur who maintains that this is forbidden in Eretz Yisrael. The Tur's view is supported by the Ra'avad who differs with the Rambam and forbids such a practice. The Kessef Mishneh and the Radbaz support the Rambam's view. Similarly, it is permitted to mix seeds from different species of trees and sow them together. [The rationale is that] the only prohibition against mixed species that applies to trees is the prohibition against grafting [different species together].
Although he is liable for lashes, when a person sows forbidden species together or grafts forbidden species of trees together, the produce that grows is permitted to be eaten, even by the person who transgressed and sowed it.17With regard to the prohibitions against forbidden labor on the Sabbath, by contrast, greater stringencies apply to a person who performed a forbidden labor benefiting from his actions than to others (Hilchot Shabbat 6:23). For it is only sowing that is forbidden.18The Radbaz states that here, the Rambam is speaking about the status of the produce according to law. As stated in the conclusion of the following chapter, as a punishment for violating the law, our Sages decreed that the entire field should be designated as ownerless.It is permitted to plant a branch from the grafted tree or plant the seeds from a vegetable that was planted together with mixed species.19Therefore it is permitted to plant nectarines and other mixed species.
Edible plants are divided into three categories:20From here to the conclusion of the chapter, the Rambam is outlining general principles that will be relevant in the coming chapters (Kessef Mishneh).a) the first is called grain; it includes wheat, wild wheat, barley, oats, and spelt;b) the second is called kitniot; it includes all the types of seeds eaten by men other than grain, e.g., beans, peas, lentils, millet, and rice, sesame seeds, poppy seed, white peas, and the like. c) the third is called garden seeds, i.e., seeds which are not fit for human consumption, but whose fruit is fit for human consumption, e.g., onion seeds, garlic [seeds], leek seeds, ketzach [seeds], cabbage seeds, and the like. Flax seed is considered in this category. When these seeds are sown and grow, before the seeds are recognizable, the entire plant is called herbage and it is called vegetables.
There are some garden plants that that are sown in [large] fields, e.g., flax and mustard seed21The commentaries note that the Rambam's statements here appear to contradict his statement in Chapter 3, Halachah 18, and Hilchot Matnot Aniyim 3:11, where the Rambam states that it is customary to sow mustard seed in individual rows. and they are called "types of seeds." And there are other garden plants which people customarily sow only in small rows,22I.e., it is not customary to grow an entire field of them. e.g., turnips, radishes, spinach, onions, coriander, parsley, horse radish, and the like. These are called vegetables.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
[The following rules apply when] seeds [of one species] are mixed together1As stated in Halachah 6, this and the following halachot apply when the mixture came about unintentionally. If the mixture was made intentionally, even the slightest amount is forbidden. with seed of another [species]. If the smaller quantity was one twenty-fourth [or more of the entire mixture], e.g., a se'ah of wheat became mixed with 23 se'ah of barley,2When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 297:5) speaks of 24 se'ah of barley. it is forbidden to sow the mixture unless one reduces the amount of wheat3By removing the kernels. or adds to the amount of barley.4So that the amount of wheat will no longer be considered significant.The Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 2:1) refers to the general principle (Beitzah 4b) that we do not nullify the existence of a prohibited substance. Why then are we allowed to add more barley and thus nullify the presence of the wheat?It explains that the mixture is forbidden only because of the appearance created, i.e., as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 5, mixed substances are forbidden only if the mixture is noticeable to the eye. Hence, if the barley is added before the mixture is sown, when the crops grow, the mixture will not be noticeable. Hence, there is no prohibition involved (Rambam LeAm). If he sowed [the mixture as is], he is liable for lashes.5There are those who interpret the Jerusalem Talmud as implying that in this instance, the prohibition is merely Rabbinic in origin. Hence, they question this ruling. According to the explanation in the previous note, however, there is no difficulty.
Any [species of seed] that is considered a forbidden substance with the seeds [that are mixed in] is included in the sum of one twenty-fourth. What is implied? 23 se'ah of wheat were mixed together with two kabbin of barley, two kabbin of lentils, and two kabbin of beans.6There are six kab in a se'ah. Thus there is not enough of any one different species for it to be considered as a forbidden mixture on its own. Nevertheless, since when combined, there is a significant amount of seeds of other species, the mixture is forbidden. He should not sow the entire mixture until he reduces the se'ah of mixed substances by removing part of it or adding to the wheat, for barley, lentils, and beans are all considered as kilayim with wheat.
When does the above apply? When the different types of grain are mixed together, the different legumes are mixed together or grain is mixed with legumes or legumes mixed with grain. If, however, species of garden seeds are mixed with grain or beans, the measure [which is considered significant] is one twenty-fourth of what would be sown of that species7The seeds of garden vegetables are far smaller than those of grains and legumes. Thus a far lesser amount is necessary to produce a crop. We must take this factor into consideration in these calculations [Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura (Kilayim 2:2)]. in the area necessary to sow a se'ah [of grain].8I.e., a square 50 cubits by 50 cubits, or any area of 2500 sq. cubits. If [this amount] is mixed with a se'ah9According to the Rambam's statement in Halachah 1, the intent is not a se'ah, but one-twenty-fourth less. of grain or legumes, one should not sow the mixture unless he reduces [the garden seeds] or adds to the grain.
What is implied? [For example,] mustard seed was mixed with grain. Now a kav10One sixth of a se'ah. of mustard seed is sown in the area fit for a se'ah of grain. If one twenty-fourth of a kav of mustard seed is mixed with a se'ah11I.e., a square 50 cubits by 50 cubits, or any area of 2500 sq. cubits.  of grain or legumes, one must reduce [the mustard seed]. Similarly, if it was customary to sow two se'ah of a species of garden seeds in an area where a se'ah of grain would ordinarily be sown,12I.e., we are speaking about sowing seeds that are bulkier than the seeds of grain and a larger amount is necessary to be sown in the area in which a se'ah of grain seeds would be sown. should a half a kav13I.e., one twenty-fourth of two se'ah, double the ordinary amount. be mixed in a se'ah of grain or legumes, it must be reduced.
Therefore, [the following laws apply if] grain becomes mixed with flax seed. If there were three quarters [of a kav] in every se'ah [of grain], it is necessary to reduce the amount [of flax]. If there is less than that [amount], it is not necessary to make such a reduction. [The rationale is that] in an area fit to sow a se'ah [of grain], it is customary to sow three se'ah of flax seeds. This pattern is followed with regard to all other types of seeds.
When does the above apply? When one did not intend to mix the two species and one did not intend to sow a mixture of the two species. If, however, one intended to mix one species of seed with another species or to sow two species,14I.e., after the two species were mixed together accidentally, the person sowed the mixture with the intent of benefiting from both species (Kessef Mishneh). it is forbidden to sow even one kernel of wheat with an entire grainheap of barley. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
[The following rules apply when] a person sowed a particular species in his field,15I.e., with the intent that each one grow in a separate place. but when the crops grow, he saw that there are intermingled species there.16And he does not desire to benefit from the intermingled species (Turei Zahav 297:3). If the [intermingled] species covered one twenty-fourth of the area in the field, he should gather it until he reduces the amount because of the impression that might be created.17In the initial halachot of this chapter, a Scriptural prohibition was involved, as evident from the fact that the person was punished by lashes. For those halachot were speaking about instances where the person desired to benefit from the forbidden mixture. In this instance, we are speaking about an instance where he did not desire to benefit. Hence there is only a Rabbinic prohibition involved (Turei Zahav 297:4). Alternatively, the explanation given in note 3 can be employed here as well. [An onlooker might think that] perhaps he sowed mixed substances intentionally. [This applies] whether the [intermingled] species that grew was grain and legumes amid grain and legumes or garden seeds amid grain, legumes, and garden seed. If the amount that grew was less than this, he does not need to reduce it.
When does the above apply? When there is a reason to suspect [that he did so intentionally]. When, however, it is apparent from the situation that this was not the owner's intent, but the [intermingled species] grew on their own accord, we do not require him to reduce their amount.
What is implied? Indigo grew in [a field of] wheat. Grass grew in [a field of] chilbah18A pungent herb also known as fenugreek. planted for human consumption.19Instead of for animal fodder, as is also done on occasion. [It is obviously undesirable, because the intermingled species] damage the primary species. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
How is it possible to know whether the chilbah is planted for human consumption? When it is sown in a series of rows and there is a border around it.20And not in a haphazard manner [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 2:5) based on Bava Kama 81a].Similarly, if different species grew in the place of the grainheap, we do not require him to uproot them, for it is known that he does not desire plants to grow in the place of the grainheap.21That place has to be flat and smooth so that the grain can be threshed (ibid.). If he removed some of the growths - which indicates that he desires to maintain [the plants] that remain - we tell him to uproot everything except one species.22For anything more than one species would be considered kilayim.
We may not plant vegetables in a stump of a wild fig tree or the like.23I.e., grafting vegetables onto any other tree is also forbidden, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 5.The Radbaz states by using the term "wild fig tree," instead of fig tree, the Rambam - and his source, Kilayim 1:9 - are emphasizing that even though one might think that a wild fig tree resembles a non-fruitbearing tree, that is not so. From this statement, we learn that the Radbaz maintains that there is no prohibition against grafting a vegetable onto a non-fruitbearing tree. This point is a matter of discussion among the commentaries.[The following laws apply when a person] buries a bundle24If, however, they are not tied as a bundle, more stringent laws apply as indicated in the conclusion of the halachah. The rationale is that the fact that the vegetables are tied in a bundle indicates that they were placed in the earth for storage - in that era, there was no refrigeration - and not so that they would grow. of turnips, radishes, or the like under a tree, or even under a vine.25The Rambam mentions a vine, because that is the wording used in his source (ibid.), but it applies to other trees as well.From the connection to the initial clause of the halachah and from the fact that other trees aside from a vine are mentioned, we can conclude that this clause also focuses on grafting. For there is no prohibition against planting vegetables in an orchard of trees other than a vineyard. What grafting is involved? It is possible to explain that the intermingling of the roots of the vegetable and the roots of the tree or vine could be considered as grafting (Rambam LeAm). If some of the leaves were revealed, he need not be concerned [about the prohibition against kilayim],26Nor those involving the Sabbatical year, the tithes, or the Sabbath labors (ibid.). since he does not desire that [the buried vegetables] take root. If they were not [tied in] a bundle or their leaves were not revealed,27For this is not the ordinary way to plant these vegetable. The Ra'avad rules that the prohibition against kilayim does not apply even when the leaves are not revealed. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, justify the Rambam's view. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 297:11) quotes the Rambam's ruling. he must show concern for that prohibition.
When a field had been sown and the produce [that grew] was harvested, but the roots were left in the earth, one should not sow another type of produce in that field until the roots are removed. [This applies] even if [these roots] will not produce a plant for several years.28The Rambam's ruling is based on his interpretation of Kilayim 2:5. The Ra'avad objects, offering a different understanding of that mishnah. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 297:12) follows the Rambam's understanding.
When a person had sown wheat in his field and then changed his mind and decided to sow barley before the wheat grew, he must wait until the wheat seeds rot and decompose in the earth - i.e., three days if the field is well irrigated. Afterwards, he should turn the land upside down with a plow29For after these steps, the seeds that were planted initially will no longer grow [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 2:3)]. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that even one of these steps is sufficient. There is no need to both wait and plow. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's view. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 297:13) follows the Rambam's understanding. and sow the other species. He does not have to turn the entire field upside down until there is not one kernel of wheat that has not been uprooted. Instead, he should plow the field like he would plow it before rainfall so that it would be watered thoroughly.
If the wheat grew and then he changed his mind and decided to sow barley, he should turn over the field30For the plowing will destroy the plants that have grown. In contrast to the previous halachah, in this instance, he does not have to wait three days, because we do not think that the seeds will produce another plant. and then sow it. If he let his animal into the field and it ate the growths, it is permitted to sow the other species.
On the first of Adar, a pronouncement is made regarding [the need for concern for] kilayim.31This is the time when plants first begin to grow and it is able to see whether one's fields and orchards have mixed species growing in them or not. Every person should go out to his garden and his field and clean it from mixed species. On the fifteenth of [Adar], the agents of the courts go out and spread out [throughout the land] to check.
Originally, [the agents of the court] would uproot [the mixed species] and cast them out and the owners of the fields would be happy that [the court's agents] would be cleaning their fields.32And hence, they would be lax in doing so themselves. [As a safeguard against indolence, the court ordained] that they would declare ownerless33See the Sefer Meirat Einayim 273:27 which states that according to the Shulchan Aruch (and the Rambam) the court's agents must declare the field ownerless. According to the Tur, by contrast, if a person sees mixed species are growing in a field, he may take possession of it, for it is considered ownerless even though the court has not made a declaration to that effect as of yet. any field where mixed species were found, provided the [additional] species was one twenty-fourth [of the entire crop]. If it is less than that, they should not touch it.
The agents of the court return during the intermediate days of Pesach to look at the crop that were late in ripening. If mixed species have budded, we do not wait. Instead, [the agents] go out immediately and declare the entire field ownerless if one twenty-fourth of it is from a second species.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
There are certain species of plants which will divide into separate forms because of the difference in the place [where they grow] and the differences in the manner in which the earth is cultivated until they appear as two species. Nevertheless, since they are one species, they are not considered as kilayim with each other.
And there are species of plants that resemble each other and whose form is close to being the same. Nevertheless, because they are two species, it is forbidden [to grow] them together.
What is implied? Lettuce with wavy lettuce,1In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 1:2), the Rambam defines this as "mountain lettuce." The examples cited by the Rambam in this and following halachot are all taken from Kilayim, ch. 1. Our translation is largely dependent on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah and Rav Kappach's notes to that text. endives and wild endives, leek and wild leek, coriander and mountain coriander, mustard and Egyptian mustard, Egyptian squash and squash of ashes,2This squash has a bitter taste and is made edible only by putting it in a remetz, a pit filled with smoldering ashes (ibid.). are not considered as kilayim with each other. Similarly, wheat and undomesticated wheat, barley and oats, rye and spelt, beans and white peas, fabaceae and leguminosaea,3Two types of wild beans. white beans with azuki beans, zucchini and cucumbers, cabbage and cauliflower, beets and sorrel are not kilayim with each other. But radishes and Israeli radishes,4See Halachah 6. mustard and bitter cabbage, Greek squash and Egyptian squash, or and squash of ashes, although they resemble each other are kilayim with each other.
Similarly, with regard to trees, there are species which resemble each other with regard to their leaves or their fruit, but since they are separate species, they are kilayim. What is implied? Apples and crabapples, peaches and almonds, prunes and Arabian jujube, although they resemble each other are kilayim with each other. But apricots and white plums and quince and lavallei are not kilayim with each other.
Similarly, there are other plants and trees which [our Sages] did not classify as kilayim although they are inherently two different species, because the leaves of one resemble the leaves of the other or the fruit of one resembles the fruit of the other very closely to the extent that they appear as different shades of the same species. [The rationale is that] with regard to kilayim we follow the appearance alone.5The Rambam also states this principle in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:1). According to his understanding, it is our perception which determines whether one is mixing species or not. Their biological nature is a secondary factor.
What is implied? Turnips and radishes are not kilayim with each other because their fruits are similar.6The Ra'avad differs on the principle explained by the Rambam and considers these species as kilayim. Turnips and Israeli radishes are not kilayim with each other, because their leaves resemble each other. But radishes and Israeli radishes are kilayim even though their fruits resembles each other and their leaves resemble each other, because the taste of the fruits are drastically different from each other.
How much is it necessary to separate between two species of plants so that they will not be considered as kilayim [when planting them in the same field]? So that [the two species] will look distinct from each other. If, however, they appear as if they were sown together, this is forbidden.7The Rambam is stating a general principle with which he introduces the coming halachot.
There are many different measures given with regard to the distance required to make this distinction. Everything depends on the size of the field that is being sown and the proliferation of leaves [the plants have] and the extent to which their branches spread out.
What is implied? If a person had sown a species of grain in his field and he sought to sow another species of grain in another field at its side, he must make a separation the size of the area in which one can sow a quarter of a kav between the two. This is approximately8I.e., slightly more than that sum (Kessef Mishneh). ten and one fifth cubits by ten and one fifth cubits. [This applies] whether [the space left empty ceases] in the midst [of these fields] or [continues along their entire] side.9Our translation is based on the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh who cites the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:3) as a source.The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh cite the Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 2:7) which states that if one species surrounds the other on all four sides, such a separation is not sufficient. They say that one could understand the Rambam as alluding to that view. The Aruch HaShulchan 297:32, however, explains that the Rambam differs. If there is less than this space between them, sowing [these crops] are forbidden, but he is not liable for lashes unless they are six handbreadths [or less] close to each other.10I.e., unless it is less than the smaller figure, it is not forbidden by Scriptural Law. Nevertheless, as a safeguard, our Sages required an even greater separation.
If his field was sown with vegetables and he desired to sow another species of vegetables - even squash11Whose leaves spread very far (see Halachah 13). - in another field at its side, he must make a separation of a square six handbreadths by six handbreadths between the two whether [the space left empty ceases] in the midst [of these fields] or [continues along their entire] side. If there is less than this space between them, sowing [these crops] are forbidden, but he is not liable for lashes unless they are within a handbreadth of each other.12Although the Ra'avad rules stringently, stating that the measures mentioned in the previous halachah apply in this instance as well, the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's approach.
If there was grain sown in one of two fields and vegetables or squash sown in the other, one must make a separation the size of the area in which one can sow a quarter of a kav between the two.13Since there is grain involved, we rule stringently (Radbaz).
When does the need to make a distinction of the size mentioned above apply? Between two fields.14Here the Rambam does not define what constitutes a field. In Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 3:4, he states that a small field is 50 cubits by 2 cubits and in Hilchot Shechenim 1:4, he defines a field as a place that is fit to sow nine kabbim. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bava Basra 1:6), he defines that as being 3750 sq. cubits. If, however, he had sowed vegetables in his field and he desires to sow a row of another species of vegetables at their side,15If he wants to sow this row in the middle of the field, he must leave such a trench on either side (Radbaz). it is sufficient for him to leave a trench six handbreadths long16For a separation this size is sufficient to set the row apart as a distinct entity [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:3)]. with its width the same as its depth17The trench must be at least a handbreadth deep.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's interpretation of this concept, but the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh substantiate the Rambam's understanding. between the row and the field.
When a field is sown with grain and a person desires to sow a row of vegetables - even squash whose leaves are long and become tangled - in its midst, he must leave a distance of six handbreadths between them.18See Chapter 4, Halachah 3, and notes. If the leaves of the squash became extended and entered into [the portion where] the grain [was sown] and became entangled with it, he should uproot enough of the grain in front of the squash so that the leaves will not become tangled.19The Radbaz explains that he could also cut off the extensions of the squash plants, but apparently, he would suffer a greater loss from doing that than from uprooting the grain. Hence, the Rambam is simply giving him good advice. Needless to say, if he sowed one row of one species and another row of another species, it is sufficient for there to be one trench between them, as will be explained.20The Radbaz mentions that this also refers to the concepts mentioned in the previous halachah. It is, nevertheless, placed here to teach that even though there is grain involved (see Halachah 9), since we are speaking only of one row, there is no need for additional stringency.
If he made an appropriate separation between the two species, but one of the species became draped upon the other one - whether the grain became draped upon other grain, a vegetable upon another vegetable, a vegetable upon grain, or grain upon a vegetable - everything is permitted, for he made a separation of the appropriate measure. [There is one] exception, Greek squash, because it becomes extended very far. Therefore if it becomes draped upon [another species], one should uproot the species in front of it,21Even though there is an appropriate separation, the species appear to be mixed [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:11)]. as explained [in the previous halachah].
If between two species there were [any of the following] - a cistern,22Our translation follows the gloss of the Radbaz. Others interpret the term bor as referring to an unplowed field. a plowed field left fallow, a stone fence, a path,23Which is four cubits wide (see Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 3:3). a wooden fence that is ten handbreadths high, a trench that is ten handbreadths deep and four handbreadths wide, a tree whose branches hang to the earth,24And thus it appears as a tent [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:11)]. or a rock that is ten handbreadths high and four [handbreadths] wide - it is permissible to place the one species on one side of [the divider] and the other species on the other side [of the divider]. Since one of the above is separating between them, they appear distinct from each other.
When is it necessary for there to be such a separation or a divider? When one is sowing [the two species] in his own field. If, however, one person sowed wheat in his field, his colleague is permitted to sow barley in a bordering [field], as [implied by] Leviticus 19:19]: "Do not sow mixed species in your field." The prohibition applies only to sowing mixed species in one's own field. For the Torah does not say: "Mixed species shall not be sown on the earth."25This ruling is an outgrowth of the rationale for the prohibition against mixed species: not to intermingle the different spiritual powers that give energy to the various crops (see the commentary of Rabbenu Bachaye to Leviticus 19:19 . If the properties belong to two different people - even though the land on which the different crops grow are adjacent - the two spiritual mediums of nurture will not be intermingled (Yayin Malchut).The Ra'avad does not accept the Rambam's ruling. He accepts the following clause - for it is an explicit mishnah (Kilayim 2:7) - but maintains that the sowing of the two species next to each other are acceptable in that instance, because at the outset, there was a clear distinction. In this instance, by contrast, there is no distinction at the outset, and it appears that a prohibition was violated. The Radbaz justifies the Rambam's ruling, stating that if one is allowed to sow mixed species in his own field, because it appears to be an extension of his colleague's field, certainly, his colleague is allowed to plant a different species in his own field.Moreover, even if one planted barley in his own field next to wheat and extended the barley until it was adjacent to the field of his colleague which was planted with barley, it is permitted. [The rationale is that] the barley in his own field appears to be the end of his colleague's field.26And thus they will not appear as mixed species to an onlooker.
If his field was planted with wheat and a colleague's field adjoining it was planted with wheat, he is permitted to sow one row of flax at the side of his wheat adjoining his colleague's field.27Despite the fact that the two fields appear to be one continuous field of wheat, planting the one row of flax is permitted for the rationale explained by the Rambam (Radbaz). [The rationale is that] an observer knows that it is not the common practice to sow only one row of flax and this person is merely testing his field to see if it is fit to plant flax or not. Thus he is sowing the seed with the intent of destroying it.28I.e., he is not intending to reap any benefit from planting this flax. For this reason, the prohibition against kilayim does not apply. Therefore,29I.e., since the reason for the leniency is that everyone can see that he has no benefit from the row of flax, when that rationale does not apply, the leniency is not granted. it is forbidden to sow another species30I.e., a species other than flax that people might commonly sow only one row of. between these two fields31Our text is based on authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. The version in the standard printed text is slightly different. that are planted with one species until he makes a distinction [between the two species] within his own property.
When a person's field and a colleague's field were sown with two [different] types of grain,32Needless to say, this applies when the fields are sown with the same species (Radbaz). he should not sow even one row of mustard seed or safflower seed, because it is customary to sow one row of these.33I.e., these are crops for which there is a benefit in sowing a single row. Hence, in contrast to the flax mentioned in the previous halachah, a prohibition exists.The commentaries note that the Rambam's statements here appear to contradict his statement in Chapter 1, Halachah 9, in which he states that it is customary to sow entire fields of mustard seed. They are, however, reinforced by his statements in Hilchot Matnot Aniyim 3:11. If, however, there were two fields planted with different species of vegetables, it is permitted to sow mustard seed or safflower seed between them. For it is permitted to bring any species close to mustard seed or safflower seed with the exception of grain.34Since mustard seed and safflower seed have a harmful effect on other crops, there is no prohibition. Significantly, in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Kilayim 2:8), the Rambam writes the direct opposite that mustard seed and safflower seed have a harmful effect on grain, but not on other crops.Rav Yosef Corcus notes that from the previous halachah, one might think that it is permitted to plant only a row of flax, but not of other species, because only flax is planted as an experiment. And from this halachah, one might think only mustard seed and safflower seed are forbidden, for otherwise, there would be no reason to single them out individually, but other species are permitted. In resolution, he explains that here the emphasis is on mustard seed and flax seed individually. Since they are permitted next to other species, one might think that they are also permitted next to grain. Hence, it is necessary to emphasize that this is not so. [There is a stringency in the latter instance, because the mustard seed or safflower seed] do not have a harmful effect on [grain].Similarly, if a corner [of a portion] of one's field [sown] with one species touches a block [of the field sown] with another species, it is permitted, because they appear separate from each other.35Even though they are adjacent, the manner in which they are planted makes a clear distinction. Needless to say, if the corner [of a portion of one's field sown] with one species touches a corner [of the field sown] with another species, it is permitted without setting them apart or making a distinction as we explained,36In Halachah 16. because it appears that it is the end of one field that touched the end of another field.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
It is permitted to sow two rows of zucchini next to each other, next to them two rows of squash, next to them two rows of Egyptian beans, [provided] there is a trench1Chapter 3, Halachah 12, states that these trenches must be as wide as they are deep. The Aruch HaShulchan writes that the trench must be at least four handbreadths wide. between each species.2Although these species are considered as kilayim, sowing them in this manner is permitted, because of the precautions that are taken. For each block of a particular crop appears as a separate field [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:4)].Although in the following halachah, a twelve cubit stretch of each crop is required, that is because one is sowing only one row of the squash. Hence, it does not look like a field of squash and sowing a larger stretch of vegetables is required (Radbaz). One should not, however, sow one row of zucchini, one row of squash, and one row of Egyptian beans, even though there is a trench separating between each species, because the leaves of these species grow long and become extended and tangled. If they are sown one row next to another, everything will become intermingled and it will appear that he sowed [the crops] as a mixture.
If a person's field was planted with types of vegetables and he desired to plant several rows of squash3In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:6), the Rambam writes that a row of squash is four cubits wide. in it, [he must do the following]: Rip up from the vegetables a place where he will plant a row of squash and separate between it and the vegetables with a trench. He then leaves a twelve cubit section of vegetables and plants a second row of squash, dividing between it and the vegetables with a trench. Similarly, [he should follow this pattern] until [he reaches] the place he desires. Thus there will be twelve cubits between each two rows of squash.4In such an instance, each block of vegetables appears as a separate field, as stated above (Radbaz).The width of the trench is not counted because it does not have a specific measure, nor must it extend over the entire length of the field (Rav Yosef Corcus). If there is less than this measure, it is forbidden, because the leaves will become tangled with the vegetables between them on either side and it will appear that he sowed [the crops] as a mixture.
When [a person has] a row of squash sown or even one squash [plant] and desires to plant grain next to it, he must [leave empty a portion] large enough to sow a fourth [of a kav],510 and one fifth cubits by 10 and one fifth cubits. This stringency is required because the laws governing grain are stricter than those governing vegetables. for [the squash plants'] leaves have become extended and are considered to have taken possession of a large area.6The Radbaz notes that in Chapter 3, Halachah 13, the Rambam speaks of making a separation of six handbreadths between grain and squash and here, he requires a much larger figure. He explains that here we are speaking about a situation in which the squash has already grown and its leaves are extended, while there we are speaking of squash that is just beginning to grow. Any entity, e.g., a grave, a rock,7I.e., a rock that is less the ten handbreadths high and four handbreadths wide. If it is of the latter size, it alone is considered a sufficient divider, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 15. or the like, that exists within [the area] large enough to sow a fourth [of a kav] that is left empty as a separation between these two species is considered as part of the measure.
When a trench or an irrigation ditch are a handbreadth deep,8If they are not this deep, they are considered to be flush with the earth and the leniency mentioned in this halachah does not apply. one may sow three types of plants within them: one on each edge of the trench and one in the middle.9For each type of plant appears distinct.
It is permitted to sow two species in one pit - even zucchini and squash10Whose leaves spread and become entangled [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:5)]. - provided that one is leaning above one side of the pit and the other leans above the other side and thus they appear separate from each other.11And the foundation of the prohibition of Kilayim is the impression created (ibid.). Similarly, if one planted four species in a pit and pointed them to each of the four directions, it is permitted.
When a person desires to sow his field in many long rows of different species, he should make a separation of two cubits by two cubits [at the beginning of the rows]. He may then continually reduce the width of the empty space until at the end of the rows, there is only the slightest amount of empty space between them. [This is permitted,] because they do not look like they have been sown as a mixture.12I.e., the separation made initially is sufficient to distinguish the crops sown throughout the field.
If a person wants to plant his field in squares13The Ra'avad notes that the Rambam uses the term karachat which usually means "bald patch" to refer, not to the area of the field that is left empty, but the area which is planted. of different species, he should not plant more than nine squares in a field large enough to sow a se'ah. Each square should be large enough to sow a quarter of a kav.14Ten and one fifth cubits, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 10. Thus there will be approximately ten cubits minus a fourth of a cubit between each square, for the area in which a se'ah can be sown is fifty [cubits] by fifty [cubits].
What is the difference between the terms meishar and karachat?15The Hebrew terms used in the two preceding halachot. The former is long and the latter is square.
[The following principle applies with regard to] species of vegetables that it is not customary for a person to sow in large amounts as we explained.16Chapter 1, Halachah 9. It is permitted to sow even five types of these vegetables in one row that is six handbreadths by six handbreadths, provided he sows four species at the four sides17Note the accompanying diagrams, taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:1). of the row and one in the middle, leaving a handbreadth and a half between each species so that they will not derive nurture from each other.18This is the measure in which plants derive nurture from the earth (ibid.). The Rambam, however, does not always focus on this point, because he views the impression created of equal significance, as stated at the conclusion of the chapter. One should not, however, sow more than five species [in a row] even if he makes an appropriate separation, because it appears that they are sown as a mixture.
When does the above apply? To a row planted in a ruin where there are no crops outside it. If, however, a row is planted among other rows [of produce], it is forbidden to sow five [different] species. For if he will sow all four sides of one row and all the sides of the rows around it, everything will appear as a mixture.19Even if he does not fill up the borders, it is forbidden as a decree, lest he come to do so (Kessef Mishneh).If he caused the leaves of one row to lean to one side and those of the other row to lean to the other side so they appear distinct [from each other], it is permitted. Similarly, if he makes a trench between each row, it is permitted.20For the trench appears as a distinction.
It is forbidden to sow outside this row without a trench or without leaning [the plants to the side]. [This applies] even opposite the corners of the row in which there are no plants. This is a decree, [enacted] lest one sow the four species in the four corners of the row21See the accompanying diagram, taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah. and sow other species outside of it, opposite the corners, and thus, everything would appear mixed.
If the row was six handbreadths by six handbreadths and it had a barrier a handbreadth high and a handbreadth wide around it, it is permitted to sow even eighteen species within it: three on each barrier22I.e. since the species are sown on the barrier, they are distinct from those sown within the trench. Note the following diagram, taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah. and six in the middle. One must separate a handbreadth and a half between each species. One should not sow a turnip in the midst of the barrier, lest it fill it.23I.e., lest the turnip grow large and fill up the empty space on the border. He should not sow more than that.24For it will be cluttered and appear as a mixture (Radbaz).
It is forbidden to sow different seed plants25E.g., mustard or smooth peas (Kilayim 3:2). in this manner, because they appear as kilayim.26It is customary to sow larger plots of these crops. Hence if one sows a row of the above size with different species of these crops, it will appear to be a mixture of species. [More lenient laws apply to] species of vegetables. Since people generally sow only small amounts of them, it is permitted [to sow them in the manner] explained [above].
When there is a barrier a handbreadth wide and one sowed several species in it as we explained,27Halachah 12. if the height of the barrier was reduced,28I.e., some of its earth was taken away. it is still acceptable since it was acceptable at the time when it was originally sown.29It is, however, forbidden to sow crops on the side of the barrier until its height is restored [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 3:2)]. There, however, the Rambam interprets the barrier as referring to a divider between two types of crops, not a barrier around a row.
When a person desires to fill his entire garden with different types of vegetables without making a separation between them, he should divide the entire garden into square rows, even six handbreadths by six handbreadths. He should then make five circles in every row, four for the four corners and one in the center. He may sow a species [of vegetables] in each circle and one in the center and he may sow four other species in the four corners.30I.e., the area between the circles and the perimeter of the square. Thus there are nine species in each row and yet they appear separate from each other. He leaves empty only what is between the circles. This is left fallow so that the circles will appear distinct from the corners and distinct from each other.31The Ra'avad objects to this ruling. The Rambam's rationale depends on the principle explained in the following halachah: that when crops appear distinct, we are not concerned that they derive nurture from each other.If he desires not to leave any empty space at all, he should do the following: If [the crops in] the circles are sown vertically, he should sow [crops in the space left] between them horizontally. If they are sown horizontally, he should sow [in the space] between them vertically so that they will appear distinct from each other.
From all of the above, the following principles become apparent for you. When there is sufficient space32A handbreadth and a half. between two species so that they will not derive nurture, we are not concerned with the appearance as we explained.33Halachah 9. And when they appear separate from each other, we are not concerned with the fact that they derive nurture from each other, even if they are next to each other as we just explained.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
When a person sows two types of grain or two types of vegetables1The wording of the prooftext implies that one is sowing mixed species - i.e., two species that are themselves kilayim - in a vineyard, i.e., together with grape seeds (Radbaz). together with [grape] seeds, he is liable for two sets of lashes:2Provided he is given a warning for each of the prohibitions (ibid.). one for [violating the prohibition (Leviticus 19:19 ]: "You shall not sow your field with mixed species,"3As explained in Chapter 1. and one for [violating the prohibition (Deuteronomy 22:9 ]:4I.e., he transgresses a negative commandment, included as one of the 365 negative commandments by Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 216) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 548). "You shall not sow your vineyard with mixed species."
A person does not receive lashes for sowing kilayim in a vineyard unless he sows a handful of wheat, barley,5Not only wheat and barley, but all five species of grain are considered as mixed species when sown with grapes and forbidden according to Scriptural Law. and grape seed in Eretz Yisrael.6For the only concept of kilayim that applies with regard to crops in the Diaspora is the prohibition against grafting different species of trees. The prohibition against mixed crops, like all the other laws concerning the crops of Eretz Yisrael, do not apply in the Diaspora. Similarly, one who covers such seeds with earth is worthy of lashes. And one who sows two types of vegetable seeds or a vegetable seed, a grain seed, and a grape seed from one hand is worthy of lashes.
He is not liable according to Scriptural Law unless [he sows] hemp and wild onions or the like from seeds that will mature together with the produce of the vineyard.7These species, like grapes, require three years before their produce appears. For the prohibition against mixed species to apply, the produce must resemble that of the grape vine.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 2:5), the Rambam writes that he does not see how it is possible for there to be a vegetable plant that does not produce fruit for three years. That is a common phenomenon for trees and vines, but not for vegetables. He writes that these species of vegetables do remain in the ground for several years and continue to produce fruit and that appears to be the Rambam's intent. Other types of seeds are forbidden according to Rabbinic decree. Similarly, according to Rabbinic decree, it is forbidden to sow kilayim in a vineyard in the Diaspora.
Why did [the Sages] forbid planting mixed species in a vineyard in the Diaspora, but not mixed species in a field?8As stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 3. Because [the prohibition against] mixed species in a vineyard is more severe. For if they were to be sown in Eretz Yisrael, it would be forbidden to benefit from them.9As mentioned in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:6, Deuteronomy 22:9 states: ...Lest the fullness of the seed which you sowed and the produce of the vineyard become hallowed.' ['Becom[ing] hallowed'] means being set apart and forbidden."In contrast, mixed species in the field are forbidden to be eaten, but it is permitted to benefit from them, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 7. Since it is forbidden to benefit from them in Eretz Yisrael, it is forbidden to sow them in the Diaspora.
We may not hoe with a gentile with mixed produce,10This applies even on land belonging to a gentile. The Radbaz maintains that, according to the Rambam, this prohibition applies even on land belonging to a gentile in the Diaspora. Since it is forbidden for a Jew to plant such crops there according to Rabbinic Law, it is forbidden to help a gentile. but one may uproot the produce11With the intent of destroying it. with him in order to eliminate the undesirable substances.12The Radbaz asks: Since mixed substances that grow on a gentile's land are not prohibited, why are they referred to as undesirable substances? He explains that since they are forbidden when growing on a Jew's land, they are considered as undesirable even when growing on a gentile's land.
The prohibition against mixed species in a vineyard applies only to species of grain and species of vegetables. Other types of plants,13I.e., plants that do not produce edible produce. This applies even according to Rabbinic Law (Kessef Mishneh). See Halachah 19 for illustrations of this principle. by contrast, are permitted to be sown in a vineyard. Needless to say, [this applies with regard] to other trees.14I.e., all types of trees may be planted in a vineyard.
It is forbidden to sow vegetables or grain next to vines or to plant a vine next to vegetables or grain.15The Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 296) states that the Rambam's wording implies that only one species of vegetable or grain is present. Although Halachah 1 states that to be liable for lashes, he must sow two mixed species together, a prohibition is involved when even one is present. If one does this, although he is not liable for lashes,16For as stated in Halachah 2, he is not liable for lashes unless he sows the mixed species together. [the produce] is hallowed and it is forbidden to benefit from both the grain or vegetables and the vines.17From the Rambam's wording, it is clear that he does not consider this as a Rabbinic safeguard, but rather the violation of a Scriptural prohibition. They must both be burnt, as [Deuteronomy 22:9] states: "Lest the fullness of the seed... become hallowed."It is forbidden to benefit from even the straw of this grain and the wood from these vines.18I.e., the prohibition does not apply only to the produce, but to the plants themselves. See the gloss of the Radbaz. They must be burnt. One should not use them as fuel for an oven19Moreover, if a new oven is fired with them, it is forbidden to benefit from the oven itself. For firing a new oven completes it (Pesachim 26a). or a range and one should not [use them] for cooking while they are being burnt.
[The prohibition applies equally] whether one plants or maintains kilayim; i.e., one saw that mixed substances grew in his vineyard and he left them [to grow], they become hallowed.20The owner of the field is not, however, liable for lashes, because he did not perform a deed.A person may not hallow an article that is not his.21We find this principle in several other contexts (e.g., Hilchot Nazirut 9:9; Hilchot Arachin 4:26). Nevertheless, in those instances, the consecration of the article does not reflect a physical change in its state, but rather its designation as being holy. It is logical to conceive that only the owner of an article can make such a designation. In the present instance, by contrast, the different species of produce become hallowed because of the fact that they grow together. Seemingly, it makes no difference why they grow together, whether they were planted by the owner or by another person. Indeed, if a person puts milk into a pot cooking with meat belonging to his colleague, the food becomes prohibited.For this reason, although the Rambam accepts the above principle in other contexts. He found it problematic with regard to kilayim. Thus in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 7:4), he originally favored the opinions which maintain that the above principle does not apply in this instance. Only later in life did he change his view and rule, as above, that it does apply. According to Rav Kappach, at that time, he also amended his Commentary to the Mishnah. Therefore if a person draped his vine over grain belonging to a colleague, he causes his vine to be hallowed, but not the grain. If he draped a vine belonging to a colleague over his grain, he causes his grain to be hallowed, but not his colleague's vine. If he draped a vine belonging to a colleague over grain belonging to a colleague, he does not cause either of them to become hallowed. For this reason, when a person sows [kilayim] in his vineyard in the Sabbatical year, he does not cause it to be hallowed.22For in the Sabbatical year, the field is not his own. Instead, it is ownerless. As above, in this instance as well, the Rambam deviated from his original ruling in his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:5).The Radbaz notes that the above ruling applies to the produce, but not the wood growing in the vineyard, because the wood does not become ownerless. Therefore it is forbidden.
When a person23The Ra'avad (based on the Jerusalem Talmud, Kilayim 7:5) interprets this as referring to a situation where the person is working for the owner of the field. Otherwise, he maintains there is no reason to rule that he should be forbidden to benefit. Rav Yosef Corcus and the Radbaz explain the Rambam's ruling. Rav Yosef Corcus states that it applies to a person who has the right to enter his colleague's field even thought he is not working there (see also Turei Zahav 296:3). Otherwise, he would not have any effect on it, even for himself. The Radbaz states that the Rambam's ruling applies even to a person at large. Since he did not notify the owner about the problem, it is as if he took a vow to personally consider the produce as forbidden. sees mixed species [growing] in a vineyard belonging to a colleague and maintained them, that observer is forbidden to benefit from them. Every other person is permitted. Were the owner of the vineyard to have maintained them, they would be hallowed for all people as explained.
[The following laws apply when] a man of force24In the time of the Roman occupation, it was common for landed property to be taken by force. Our Sages addressed the possible halachic problems that arise in such a situation. sowed kilayim in a vineyard belonging to another person. If the owner hides out of fear,25Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 7:6). Others interpret the term as meaning that the land is no longer referred to as belonging to the original owner. even though he does not despair over [ultimately receiving his property], [the produce] becomes hallowed according to Scriptural Law.26The Radbaz explains that since the owner is forced to hide, even though in his own heart, he hopes to have the land returned, it is as if he has already given up hope (Radbaz). Although generally, we follow the ruling that land cannot be stolen (Hilchot Gezeilah 8:14), but instead, is always considered as belonging to the original owner, in this instance, because of the severity of the prohibition against kilayim, we rule stringently. If he does not hide, even though he does despair [the produce] becomes hallowed only according to Rabbinic Law.
When wind uproots branches of a vine and blows them against grain, one should remove27Our translation is based on authentic manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. It also follows the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (according to Rav Kappach's version). The standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah - and also that followed by the Kessef Mishneh - follows a different version. In all cases, the basic intent remains the same. them immediately. If he did not remove them28I.e., and in the time he did not remove them, they grew 1/200th, as stated in Halachah 22. due to forces beyond his control, they are permitted and they do not become hallowed.29For, as evident from Halachah 21, a person does not cause produce to be considered kilayim unless he willfully allows the mixed species to grow.
[The following laws apply when] a man of force30In the time of the Roman occupation, it was common for landed property to be taken by force. Our Sages addressed the possible halachic problems that arise in such a situation. sowed [kilayim] in a vineyard [and then departed, leaving the vineyard to its original owner]. When the man of force departs, [the owner] should harvest the crops immediately,31Lest he be liable for maintaining kilayim.even during Chol HaMoed.32The intermediate days of a festival, when there are restrictions against performing work in one's fields (see Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov, ch. 7). Nevertheless, in this instance, he is required to do so, to avoid the violation of the prohibition against kilayim. If one cannot find workers, he should add even a third to their wages.33In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 7:6), the Rambam gives an example. If the worker's wage was normally three zuz a day, he should be paid four. If they demanded more than that or was unable to find workers, he may continue searching without pressure and harvest [the produce]. If the produce remained until it reached the point that it hallows [the vineyard],34I.e., it grows 1/200th. it is hallowed and both species are forbidden.
When do grain or vegetables become hallowed? When [the plants] develop roots. [When do] grapes? When they reach the size of a white bean, as [implied by Deuteronomy 22:9]: "Lest the fullness of the seed which you sowed and the produce of the vineyard become hallowed;" [i.e., the prohibition applies when] one sows this35Wheat or vegetables. and this36The grapes. becomes produce. If, however, the grain37Before grain is ready to be harvested, the kernels dry out and harden. has already dried to the degree necessary or grapes had matured to their full extent, they do not become hallowed.38In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:7), the Rambam explains that the prooftext describing the prohibition speaks of "the seed" and "the produce." The Hebrew terms imply produce that is in the process of developing and not produce that has already developed fully and is ready to be harvested.What is implied? When grain has already dried to the degree necessary and then one planted a vine in their midst or grapes had matured to their full extent and one planted grain or a vegetable next to them, although this is forbidden, they do not become hallowed.
[The following rules apply in] a vineyard whose grapes have not grown to the size of a white bean, but are still underdeveloped. If one sowed vegetables or grain there and they took root, they are not hallowed.39I.e., according to Scriptural Law, neither the vines, nor the grain or the vegetables are forbidden. Nevertheless, he is penalized and we forbid the growths.40According to Rabbinic decree. Not only may one not partake of them, it is forbidden to benefit from them. The underdeveloped grapes, by contrast, are permitted.41The Ra'avad states that it is permitted to benefit from the produce of the vine, implying that it is forbidden to partake of it. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, differ and maintain that it is permitted even to partake of it. If one uprooted the growths before the grapes became the size of a white bean, it is permitted to benefit from them.42The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh state that this ruling appears to contradict the Rambam's statements made previously, that "he is penalized and we forbid the growths," implying that it is forbidden to benefit from them. They each suggest possible resolutions of the issue.If some of [the grapes] have reached that size and some have not, those which have are hallowed and those which have not are not.43This is speaking about a situation where the grain or the vegetables have taken root. The grain or the vegetables are forbidden, as above.
When grapes have grown to the size of a white bean and one planted grain or types of vegetables at their side and reaped the growths before they became rooted, it is permitted to benefit from them.44It appears that, according to the Rambam, it is forbidden to partake of their produce immediately. The Ra'avad permits one to partake of it. His rationale is that since they did not take root, it is as if they were never planted. The Radbaz explains that the prohibition against partaking of the produce is a Rabbinic safeguard. If they became rooted, it is forbidden.
When a vine has dried out and its leaves have fallen as is frequent in the winter,45In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 7:2), the Rambam emphasizes that we are speaking about a vine that is alive and will produce grapes in the future and not one that has dried out entirely. If the vine is totally dried out, it is permissible to sow other species near it (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh, commenting on the gloss of the Ra'avad). it is forbidden to sow vegetables or grain next to it. If one sows them there, they do not become hallowed. Similarly, if one sows these species in a flowerpot that does not have a hole which is located in a vineyard, the produce is not hallowed.46As indicated by Chapter 1, Halachah 2, this reflects a general principle applicable in many contexts of agricultural law: If a flowerpot has a hole at its bottom, it is considered as being a part of the field, because it derives nurture there. If it does not have such a hole, it is considered as a separate entity. He, however, should be given stripes for rebellious conduct.47The punishment administered for the violation of a Rabbinic commandment. If, however, the flowerpot has a hole, it is [as if he sowed] in the ground.48For it derives nurture from the ground through the hole. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:10).
[The following rules apply when a person] was passing through a vineyard and seeds fell from him49Without his knowledge. or they were brought [into a field] with fertilizer or water, or one was sowing or winnowing in a field of grain and the wind carried the seeds behind him and the seeds fell into a vineyard and sprouted, they do not become hallowed. [This is derived from the prooftext cited above] which states "which you sowed," and this was not sowed.50On the contrary, they fell in the vineyard against his will [ibid. (Kilayim 5:7)]. He is, [nevertheless,] obligated to uproot it when he sees it. If he maintains it, it becomes hallowed.51For whenever mixed species are maintained in a vineyard, they become hallowed, as stated in Halachah 8.If the wind carried the seeds before him and he saw them fall into the vineyard, he is considered to have sown them. What should he do if their grasses grow? He should turn them over with a plow; this is sufficient. If he discovered that they have already ripened,52But had not seen them beforehand. he should crush the portion that ripened,53Although generally, kilayim should be destroyed by fire, an exception is made in this instance, because - since the newly grown crops are moist and not appropriate to be burnt. for it is forbidden to benefit from the entire54I.e., even its straw (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh; this ruling appears to contradict the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). [plant].55The grain is forbidden from the time it becomes rooted in the ground. The vines are not forbidden unless they grow 1/200th of their size. Alternatively, since he did not purposely plant the grain, even if the vines grew that much, they are not forbidden as long as the person did not willfully maintain the mixed species (Radbaz). If he discovers that grain has already sprouted,56For whenever mixed species are maintained in a vineyard, they become hallowed, as stated in Halachah 8. it must be burnt. If he saw it and maintained it, it must be burnt together with the vines adjacent to it.
When a person sees an herb that [most] people would not plant [growing] in a vineyard, it does not become hallowed57In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 5:8), the Rambam explains that this is also derived from the prooftext cited above. "Which you sowed" implies "what is customary for you to sow." even though he desires that it be maintained [so that he will use it] for animal [fodder]58Compare to Chapter 1, Halachah 4. or for medicinal purposes unless most people in that locale59I.e., everything depends on the prevailing local practice. What the person thinks individually is not of consequence. would maintain such a plant. What is implied? [When] a person maintains brush [growing] in his vineyard in Arabia, it becomes hallowed, [because there most people] desire the brush for their camels.
Mint, ivy, the king's lily, and other [similar] plants are not considered as kilayim in a vineyard. Hemp, artichokes,60Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Uktzin 1:6). and cotton, are considered like other types of vegetables and they become hallowed in a vineyard. Similarly, all types of herbs that grow on their own accord in a field become hallowed in a vineyard. An Egyptian bean is considered as a plant and does not become hallowed. Bamboo, roses, and thornbushes are considered as species of trees and are not kilayim in a vineyard.61As stated in Halachah 6, all types of trees may be planted in a vineyard.
This is the general principle: Whenever the leaves of a plant grow from its roots, it is considered a vegetable.62In such an instance, each year, the trunk changes. If its leaves do not grow from its roots, it is not a vegetable. A caper tree is considered as a tree in all contexts.63Compare to Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:7. See also Hilchot Berachot 8:6.
When a person sees a vegetable [growing] in [his] vineyard and says: "When I reach it, I will take it out," it is permitted.64I.e., he need not hurry to uproot it immediately, but may proceed at his ordinary pace, provided he does not delay. Should he reach it and pass it by, saying: "When I return, I will take it out,"65He has transgressed, because he has maintained mixed produce in a vineyard. if he waits [the time it takes] to add 1/200th [to its size], it becomes hallowed.
How can we measure this degree [of growth]? We see how long it would take for this vegetable or grain to dry if its connection with the earth were severed.66As the Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 5:6) explains, a plant will grow at the same rate that it will dry out. (As the Radbaz points out, this applies over the entire span. The particular phases of its growth and drying will vary.) Let us say that it would take 100 hours to dry to the point that it retained no moisture. Thus if it remained in the ground for half an hour after he reached it, it will have added 1/200th [to its size] and it is forbidden. If he waited less than half an hour, it is permitted.
It is forbidden to carry a pot with a hole [at its bottom]67As stated in the notes to Halachah 16, when such a flowerpot is left on the ground, it is considered as if the pot is connected to the earth and it as if the plants growing in it are part of the vineyard. As a safeguard, our Rabbis forbade even carrying such a flowerpot through a vineyard. in which a vegetable is growing through a vineyard.68According to the Rambam, however, the produce growing in it does not become hallowed. If one left [such a pot] under a vine on the earth for [the time it takes] to add 1/200th [to its size], it becomes hallowed.
[The following law applies when one] sowed an onion in a vineyard,69And thus it became forbidden as kilayim. the vineyard was uprooted afterwards,70But the forbidden onion plant was left in the ground. and then the onions grew from the roots that were already planted. Even though the growths are more than 200 times the size of the root,71And mixed species are nullified in a mixture 200 times the size of the original amount. the root remains forbidden, for the permitted growths cannot change the status of the forbidden root.72Instead, despite the growth of the onion plant, the root remains forbidden. Rabbi Akiva Eiger notes that the Rambam rules in this manner in Hilchot Neta Reva'i 10:16. In Hilchot Terumah 11:22, he rules otherwise.The Rambam's wording could be interpreted as implying that the plant that grows from the root is permitted. This is the conclusion of Rav Yosef Corcus. There are other Rishonim who maintain that the entire plant is forbidden. Kin'at Eliyahu notes that in Hilchot Nedarim 5:15, the Rambam rules: "If it was an entity whose seed does not decompose, even the produce that grows from the produce that grows from them is forbidden." Seemingly, the same principles would apply here.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
When a person sows vegetables or grain in a vineyard or maintains these species, allowing to grow 1/200th, he causes the vines around it to become hallowed in a radius - not a square1And thus the vines on the corners are permitted. - of sixteen cubits. We consider the entire circle with a diameter of 32 cubits as if it were filled entirely with vegetables. Any vine that grows in this circle becomes hallowed together with the vegetables. Any one outside the circle is not hallowed.
When does the above apply? When there are more than four cubits between the edge of this circle and the rows of the vines outside of it.2The Rambam derives these concepts from an analysis of the wording of Kilayim 5:5. To explain: The Mishnah states: "[A person who] plants a vegetable in a vineyard... causes 45 vines to be hallowed. When? When they are planted, each one four [cubits from the other] or five [cubits from each other]." As the Rambam explains in his Commentary to the Mishnah, if the vines are five cubits away from each other, some of the 45 vines will be outside the circle. Now its true, that if the vines are four cubits away from each other, there will be individual vines within four cubits of the circle. There will not, however, be "rows of the vines" outside the circle.The Ra'avad differs with his interpretation. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's view. If, however, there were exactly four cubits or less between them, we consider the circle as if it reached the row which is next to it and it is as if the diameter of the circle is 40 cubits. We take into consideration every vine that is included in this circle that is 40 cubits in diameter and it is hallowed.
When does the above apply? When one sows or maintains the different species in the midst of the vineyard. When, however, he sows [the grain or vegetable] outside the vineyard, but next to it, he causes the two rows of the vines3Since the prooftext cited above speaks of "the vineyard" becoming hallowed, the area that becomes hallowed must be at least two rows wide, for only that is worthy of being called "a vineyard" [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 4:5)]. The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, but the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh question his objection.The Kessef Mishneh also clarifies that here a smaller portion of the vineyard is forbidden than in the previous halachah, because the mixed species is not surrounded by the vineyard on all sides. Hence, only four cubits, the area is necessary to perform the work necessary for the vineyard, is forbidden. next to [the different species] sown to become hallowed. [The hallowed portion of the vines continues] over the entire length of [the area] sown plus four cubits [on either side]. A portion four cubits wide [of the area] sown along the entire length of the [external] row of the vineyard becomes hallowed.4The Radbaz adds that if one sows the vegetables or grain beyond the row of the vineyard, a four cubit portion of that area is also forbidden. If one sows [such crops] next to a single vine, only a circle with a radius of six handbreadths of the area sown becomes hallowed.5For this is the size of the area necessary to tend to a single vine (Kilayim 6:1).
A small vine that is less than a handbreadth long does not cause the sown [area]6This applies regardless of the species of crops sown there (in contrast to the opinion of Rashi, Sotah 43b) [Kessef Mishneh]. to become hallowed.7I.e., because the plants are small, planting them is not considered planting a "vineyard." See also Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 10:19. It is possible to say that one should, however, keep a distance of six handbreadths between them and grain or vegetables, as stated in the previous halachah with regard to a single vine. When does the above apply? When there are two [vines] planted opposite two others and another one projects as a tail.8See Chapter 7, Halachah 7, which describes vines planted in this manner as "a small vineyard." If, however, the entire vineyard [was planted] in this manner, it does become hallowed.9For this indicates that this person considers this as a vineyard; alternatively this is a Rabbinic safeguard, lest an observer think that planting other species is permissible in an ordinary vineyard (Radbaz).
[The following rules apply when there are] two gardens one above the other10This refers to a terraced hill with gardens planted on an incline (Radbaz) and the lower one is planted as a vineyard. One should plant the upper one until he reaches within the aerial space of ten handbreadths of the vineyard.11The notes to the Frankel edition of the Mishneh Torah cite Hilchot Shabbat 4:4,18 which speaks about the significance of ten handbreadths of space. For it is forbidden to sow seeds within ten handbreadths of the aerial space of a vineyard or a vine. If the upper [garden] was planted as a vineyard, one should sow the lower garden until he reaches within three handbreadths of the roots of the vines.
When a person's field was sown with vegetables or grain and he changed his mind and decided to plant vines in it, he should turn over the sown produce with a plow and then plant the vines.12From the ruling in Chapter 2, Halachah 13, it would appear that he should also wait until the seeds rot (Tosafot Yom Tov). He should not plant the vines and then turn over [the produce].If it was planted with vines and he changed his mind and decided to sow crops there, he should uproot the vines and then sow the crops. If he desires to merely cut off the vines until there is less than a handbreadth of them near the earth, it is permissible for him to sow [the crops at this point] and then uproot the remainder of the vines from the earth.13The Radbaz states that following this course of action will be beneficial, for pulling out the vines will save him the trouble of having to cover the seeds with earth, for that task will be accomplished as a matter of course.
[The following laws apply when a person] extends a vine [by embedding it] in the earth,14The Rambam is referring to a process which was used to extend a vine and increase its fertility. For if a vine was allowed to grow endlessly, its fertility would wane as it grew longer. Therefore its head was implanted in the ground. There it would grow roots - thus increasing the nurture it could give the plant - and then from the embedded head would sprout forth a new plant. even if he encloses it in a dried15If the gourd is not dried out, it is certainly forbidden, because the gourd itself is a separate species. gourd that serves as a cylinder for it or in an earthernware cylinder.16Since as the vine's roots grow, they will emerge from the sides of these cylinders, they are considered as subservient to the earth and not as independent entity. If, however, the person places the vine in a metal pipe, these laws do not apply (See the Jerusalem Talmud, Kilayim 7:1). If there are three handbreadths or more of earth covering it, it is permitted to sow [crops of other species] above it.17Since it is buried so deeply in the earth, it is no longer considered significant. If there was less earth than that upon it, it is forbidden to sow above it18Because the amount of earth over it is not that much to cause it to be considered as insignificant. It is, however, permitted to sow at its side.19Were it above ground, by contrast, one would have to move six handbreadths away before sowing a crop.
If he extended it through hard ground,20Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 7:2). it is permitted to sow crops over it even if there are only three fingerbreadths and not three handbreadths of earth upon it.21For its roots will not emerge.When does the above apply?22This applies to the previous halachah as well. When the base of the vine is not visible. If, however, it is visible, it is necessary to make a distinction of [at least] six handbreadths23The notes to the Frankel edition of the Mishneh Torah mention that this ruling appears to be somewhat of a departure from the Rambam's understanding as reflected in his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). at either side in every direction before sowing just as one must make such a separation from any one vine that was not extended in the ground, as will be explained.24Chapter 7, Halachah 1.
When a person extends three vines in the ground, but their bases are visible, if there are between four and eight cubits between them,25When vines are this distance apart they are still considered as part of the same vineyard (Chapter 7, Halachah 2). they are grouped together with the other vines that are growing [in the vineyard]26The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that this law applies even if there are no other vines. He maintains that since a portion of the vines extended in the ground is visible, they themselves can be grouped together and considered a vineyard, because the three bases and the three heads are considered as six vines. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's ruling. They do not dispute the law mentioned by the Ra'avad, but maintain that it is not the interpretation of the mishnah cited above. (Significantly, the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah appears to follow the Ra'avad's approach.) and it is as if they were not extended in the ground. If not, they are not included among the others.
If there were less than three vines, they are not included [as part of the vineyard].27The Rambam derives this law from the fact that the mishnah cited above speaks of "three vines." Implied is that the law does not apply to less. Instead, one should separate six handbreadths on every side and sow [other crops].28As stated in Halachah 8.
Anyone who sows crops under branches and leaves that emerge from the vines causes [the produce] to be hallowed even though the crops are several cubits away from the base of the vine.29I.e., even though the branch is only an extension of the vine, sowing under it is forbidden. See Halachah 15.
When a person drapes a vine over a portion of a trellis30See Chapter 8, Halachah 1, for a description of such trellises. [intended for vines], he should not plant [crops] under the remainder of the trellis31I.e., a person prepared a series of trellises over which to drape a vine. In fact, however, he did not drape the vine over the entire area of the trellises, only over a portion of it. He should, nevertheless, be stringent and regard the vine as growing over the entire trellis, because ultimately, it will spread over it. even though there are no leaves or branches upon them.32The rationale is that they are placed there so that ultimately, the vine will grow and be extended upon them. If he did plant there, since there are no crops under the shade of the vine, it is permitted.33For unless the vine spreads there, the prohibition is merely a Rabbinic safeguard. Similar [laws apply] if he draped a vine over some branches of a tree that does not produce fruit,34I.e., it forbidden to sow crops under the entire tree. The produce becomes hallowed, however, only when sowed under the area where the vine is actually draped. e.g., cedars or pines. If, by contrast, he draped a vine over some of the branches of a fruit-bearing tree, it is permitted to sow under the branches of the tree where the vine was not draped. [The rationale is] that a person does not nullify a fruit-bearing tree to make it a trellis for a vine.35Since it is a fruit tree, it has its own importance and it is never considered as merely a trellis for the grapes as long as the grape vine is not draped over these branches.If, after [produce] was sown, the branches were extended and covered the produce, they should be shifted to another place.36Note the contrast to the stringency mentioned in the following halachah. The reason for the leniency in this halachah is that the branches of a fruit-bearing tree are considered entities in their own right and are not subservient to the vine. Hence, since it was permitted to sow the crops there, they are not forbidden if the vine grows unintentionally.
When a person sows under the remainder of the trellises37I.e., portions of the trellises to which the vines have not spread. or under the remainder of the branches of a tree that does not produce fruit38For they are considered as equivalent to the trellises, as stated in the previous halachah. and then the branches of the vine were extended and covered the crops, it is forbidden to maintain them or shift the branches [of the vine].39Since he transgressed by sowing there, our Sages required him to uproot the crops (Radbaz). From the Rambam's wording here and in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 6:3), it would appear that he maintains that only the crops are forbidden, but not the vines. What should he do? He should uproot the crops.
When reeds are jutting out from the lattice on the surface of a trellis, but [the owner] does not want to cut them off lest he destroy the trellis, he is permitted to sow [crops] under them.40Since his intent is not to drape vines upon them, they are not considered as part of the trellis [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid. 6:8)]. If he left them so that the branches and leaves that emerge will grow upon them, it is forbidden to sow [crops] under them.
When a branch41Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid. 6:9). emerges from a vine which is propped up42Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid. 7:1). or from the trunk of a vine that is not propped up, 43Since he transgressed by sowing there, our Sages required him to uproot the crops (Radbaz). From the Rambam's wording here and in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 6:3), it would appear that he maintains that only the crops are forbidden, but not the vines. we considered it as if a plumb line is hanging from it to the earth and it is forbidden to sow under it. Similarly, if one extends a branch from one tree to another, it is forbidden to sow under it.
When a person ties a rope or rubber cord to a branch and ties the other end to a tree, he is permitted to sow [crops] under the rope.44For he is not planning to have the vine grow upon it. If he extended this rope with the intent that the branches and leaves will grow upon it, it is like a trellis and it is forbidden to sow under it.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
When a person comes to sow [crops] next to a vineyard, he should move four cubits from the roots of the vines1See Chapter 8, Halachah 3. and sow.2For this is the space necessary to tend to the vineyard (Kilayim 7:1). From a single vine, he should move six handbreadths away and sow.If there was a row of vines, one next to each other - even 100 of them - it is not considered as a vineyard, but as a single vine. One must move [only] six handbreadths away from the row [before] sowing. If there were two rows, one must move four cubits away from every side before sowing.3For this is considered as a vineyard.
How many vines must there be in each row? Three or more.4Note, however, the exception in Halachah 7.When does the above apply?5I.e., when are the vines considered as a collective, a vineyard, and not individual entities. When there are between four and eight cubits between each vine. If, however, there are eight cubits besides the place of the vines between the two rows, they are considered as distinct from each other. They are not considered as a single vineyard and there is no need to separate more than six handbreadths from each row. Similarly, if there are less than four cubits6Here the four cubits are measured tightly, rather than amply. See Chapter 8, Halachah 12. between each of [the two rows], they are considered as a single vine and it is [only necessary] to make a distinction of six handbreadths on each side.
If there were three rows, even though there are less than four cubits between them, they are considered as a vineyard, for we consider the middle row as if it does not exist.7When the vines are planted so densely, they will not grow well. Thus we assume that ultimately, the middle vines will be uprooted. Since that is their eventual fate, even while they exist, they are not considered as significant entities. Similarly, if there were three rows and eight cubits or more between each row, one may sow between the rows.8For each row is considered as an independent entity and hence, it is only necessary to make a six handbreadth separation between them.The Ra'avad follows a more stringent view and maintains that since there are three rows, they appear as a vineyard. Unless there is a significant distance - sixteen cubits - between them, they are considered as a collective. The Kessef Mishneh states that although the Mishnah (Kilayim 4:8) appears to support the Ra'avad's view, the Rambam's opinion has its source in the Jerusalem Talmud.
Therefore if a person sows his vineyard from the outset with an eight cubit separation left between each row, he is permitted to sow crops within it, leaving a distance of only six handbreadths between [the crops and] every row of vines.9For, with regard to the produce sowed within it, each row is considered like an individual vine. If, however, he sowed [crops] outside the vineyard, he must make a separation of four cubits from the outer row, as applies with regard to other vineyards.10The rationale is that this vineyard was designated as a vineyard from the outset and an outside observer should be able to see that it is separate from an adjoining field. Hence, a proper separation must be made from its outer borders. The Ra'avad differs, stating that if a separation is required outside it, one certainly should be required inside it. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's view. The laws [applying to the space] between the rows of this vineyard are not the same as those that apply to a vineyard whose center was devastated,11In which instance, it is necessary to make a separation of four cubits, as stated in Halachah 11. for from the outset, he planted them in a separate manner.
When there was one row of vines in a field and another row in a field belonging to a colleague that was opposite it and close to it, [the two rows] can be combined to be considered as a vineyard12Despite the fact that the two rows of vines belong to two separate individuals, since they are close enough to appear as a single entity, it is forbidden to sow crops between them and one must make a separation of four cubits on the outside [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 4:7)]. although there is a private path, a communal path,13Inspired by the Ra'avad's gloss, we have chosen this translation, rather than the term "public thoroughfare" which is usually used, because, here the road is no more than eight handbreadths wide, as stated at the conclusion of the halachah, while a "public thoroughfare" is sixteen cubits wide, as stated in Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 3:3 and Hilchot Shabbat 14:1. Notably, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam mentions the figure of sixteen cubits. or a fence which is less than ten handbreadths high14If, however, it is ten handbreadths high, it is considered as a distinguishing factor, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 15. provided there are less than eight cubits between them.
[The following rules apply if one] planted one row on ground level and one row on a terrace: If the terrace is ten handbreadths above ground level, they are not considered as a single entity.15Certain restrictions, nevertheless, apply, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 5. If it is lower than that, they are.16According to the standard published text of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 6:2), the Rambam changed his mind when issuing the ruling here. Rav Kappach, however, maintains that a printing error crept into that text.
When a person plants five vines: two opposite each other and one which projects like a tail, it is called a small vineyard.17Ordinarily, a vineyard must have at least two rows of three vines each, as implied by Halachot 1-2. The differences between an ordinary vineyard and a small vineyard are mentioned in Halachah 13.During the Talmudic era in Eretz Yisrael, it was very common to plant vineyards with five vines. See the accompanying diagram. It is necessary to separate four cubits from it on all sides. If, however, he planted two opposite two and one in the middle or one row of three and two opposite them in a second row,18This represents the Rambam's interpretation of the phrase "two opposite two, and one in between" in Kilayim 4:6. they are not considered a vineyard and it is only necessary to make a separation of six handbreadths on each side.
[The following laws apply when] a vineyard has been devastated. If there are ten vines [whose produce] can be reaped in an area fit to harvest a se'ah [of grain]1950 cubits by 50 cubits. and they are planted two opposite two and one projecting like a tail or it is possible to see them as two rows of three, it is called a meager vineyard20I.e., it is obviously sparsely planted. Nevertheless, there are enough vines in it for it to be called a vineyard and sowing other species is forbidden. and it is forbidden to sow [crops] in it.
[The following laws apply when] a vineyard is not planted in rows, but rather randomly. If it is possible to see [the vines] as having been planted two opposite three,21The Radbaz and Rav Yosef Corcus interprets this as meaning "two opposite two and one projecting like a tail" as in the previous halachot. it is considered as a vineyard.22And it is forbidden to sow other crops there and one must separate four cubits from its outer perimeter before sowing other crops. If not, it is not considered a vineyard and it is sufficient to separate only six handbreadths from each individual vine before sowing.
When the base of the vines are [planted] opposite each other, but the branches are not growing opposite each other, it is considered a vineyard.23I.e., and not as individual vines. Hence, the restrictions mentioned in the previous note apply. If the branches are [growing] opposite each other, but the bases are not [planted] opposite each other, it is not considered a vineyard. If when the vines were thin, they were not [positioned] opposite each other, but when they grew thick, they were positioned opposite each other, it is considered a vineyard.How should one know if the vines are planted opposite each other? He should take a measuring line and measure from one to the other.
[The following laws apply when] the middle of a vineyard has been devastated, but it remains complete on all its sides. If the empty portion in the center [has a diameter of] sixteen cubits, one may separate four cubits24The amount of space necessary to perform work in the vineyard. from the base of the vines on each side and sow in the midst of the empty portion.25Thus he will save a circle with a radius of at least 8 cubits in which to sow crops [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 4:1)]. If [the diameter] is less than sixteen cubits, he should not bring seed there.26For the area is still considered as a vineyard. If he did sow there, since he made a separation of four cubits from the vineyard's vines on all sides, [the produce] does not become hallowed.
Similarly, if an empty portion was left without vines between the end of the vineyard and its fence, it is called "a forsaken [portion of a] vineyard."27Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). If it is [at least] twelve cubits wide,28The requirement of twelve cubits is determined as follows: Four cubits are required for the tilling of the vineyard and four cubits are required for a path near the fence. If the remaining space is less than four cubits wide, it is not significant and is considered subsumed to the vineyard. If it is larger than that, it is considered as an independent entity and it is permitted to sow crops in it (Eruvin 93ab). one may [merely] separate four cubits from the vines and sow the remainder.
If it was less than twelve cubits wide, he should not bring seeds [to sow] there. If he did, since he made a separation of four cubits [between the seeds and the vineyard, the produce] does not become hallowed.29For the prohibition is a Rabbinic safeguard.When does the above apply? In a large vineyard.30I.e., one with at least three rows of three vines. [The laws of] "a forsaken portion," by contrast, do not apply with regard to a small vineyard.31From the Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 4:1), it appears that this term refers to a vineyard with three rows of two vines. Certainly it applies to one with only five vines, as described in Halachah 7.As mentioned above, with regard to a large vineyard, the owner is willing to refrain from sowing the four cubits next to the fence so that they can be used as a path. With regard to a small vineyard, he is not prepared to forgo the use of so much space. Instead, one may make a separation of four cubits from the end of the vines and sow until the fence. Similarly, if there are eight cubits or more between each row of a large vineyard,32In which instance, the leniency mentioned in Halachah 3 applies (Kessef Mishneh). [the laws of] "a forsaken portion," do not apply.33Since this vineyard is planted irregularly, the laws governing the ordinary pattern in which vines are planted do not apply (ibid.).
If the fence surrounding the vineyard was less than ten handbreadths high or it was ten handbreadths high, but not four handbreadths wide,34This is referring to a stone fence, which was usually built ten by four. [the laws of] "a forsaken portion," do not apply.35One of the reasons four cubits were left open next to the fence for people to walk was that walking there strengthened the fence. A fence that does not possess those dimensions does not need to be strengthened. Instead, one should make a separation of four cubits from the base of the vines and sow until the barrier. Even if there are four and a half cubits between the vines and the barrier, he may sow the half cubit.
When a fence is ten handbreadths high or a trench is ten handbreadths and four handbreadths wide, it is permitted to plant a vineyard on one side and vegetables on the other side.36Without moving away from the fence or trench. The fence or the trench itself creates a distinction between the two crops. Even if there is a barrier made of reeds [with spaces in between them], as long as there is less than three handbreadths between one reed and another,37The rationale is that within three cubits, we apply the principle of l'vud and the open space between the reeds is considered as closed [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 4:3)]. the fence is considered as separating between the vineyard and the vegetables.
[The following laws apply when] the fence separating between the vineyard and the vegetables is breached. If it is ten cubits or less, it is considered as an entrance and it is permitted. If the breach was more than ten [cubits], [it is] forbidden [to sow vegetables] opposite the open portion unless he moves the required measure away38Four cubits. from the vines.[The following rules apply when] there are many breaches39That are less than ten cubits wide. in the fence.40With regard to the following, note the parallels to Hilchot Shabbat 16:16. If the [portions of the fence that remain] standing are equal to those that have been breached, it is permitted as if there was no breach. If the breached portions exceed those which remain standing, he should not sow in front of all those open spaces unless he separates in the appropriate manner.41He may, however, sow opposite the portions that remain standing, provided they are four cubits wide.
When the partition of a vineyard is breached,42And there is grain or vegetables growing outside it. [the court] tells [the owner]:43As a warning. At this stage, the status of the produce is not changed. "Close it." If he closed it and it was breached [again], [the court] tells him: "Close it." If he despairs and does not close it,44And the produce increases 1/200th in size. [the produce] becomes hallowed.45Because there is no distinction between the other produce and the vineyard.
When a building is partially covered by a roof and partially open and vines are planted on one side, it is permissible to plant vegetables on the other. [The rationale is that] we consider it as if the end of the roof descends and closes [the area] off and creates a barrier between them.46Note the parallels in Hilchot Shabbat 17:35; Hilchot Sukkah 4:5, 8-9. If he completes the roof, it is forbidden [to plant two species].47Even though the vineyard is indoors, there is still a Rabbinic prohibition involved.
When [the walls of] a small courtyard were breached entirely to a large courtyard and there were vines in the large courtyard, it is forbidden to sow [other produce] in the smaller one.48For the two courtyards are considered as a single entity. Note the parallels in Hilchot Tefilah 8:7-8; Hilchot Eruvin 3:24.Rashi, Eruvin 92b states that even if one makes a separation of four cubits, it is forbidden to sow in the smaller courtyard, because it is considered as an entranceway to the larger one. If he sows there, that produce is forbidden and the vines are permitted. If there were vines in the smaller [courtyard], it is permitted to sow other produce in the larger one.49Provided one separates four cubits. [The rationale is] that since the larger [courtyard] has barriers on either side,50I.e., a portion of its walls remain standing. it is considered as separate from the smaller one. The smaller one, by contrast, is not considered as separate from the larger one.
[The following laws apply when] a trench that is ten [handbreadths] deep and four [handbreadths] wide passes through a vineyard. If it passes from the beginning of the vineyard to the end, [since] it appears as [passing] between two [separate] vineyards, it is permitted to sow [other crops] in it, provided the vines do not become draped over it, as we explained.51See Chapter 5, Halachah 8, Chapter 6, Halachah 11, and Halachah 22 of this chapter.If it did not pass from side to side,52And is thus surrounded by the vineyard on all three sides. Accordingly, although the trench is a separate entity, it is forbidden to sow within it. it is considered as a vat in the midst of a vineyard, in which instance even if it is ten [handbreadths] deep and four handbreadths wide or more, it is forbidden to sow within it unless the empty portion is at least sixteen cubits wide.53As stated in Halachah 11.
A path54When mentioning the principles upon which this law is based, Kilayim 4:2-3 does not speak of a path. The Rambam, however, mentions it as a further inclusion, teaching that even if people use it to walk back and forth, it is not considered a separation unless it is of the appropriate length (Radbaz). between two vineyards resembles a vineyard that was devastated in its midst.55Halachah 11. If there are sixteen cubits between them, he may make a separation of four cubits on either side and sow in the remainder. If there was less than that between them, he should not bring seeds there.
[The following laws apply with regard to] a mound56Alternatively, a guardhouse. in a vineyard. If it is ten [handbreadths] high and four [handbreadths] wide,57Since it has these dimensions, it is considered as a separate entity, distinct from the vineyard. Although a trench must pass from one end of the vineyard to the other as stated in Halachah 20, greater leniency is granted in this instance, because the mound stands out because of its height. it is permitted to sow vegetables on its top as long as the branches of the vine do not touch58This reflects the Rambam's translation of the word kotesh in Kilayim 5:3. it so that from above, there does not appear to be vegetables in the midst of the vineyard.When does the above apply? [When the mound] is rectangular.59Since the space is rectangular, it is distinct and considered significant, even if it is not four handbreadths by four handbreadths (P'nei Moshe, Jerusalem Talmud, Kilayim 5:3). If, however, the mound is circular, there must be an empty space of four handbreadths in its midst60I.e., it must be able to circumscribe a square four handbreadths by four handbreadths (Radbaz). so that it will be separated from the earth and there must be three handbreadths of earth on its top.61I.e., if the base of the mound was a stone, there must be three handbreadths of loose earth.
When there is a building in a vineyard, if it is three handbreadths or more62Our translation, though not literal, is based on the gloss of the Radbaz. by three handbreadths until four handbreadths,63The meaning of this phrase is somewhat problematic and in fact it is lacking in certain versions of the Mishneh Torah. According to the Jerusalem Talmud, this refers to the height of the building. The intent being that if the building is not four cubits high, one must hollow out its earth so that it reaches the height of four handbreadths. one may sow vegetables inside of it.64Because of its walls, the building is a distinct entity and one may sow up to the wall itself, even at the entrance. There is no need to make a separation (Radbaz). If it is less than three handbreadths by three handbreadth, it is considered as closed65Based on the halachic principle of l'vud. and one should not sow [vegetables] within it.
When one vine is planted in a pit66In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 5:4), the Rambam writes that this refers to a pit used to store water. or in the midst of a trench, one must separate six handbreadths67For this is the amount of space necessary to till one vine (ibid.). from it, [then] one may sow [other crops] in the remainder of the trench as one would do on flat ground. If the trench was ten handbreadths deep and there was a border on the edge of the trench with a top four handbreadths wide, it is forbidden to sow other crops inside of it even though one made a separation of six handbreadths.68This is a continuation of the principle stated in the following halachah (Rav Yosef Corcus).
Similarly, when there is one vine that is surrounded by a fence that is ten handbreadths high and four handbreadths wide, one should not sow [other produce] in the entire area set off by the barriers69Since the fence is significant, it causes everything contained within it to be considered as a single entity. Hence, the entire enclosed area is considered as a vineyard even though it contains only one vine (Radbaz). even though one makes a separation of six handbreadths. If one made a separation of six handbreadths and sowed, however, the produce is not hallowed.70For the minimum requirements have been met.What is the initial and preferred size of the separation one should make? Four cubits on every side.71For this is sufficient even in a vineyard. Afterwards, he may sow [other produce] in the remainder of the trench or in the remainder of the area surrounded by a fence.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
When vines grow in their natural manner with their branches and their clusters lying on the earth, [the place where they grow] is called a vineyard (kerem). When, however, a person creates something like a bed or a platform raised above the earth so that the clusters and the branches will be extended over it and he lifted up the foliage of the vines from the ground unto that trellis and draped them over it, it is called an aris. The branches and the like from which the trellis or platform was made and upon which the foliage of the vine is draped are called apiperot. Different laws apply to an aris.
When a person plants one row of five or more vines and drapes them over a wall that is ten handbreadths high or the like, or he planted them on the side of a trench1And lowered the branches and the clusters into the trench. that is ten [handbreadths] deep and four [handbreadths] wide, they are [also] classified as an aris. It is necessary to separate from an aris four cubits [before] sowing [other produce], similar to the separation [required in] a vineyard.2Thus the laws governing an aris are more severe than those governing a vineyard. For in a vineyard, it is not necessary to separate more than six handbreadths, because one row is not considered as a vineyard (Chapter 7, Halachah 1).
From where do we measure? From the base of the fence over which he draped them. What is implied? He made a separation of a cubit between the row of vines and the wall. Thus the aris is made from the vines and the wall, he should measure four cubits from the wall and sow.3Generally, a fence creates a distinction and it is not necessary to make a separation on its outside (Chapter 7, Halachah 14). In this instance, however, since the vines are draped over the fence itself, it is considered as part of the aris and a separation is required (Kessef Mishneh).The Ra'avad differs and maintains that a fence always creates a distinction and there is no need to separate on its outer side. The source for the Rambam's ruling is Kilayim 6:1. Significantly, in his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam follows the Ra'avad's approach and maintains that one measures only on the inside of the fence. There he explains that the School of Hillel, whose view is accepted as halachah, maintains that one measures four cubits from the fence. Thus the other crops need only be separated three cubits from the base of the vine.Rav Kappach notes that in a manuscript copy of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, corrected his father's text, based on the ruling here. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that the Rambam's change of mind is dependent on his understanding of the treatment of the mishnah in the Jerusalem Talmud. Thus there are five cubits between [the crops] sown and the base of the vines. If he seeks to sow on the side of the vines, he should separate four cubits from the base of the vines. Thus he is five cubits away from the wall. This is the pattern followed when dealing with any aris.
Whether one built the fence and then planted the vines or planted the vines and then built the fence, since he draped [the vines on the fence], it is considered as an aris. If the fence was destroyed4The Radbaz mentions that the fence does not have to be destroyed entirely. As long as its height is reduced below ten handbreadths, the laws of an aris no longer apply. or the trench filled, the aris ceases to exist and the entire row is considered as individual vines.5As stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 1.
When an aris is destroyed6The Radbaz mentions that the fence does not have to be destroyed entirely. As long as its height is reduced below ten handbreadths, the laws of an aris no longer apply. in the middle and there remain five vines on one side of the fence and five vines on the other side of the fence opposite it,7There were two rows of vines separated by a wall over which they were both draped. Thus the wall causes them to be considered as a single entity. The Ra'avad offers a different interpretation of this situation. it is called "separate portions of an aris." If there are eight cubits and one sixtieth of a cubit between them,8As long as there are slightly more than eight cubits between the two rows, they are considered as separate entities and not as a single vineyard, as stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 2. As the Mishnah states (Kilayim 6:6), this is the only instance where an extra amount beyond whole numbers is required. one must separate [only] six handbreadths between each row before sowing, provided he does not sow beneath the trellises as explained.9Chapter 6, Halachah 12.
If there is exactly eight cubits between them, one should not bring seed there. If he did sow [other crops] there, since he separated six handbreadths [from each of the rows of vines], the produce is not hallowed. If there is no fence there,10I.e., it was destroyed entirely or partially. [all that is necessary is to] separate six handbreadths from each row and sow it. For there is no aris, nor the separated portions of an aris. If he went back and rebuilt the fence,11Either partially or to a height of ten handbreadths. the aris is considered to have been renewed or the separated portions of an aris to have been renewed.
[The following laws apply when there is] a small garden that is surrounded by a fence and one draped the vines12I.e., at least five vines. [growing] around it on the outside on all of its walls.13This follows the Rambam's approach (explained in Halachah 3), that a fence over which vines are draped does not act as a separation for them even if they are located outside it. The Ra'avad differs in his gloss to that halachah and differs in this instance as well. [Significantly, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ediot 2:4), the Rambam resembles the Ra'avad's interpretation here.] If [the garden] contains the space for a reaper and his basket to stand on one side14The Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 6:1) interprets this as being two cubits: one for the reaper and one for his basket. and the space for a reaper and his basket to stand on the other side, one may sow vegetables in it,15He must, however, separate six handbreadths [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 6:2)]. because it is surrounded with a fence. If it is not that large, one may not sow in it, because the entire area appears as one aris with vegetables in it.16Since the space between the two fences is very small, the entire area is considered as a single unit.
[The following laws apply when] vines were planted on a terrace and their trellis17I.e., a trellis ten handbreadths high. extends and gives shade over a field. If one can stand on the earth and harvest the entire vine,18I.e., they extend low enough that he can reach them without standing on any support. we consider the entire area under the vine as if it was the base of the vines and forbid a radius of four cubits in the field on every side of the edge of the trellis. If he cannot reap [the grapes] unless he steps on a step or a ladder, it is forbidden only to sow under the trellis itself.19As would be the law if there was only one vine.
When there are two walls perpendicular to each other and vines are planted in the corner between them, the trellis extends outward from the corner and ends [in the midst of the area],20In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 6:7), the Rambam depicts this situation as illustrated. Rabbenu Shimshon and the Ra'avad do not accept his interpretation. one may separate the [required] measure21Six handbreadths [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 6:7)]. from the base of the vines and sow in the place where the trellis ends and there is no aris. Although [the crops] were sowed between two walls between which there is an aris, since he separated the required measure, he may sow [other crops] between the walls.
[The following rule applies when] the trunk of a vine ascended above the ground, then became bent and extended along the earth, and then ascended like a knee. When we measure between the vine and other [crops] six handbreadths or four cubits, we measure only from the end of the portion that rises up and not from the base of the first vine.22In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 7:1), the Rambam adds: "If [the original stem] was apparent and obvious that it is the base of the vine that became bent, we measure from the original base."
We have already explained23Chapter 6, Halachah 11. that although one makes the required separation between the [other crops] sown and the vine, it is necessary to be careful that the vine will not provide shade for the vegetables, nor may the vegetables provide shade for the vine. If one sowed vegetables or grain and they grew and afterwards draped a vine over them, the straw [of the crops] are permitted,24For they were produced before the vines were introduced (Radbaz; see Chapter 5, Halachah 13). but the grain must be burnt. If the roots of the vine emerged in the four cubits between the vineyard and grain, they must be uprooted. If the roots of the grain emerge within these four cubits, it is permitted.
All of the separations and required measures that are mentioned with regard to kilayim are measured in cubits that are six ample handbreadths.25I.e., that one's fingers are not tightly pressed together, but held in a manner that allows air to pass between them [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Eruvin 1:1)]. See also Hilchot Shabbat 17:36. One should not be constricted in measuring [the forbidden] areas with regard to kilayim. For one should only constrict measurements when being stringent.26See Chapter 7, Halachah 2.
All of the measures in which separations are made between vines and grain or vegetables apply only in Eretz Yisrael27Where the prohibitions against mixed species apply according to Scriptural Law. or in Syria.28Which in certain contexts is considered as Eretz Yisrael (see Hilchot Terumot 1:3-4) and where they apply according to Rabbinic Law. But in the Diaspora, it is permitted to sow [other crops] at the side of vines29Among the vines themselves, however, it is forbidden to sow, even in the Diaspora (Kessef Mishneh). in a vineyard at the outset. In the Diaspora, it was forbidden only to sow two types of vegetables or grain and grape seeds in one handful.If one tells a gentile child30One may not, however, ask a Jewish child to perform such an activity, lest he become habituated to transgression (Shabbat 139a). to sow [such a mixture] for him in the Diaspora, it is permitted.31The Turei Zahav 296:21 rules that even at the outset, it is permitted to ask a gentile child to do this. One should not, however, make such a statement to an adult, lest one also do so with a Jew.
Although it is permitted to sow vegetables at the side of a vineyard in the Diaspora, the vegetable that is sown there is forbidden to be eaten, even in the Diaspora.32The Kessef Mishneh quotes Rabbenu Asher as differing with this ruling and permitting the vegetables to be eaten. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 296:69) follows the Rambam's ruling, while the Rama follows that of Rabbenu Asher. [This applies] provided one sees the owner harvest it and sell it. If, however, one is in doubt whether [the produce comes from there], it is permitted,33The conclusion of the tractate Orlah relates that if vegetables are being sold outside a vineyard in the Diaspora, one may purchase them provided one does not see them being harvested. as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.34Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:6-8.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
When a person causes a male to enter into relations with a female of a different species1Even if both species are kosher (see Minchat Chinuch, mitzvah 244); see Sifei Cohen, Yoreh De'ah 294:1. - whether a domesticated animal, a wild beast, a fowl, even different types of sea-animals2But not fish (Kessef Mishneh). - he is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law.3I.e., he transgresses a negative commandment, included as one of the 365 negative commandments by Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 217) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 244). [This4In contrast to the laws regarding sowing mixed species of crops (Chapter 1, Halachah 1) and sowing mixed species in a vineyard (Chapter 5, Halachah 2). applies] in all places in Eretz Yisrael and in the Diaspora, as [Leviticus 19:19] states: "You shall not mate your animal with another species."[This applies] whether the animal, beast, or fowl belongs to him or to a colleague.5Although the prooftext states "your animal," this is not meant as an exclusion (Sifra to that verse). He is not liable for lashes until he actually inserts one animal's organ into the others. If, however, he merely placed one on top of the other or encouraged them verbally, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.6The punishment given for violating a Rabbinic ordinance.
It is permitted to place two species of animals in one corral.7For the owner is not involved in their mating. The Rama (Yoreh De'ah 297:3) states that in a place where there is a suspicion that others will cause the two animals to mate, it is forbidden to place them in the same corral. If one sees them mating, he is not obligated to separate them. A Jew is forbidden to give his animal to a gentile to have him mate it with a forbidden species.8Based on Bava Metzia 90a, the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh state that the difficulty is that it is forbidden to give a gentile instructions to perform a prohibited activity. According to the Rambam (Hilchot Melachim 10:6), it is forbidden for a gentile to crossbreed species. The Rama (loc. cit.:4), however, states that if the act is performed for the benefit of the gentile, there is no prohibition.
When a person transgressed and mated his animal with a mixed species, it is permitted to benefit from the offspring.9I.e., if the mated species are not kosher. If the mated species were both kosher, [the offspring] is permitted to be eaten, as stated in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.10Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 1:13.Here we see another difference with produce that grows from mixed species. The latter is forbidden, while in this instance, the mixed offspring is permitted. Implied is that the prohibition against mixed produce affects the cheftza, the actual substance of the forbidden entity, while the prohibition against mating mix species applies only to the gavra, the person performing the mating.
[Although] two types of animals or beasts resemble each other11In the text of the Mishneh Torah, this phrase is repeated a second time. and one can impregnate the other, since they are two species, they are considered as mixed species and it is forbidden to mate them.What is implied? A wolf and a dog, a hunting dog12Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 1:6). and a fox, deer and goats, mountain goats and sheep, horses and mules, mules and donkeys, and donkeys and wild asses13Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 1:6). - although they resemble each other, they are considered as mixed species.
When a species has both a wild species and a domesticated species, e.g., a wild ox14The Radbaz notes that the term "wild ox" is sometimes used to refer to a buffalo which is considered a separate species and not part of the ox species. He states that here the intent is different and the Rambam is referring to a species of domesticated animal. See also Siftei Cohen 297:6. and an ox or a wild horse and a horse, it is permitted to mate them together, because they are one species. A duck and a wild duck, by contrast, are considered as mixed species with each other. [The reason is that] the domesticated duck has its testicles inside its body, while those of the wild duck are outside. This shows that they are different species.[Mating a] ko'i15A ko'i is a hybrid born from breeding a deer and a goat. There is an unresolved question among our Sages if it is considered as a domesticated animal (behemah) or a wild beast [(chayah) the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Bikkurim 2:8]. In Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 1:13, he states that the term refers to any hybrid that comes from mating a domesticated animal with a wild beast. with a beast or a domesticated animal is considered as mating mixed species. One, however, is not liable for lashes, because [a ko'i's] status is one of doubt.16In Hilchot Nazirut 2:10-11, the Rambam writes:In certain matters, a ko'i resembles a wild beast. In other matters, it resembles a domesticated animal. In still other matters, it resembles both a wild beast and a domesticated animal and in still other matters, it resembles neither a domesticated animal, nor a wild beast....What is implied? [When] a ko'i [is slaughtered, its] blood must be covered as the blood of a wild beast must. Its fat is forbidden as is the fat of a domesticated animal. It is considered a union of mixed species if it is mated with either a domesticated animal or a wild beast, as if it were neither a wild beast or a domesticated animal. And it must be ritually slaughtered as is required for both a domesticated animal or a wild beast. Similarly, there are other halachic considerations that apply with regard to it and they will all be explained in their appropriate place.See Hilchot Shechitah 12:8-9; Hilchot Bikkurim 9:5; 10:7; Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 1:6, et al, which mention other laws applying to this animal.
Offspring from mixed species whose mothers are from the same species may be mated.17As the Rambam emphasizes in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 8:4), the fundamental principle is that the species of the mother is the determining factor whether the union is considered as mixed species or not. If [the mothers] are from two species, it is forbidden to mate them and one who mates them is liable for lashes. Similarly, if one mated the offspring [of such a union with an animal of any other species,] even of its mother's species, he is liable for lashes.18The Kessef Mishnehsuggests that since the determining factor is the species of the mother, the text should read "he is not liable for lashes." According to that interpretation, the bracketed additions in the translation are inappropriate.What is implied? A male mule19Which comes from mating a horse and a donkey. whose mother is a donkey may be mated with a female mule whose mother is a donkey. It is forbidden to mate it with [an animal of any other species,] even a donkey. It is, however, forbidden to mate a male mule whose mother is a horse with a female mule whose mother is a donkey. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.Therefore a person who wants to mate a male and female mule or to have [a carriage] drawn by two mules, he should check their identifying signs: their ears, their tails, and their voices. If they resemble each other, it is clear that their mother is from the same species and [the above activities] are permitted.
Anyone who performs labor with two species of animals or wild beasts together when one of them is kosher and the other is not kosher20I.e., according to the Rambam - other Rishonim differ - according to Scriptural Law, one is permitted to work with two animals from two different kosher species. It is only mating them which is forbidden. The Rambam's understanding is based on his interpretation of the Mishnah (Kilayim 8:2) which he understands to be divided in half, the first clauses referring to the prohibition of mating stated in the previous halachah, and the latter clauses to the prohibition against working with different species. The commentaries note that the Rambam's perspective is shared by the Tikkunei Zohar, Tikkun 14. is liable for lashes21I.e., he transgresses a negative commandment, included as one of the 365 negative commandments by Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 218) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 550). in all places,22I.e., not only in Eretz Yisrael (see Kiddushin 36b). as [Deuteronomy 22:10] states: "Do not plow with an ox and a donkey together."Whether one plows, seeds, has them pull a wagon, or a stone, or led them together even with his voice [alone],23In which instance, one might think that one is not liable because he did not perform a deed. he is liable for lashes. This is derived from the term "together."24For that implies a combined activity [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 8:2)]. If, however, one [merely] yokes them [to a wagon], he is exempt25For he has not had them perform a forbidden task. unless he pulls them or leads them.26The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh emphasize that the animals from the two must be yoked or tied together in some way for one to be liable for leading them. If they are separate, he is not liable.
[The prohibition involves not only] an ox and a donkey, [but also] all other different species when one is non-kosher and the other, kosher, whether a domesticated animal with another domesticated animal, e.g., a pig and a lamb, or a beast together with a beast, e.g., a wild deer and an elephant, or a beast with a domesticated animal, e.g., a dog with a goat, or a deer with a pig or the like. For all of the above [types of combinations], one is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law, for a beast is considered as an animal, as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.27Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 6:1 quotes Deuteronomy 14:4-5 which states: "These are the animals that you may eat: an ox... a gazelle and a deer," including both domesticated animals and beasts in the general category "animals."According to Rabbinic Law, however, whenever it is forbidden to mate two species, it is also forbidden to plow with them together, to pull them, or to lead them. If one performs labor with [two such species] together, pulled them, or led them, he is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct. It is forbidden to lead an animal from dry land together with a sea-animal, e.g., a goat with a large fish. If one did so, he is exempt.28Bava Kama 55a raises the question whether one is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct for such an action or not, for the two cannot function as a team in the ordinary sense, sense the fish cannot leave the water and the goat will not enter it. Since the question is left unresolved, the Rambam maintains that the person is not liable.
When a wagon is being drawn by mixed species, one who sits in the wagon is liable for lashes. Even though he did not lead them,29I.e., he was holding the reins of the animals. [he is liable,] because sitting there causes the animal to pull the wagon. Similarly, if one person was sitting in a wagon and another leading the animals, they are both liable for lashes. Even 100 people who lead a team of mixed species are liable for lashes.
It is permitted to perform a task with a human and an animal together or with a beast, e.g., a person can plow with an ox or pull a wagon with a donkey, or the like. [This is derived from the phrase:] "an ox and a donkey together," i.e., not a man and a donkey and not a man and an ox.
When an animal has been sanctified but disqualified [and then redeemed]30I.e., an animal was sanctified as an offering, but then developed a blemish that disqualifies it. It was redeemed and thus is considered as an ordinary animal in that after it is slaughtered, it may be eaten without any of the strictures associated with consecrated food. While alive, however, it is forbidden to work with it or shear it, like consecrated animals. See Rashi, Makkot 22a. The Ra'avad and Tosafot offer different interpretations. even though it is one animal, the Torah considers it as two bodies. For it is consecrated and it is as if it is both a consecrated and an ordinary animal mixed as one. Thus this animal is like a non-kosher animal and a kosher animal mixed together and [Leviticus 27:11] states: "If any impure animal that may not be offered as a sacrifice." According to the Oral Tradition, [the verse] was interpreted as referring to animals that had been sanctified, but disqualified. Accordingly, a person who plows with an ox that had been sanctified but disqualified or mates such an ox is liable for lashes because of the prohibition against mixed species. This prohibition is part of the received tradition.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
The prohibition against mixed fabrics in clothes involves only wool1When the term "wool" is used without any adjective, it refers only to sheep's wool (the Jerusalem Talmud, Kilayim 9:1). and linen, as [Deuteronomy 22:11] states: "Do not wear sha'atnez, wool and linen together." In seaports, there is something like wool that grows on stones in the Mediterranean Sea2Although the Rambam uses the term Yam HaMelech, his intent is the Mediterranean Sea and not the Dead Sea. See Hilchot Tzitzit 2:2 and his Commentary to the Mishnah (Keilim 9:1) for other examples of such usage. whose appearance resembles gold and it is very soft. It is called kelech.3In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:2), the Rambam states that this fabric is a type of silk. Others identify it with cissaros blossoms. It is forbidden [to be mixed] with linen because of the appearance it creates, because it resembles lambs' wool. Similarly, silk and kelech are forbidden because of the appearance it creates.4For silk resembles linen and kelech resembles wool (ibid.).Rav Yosef Corcus and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 298:1) state that certainly a mixture of wool and silk should be forbidden. Nevertheless, he continues that at present, silk is very common and recognized by everyone. Hence, there is no need to forbid it, because of the appearance it will create.
When a ewe is born to a she-goat, one is not liable for [mixing] its wool [with linen]. It is, however, forbidden according to Rabbinic decree, because of the impression it creates.If wool and linen are connected in any manner, they are considered mixed fabrics according to Scriptural Law.5The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, meaning that making a smooth mass is not sufficient to create an article forbidden by Scriptural Law. To explain the difference of opinion: The Mishnah (Kilayim 9:8-9) states:The prohibition against kilayim applies only with regard to fibers that are spun into thread and woven, as it is written: "Do not wear sha'atnez," [i.e., the prohibition applies to fibers that] are made into a smooth mass, spun, and woven.... Sheets of fabric are forbidden for they have been made into a smooth mass.In his commentary to that mishnah, the Rambam states:"Made into a smooth mass"- This refers to making fabric. It involves smoothing down the surface of the substance made into a even mass...."Spun" - This involves mixing wool and linen together and spinning them into threads."Woven" - That [these threads] should be woven together.... It implies connection and establishing union.If one mixed wool and linen together, spun them into threads, wove them into a garment, and smoothed its surface..., that garment will be considered as mixed fabrics. This applies with regard to mixed fabrics as defined by Scriptural Law. For, [according to Scriptural Law, a garment] is not considered as mixed fabrics unless [making it] involved all these three activities. Anything other than this [that involves wool and linen] is mixed fabrics [only] according to Rabbinic Law.Some of the Geonim wrote as above. I, however, consider that as incorrect. Instead, any one [of these activities] is sufficient to cause a garment to be considered as mixed fabrics according to Scriptural Law. The statement in tractate Niddah [61b which implies that all three activities are necessary] is not the wording of the Talmud, but an interpretation.Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah which is a revised edition. Originally - and this is the version followed by the standard published text of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah - the Rambam wrote that the ruling that all three activities are necessary for the prohibition to be of Scriptural origin is "a correct ruling, concerning which there is no doubt." Thus originally the Rambam also subscribed to the opinion followed by the Ra'avad [which is also shared by Rashi (Niddah, loc. cit.), but later changed his mind [adopting the view stated here and in Tosafot (Niddah, loc. cit.)]. The Kessef Mishneh and the Radbaz discuss the issue in their glosses to the Mishneh Torah. See the Tur and commentaries (Yoreh De'ah 300. The Siftei Cohen 300:1 writes that the majority of the authorities follow Rashi's view. It must be emphasized that all of the opinions maintain that any combination of wool and linen is forbidden according to Rabbinic Law, the debate involves only the extent of the Scriptural prohibition. What is implied? When wool and linen were mixed together, combed together, and made into a smooth mass, they are considered as mixed fabrics. If they were mixed and combed as one and then a garment was woven from this combed fabric, they are considered mixed fabrics.
If one sewed woolen fabric to linen6In the previous halachah, the Rambam stated that any one of the following activities: making fabrics into a smooth mass, spinning, or weaving them is sufficient to incur liability. He also gave examples regarding the first two types of activities mentioned. As mentioned in the previous note, he interprets the term "weaving" as creating a connection. In this halachah, he gives examples of how creating a connection between two fabrics causes one to be liable. - even if he sewed them with silk, sewed a woolen garment with linen thread, or a linen garment with woolen thread, one tied woolen threads with linen threads or braided them together, or even if one placed wool and linen together in a sack or a basket and wound them,7In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:10), the Rambam explains that the sack or the basket causes the two fabrics to be considered as one. It is forbidden to carry the sack or basket on one's back, lest it be considered that one is benefiting from mixed fabrics.This follows Rav Kappach's amended text of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah. The standard printed text follows a slightly different version. they are considered as mixed fabrics. Even if one tied a braid of wool to a braid of linen, even if there is a strap of leather in between,8In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:9), the Rambam explains that we are speaking about attaching a thread of wool to one side of a leather strap and a thread of linen to the other. Since the two fabrics are connected, the Scriptural prohibition is involved. See Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 300:5) which takes a somewhat more lenient position. they are considered mixed fabrics. [This law also applies] if one folded over woolen and linen fabric and tied them together. [The rationale is that the prooftext states:] "Wool and linen together." Since they are combined - regardless of how - they are forbidden.
What is the source that teaches that all these prohibitions are Scriptural in origin? [We derive this from the fact that] the Torah had to explicitly state that kilayim are permitted in tzitzit.9According to Scriptural Law, on a linen garment, the white strands of the tzitzit should be made from linen, while the techeilet (sky-blue) threads should be made from wool dyed that color using the blood of a chilazon. Although this is the Scriptural Law, according to Rabbinic decree, safeguards should be taken and mixed fabrics should not be used for tzitzit. See Hilchot Tzitzit 3:6-7. As we learned according to the Oral Tradition,10Menachot 39a. the passage concerning kilayim11Deuteronomy 22:11. was positioned next to the passage concerning tzitzit12Ibid.:12. solely to teach that kilayim are permitted in tzitzit. Now the tzitzit are strands that are tied together. Thus it can be derived that a connection of this type in a situation that does not involve a mitzvah is forbidden according to Scriptural Law.13I.e., it is not necessary that the fabrics be spun and smoothed out together. For the Torah would not exclude something that is forbidden only according to Rabbinic Law.
There is no minimum measure for kilayim. Even the smallest thread of wool in a large linen garment or a thread of linen in a woolen garment is forbidden.14Unlike the laws of kashrut, concerning which a forbidden substance can become betal, of no consequence, if the kosher substance is greater than it according to Scriptural Law and 60 times its size according to Rabbinic Law, there is no such leniency in this instance.Tosafot (Nidah 61b) explains the rationale for this ruling. Generally, a forbidden entity can become nullified, because it is of no consequence when compared to the kosher substance into which it is mixed. Such logic does not apply in this instance, because there is no prohibited object to be nullified. Both the linen and the wool are permitted. Hence, they remain significant no matter how small an amount there is.Rabbenu Asher quotes this explanation, but questions it, noting that seemingly the same concepts apply with regard to a mixture of milk and meat. Both of them are permitted; it is their mixture that is forbidden and yet, one can become betal if there is 60 times the presence of the other substance. Rabbenu Asher, however, distinquishes between the two instances. In a mixture of milk and meat, what is significant is the flavor of the food. Hence, if the flavor of either the milk or meat can be detected, it is forbidden. If not, it is permitted. In the case of a mixture of fabrics, the existence of the mixed fabrics itself is what is forbidden. Hence, since neither are forbidden, they cannot become nullified. See Siftei Cohen 299:1 and Turei Zahav 299:1 who also discuss this concept. See also Halachah 27 which explains what should be done to detect a thread that is kilayim.
[The following laws apply when] one mixed the wool of ewes with the wool of camels and the like and made thread from them. If half [of the mixture] is from the ewes, it is considered as kilayim with flax. If, however, the majority is from the camels, it is permitted to mix them with flax, because the form of the entire mixture is that of camel wool. We do not pay attention to the strands of wool that are mixed with them, for they are not threads of wool.15The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that this is not a contradiction to the previous halachah. Indeed, were one to have separate threads of sheep's wool, the garment would be forbidden even if they were mixed with many times their sum of camel wool threads. For the sheep's wool threads are never nullified. In this instance, however, there is room for leniency, because there are no sheep's wool threads. As the threads are being made, the sheep's wool is combined with the camel's wool and since the majority is camel's wool, it is the determining factor. These concepts are also reflected in the ruling of the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 299:1).
Therefore when sheep hides are used to make garments,16I.e., of leather, not of wool. they are permitted even though they are sewed with flax. We are not concerned with the strands of wool - even though they become entwined with the linen threads used to sew it, because the wool is insignificant because of the minute amount that is there.17The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's rationale, explaining that it runs contrary to the principle stated in Halachah 5. He follows his thesis stated previously - see the notes to Halachah 2 - that according to Scriptural Law, mixed fabrics are only forbidden when they are smoothed into an even mass, spun, and woven together. If only one of those activities is performed, the prohibition is merely Rabbinical. In this instance, there is only one activity. Hence the prohibition is Rabbnical and since the amount of woolen strands are small is not substantial, there is room for leniency.The Radbaz supports the Rambam's rationale, explaining that the fundamental point here is that the strands of wool are not threads. Hence, they are not of significance and the laws of mixed fabrics do not apply regarding them.
Similar [laws apply when] hemp and linen were mixed with each other. If the majority is hemp, it is permitted to weave these threads with woolen threads. If they are half and half, it is forbidden.
If a person makes a garment entirely out of camel's wool, rabbit wool, or hemp and weaves one thread of [sheep's] wool on one side and one thread of linen on the other side,18And thus they do not touch each other. it is forbidden as kilayim.19See Halachah 3.
When a woolen garment becomes torn, it is permitted to join it together with threads of linen and tie them, but one may not sew them.20With regard to tzitzit, tying causes the garment to be considered as kilayim, because the wool and the linen are themselves tied together. In this instance, by contrast, the linen is not tied to the wool, but rather tied around it like a belt [Tur (Yoreh De'ah 300)].
A person may wear woolen garments and linen garments and tie a belt around them from the outside,21Surrounding both garments, but not tying the two together. Even though he cannot remove either of the garments without untying the knot, it is permitted. See Siftei Cohen 300:10. provided he does not wind together cords [of each fabric] and tie them22I.e., tie the linen and woolen garments together. between his shoulders.
It is permitted to make mixed fabrics and sell them.23I.e., there is no prohibition against benefiting from them. It is forbidden only to wear them or cover oneself with them.24I.e., covering oneself with a blanket made from both linen and wool. [This is derived from] the verses [Deuteronomy 22:11]: "Do not wear sha'atnez" and [Leviticus 19:19: "A garment that is of mixed fabrics, sha'atnez] shall not come upon you." [The association of the verses implies] that to be forbidden, [a garment must] "come upon [you]" as one wears it. If, however, it comes upon one not in a manner of wearing, i.e., a tent that is kilayim, it is permitted to sit under it.Similarly, it is permitted according to Scriptural Law to sit on spreads25I.e., blankets or sheets spread on the floor or on furniture. that are made of kilayim. For "Shall not come upon you" [implies], that you may spread it under you. According to Rabbinic decree, however, even if there are ten spreads one on top of the other and the bottom one is kilayim, it is forbidden to sit on the top one, lest a strand [of kilayim] becomes wound around one's flesh.
When does the above apply? With regard to [spreads made from] soft [fabrics], e.g., curtains and sheets. With regard to [those made from] firm [fabrics] that will not become wound [upon a person's body], e.g., pillows and cushions,26Our translation is taken from Rav Kapach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:2) who interprets the Arabic term the Rambam employs as referring to cushions one places behind his back for support.The Ra'avad cites the Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 9:1) which qualifies the leniency, stating that it applies only when the pillows and cushions are solid. If they are stuffed, they are forbidden lest they become wound around a person's flesh. This view is also cited by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 301:1). it is permitted to sit or lie upon them, provided one's flesh does not touch them.27I.e., there must be something else interposing between one's flesh and the kilayim.
Similar [laws apply when] a drape is made from kilayim. If it is soft, it is forbidden lest a servant lean against it and it become draped around his body.28Note the gloss of the Radbaz who explains why the Rambam deviates slightly from the wording used in his source, Beitzah 14b. If it was firm and would not be draped, it is permitted.
It is permissible to wear slippers29Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:6). The slippers were worn to walk on cushions and spreads and not for the person's own benefit. from kilayim that do not have a heel.30The Radbaz asks: Since the person is not benefiting from wearing the slipper, what difference does it make whether it has a heel or not? He explains that if the slippers have heels, they appear as functional garments and hence, it is forbidden to wear them if they contain kilayim. Alternatively, if they have a heel, it is impossible that they will not warm one's feet. The Kessef Mishneh states that indeed even if the slippers have heels, it is permitted to wear them. The Rambam mentions slippers without heels, only because that was the kind of slippers worn at the time.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 301:13) quotes this law also with regard to wearing slippers like rubbers that are kilayim. [The rationale is that] the skin of the foot is tough and does not derive satisfaction as does the skin of the other [portions] of his body.
Seamtresses sewing garments may sew [kilayim] in their ordinary manner,31I.e., draped over their legs. provided they do not intend [to benefit from them,32As mentioned above, the prohibition against kilayim is twofold: not to wear them and not to have them come upon one's person. It is forbidden to wear kilayim under any circumstances (see Halachah 18), but it is forbidden to have them come upon one's person only if one benefits [Yevamot 4b; Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 301)]. In this instance, although he may actually benefit from the kilayim, since he does not have the intent to benefit, the benefit is not significant. See the notes to Halachah 18. using them as a shield] against the sun in the summer and the rain in the rainy season. The meticulous33Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:5). sew [with the garment lying] on the earth.34So that the kilayim will not be draped over their bodies at all.Similarly, people who sell garments may sell them in the ordinary manner,35I.e., draped over their shoulders and thus they are carrying the garments that are kilayim on their bodies. as long as they do not have the intent that the kilayim on their shoulders will protect them from the heat in the summer and warm them in the rainy season. The meticulous [hang the clothes on] a pole extended over their backs.
A person should not pick up a hot egg with a cloth that is kilayim for he is [then] benefiting from the mixed fabrics as protection from the heat or from the cold.36I.e., holding the hot egg will warm the cloth which in turn will warm his hands.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, noting that the Babylonian Talmud (Beitzah 16a) rules that there is no prohibition in a similar instance. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh show a source for the Rambam's ruling in the Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 9:3) and explain that there is no contradiction between that ruling and the passage from Beitzah. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
A person should not wear kilayim [even] temporarily and even on top of ten other garments in which instance, he is not deriving benefit from [the mixed fabrics].37In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Caro connects this ruling to the concepts explained in Halachah 16. Wearing kilayim is forbidden under all circumstances, he explains, even if one does not receive any benefit. When, however, kilayim merely "come upon" one's body, there is no prohibition when one does not derive benefit. In his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 301:5), he quotes the Rambam's ruling.The Tur and the Rama follow the opinion of Rabbenu Asher who maintains that even wearing kilayim is permitted, provided one does not intend to benefit from wearing them. This touches on an issue of a larger scope: Whether a prohibited activity that is not performed with the intent to benefit is forbidden or not. The Rambam apparently maintains that it is forbidden, while Rabbenu Asher maintains that it is permissible. This explanation is, however, difficult, for in Hilchot Shabbat 1:5, the Rambam rules that according to Scriptural Law, there is no prohibition when one performs an act without an intent to benefit. The Radbaz explains that there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter among the Sages. Since the prohibitions of the Sabbath are regarded seriously by people at large, in that context, the Rambam did not worry about taking the more lenient position. The laws regarding kilayim are not considered as severe. Hence he felt it necessary to take a more stringent position. See also the Turei Zahav 301:7 and the Siftei Cohen 301:8 who offer explanations of the Rambam's view. This is forbidden even to deceive customs inspectors.38I.e., if one's personal garments are not subject to customs duty, but merchandise is, one might desire to wear garments of kilayim that were meant to be sold so that they will not be considered as merchandise and thus he would avoid paying customs duty for them. See Rav Kapach's edition of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:2).See Hilchot Gezeilah 5:11-12 on which basis it can be derived when it is permitted to deceive a customs inspector and when doing so is forbidden. If one wears them for such a purpose, he is liable for lashes.
The prohibition against [wearing] kilayim applies only to garments that [are worn] to provide warmth, e.g., a long shirt, a hat, pants, a belt, a dress, knee pants, gloves, or the like. However, small belts that people make with their pockets prepared to hold money, spices, or the like are permitted [despite the fact they contain kilayim] even though one's flesh touches them, because this is not the ordinary way in which one warms himself. [The same principles apply with regard to] a rag on which one places a bandage, poultice, dressing, or the like.
A forehead piece of leather, silk or the like to which are attached strands of wool and strands of leather that hang over a persons face to chase away flies are not [forbidden] as kilayim, because this is not the manner through which a person derives warmth.
It is permitted for a person who is leading animals to hold the leashes attached to them in his hand even though some of them are linen and some of them are wool. [He may] even wind them around his hand. If, however, he ties them all [together],39The Turei Zahav 300:11 maintains that we are speaking about a permanent knot, i.e. a double knot, even though the Beit Yosef states that one knot is sufficient for there to be a prohibition involved. they are considered as kilayim40Since they are tied together, they considered as connected and part of one garment. and it is forbidden for him to bind them around his hand.41For his hand will be warmed by them (Siftei Cohen 300:12). Even though he does not intend to benefit from the activity, it is still forbidden as above. As in Halachah 18, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 300:6) follows the Rambam's view, the Rama follows the opinion of Rabbenu Asher who grants leniency in such a situation.
Towels used to clean hands,42Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:3). cloths used to wipe down utensils and land,43Here the Rambam uses a slightly different interpretation than that found in his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). mantles for Torah scrolls,44In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam explains this term as referring to the cloths which a person holds when reading from the Torah. and a barber's cloth45The cloth a barber puts on the shoulders of the person receiving a haircut (ibid.). are all forbidden [to be made from] kilayim.46In his initial version of his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.; which is followed in the standard printed version of the text), the Rambam rules that there is no prohibition involved in these instances. Later, however, based on the ruling of the Jerusalem Talmud, he changed his mind and forbade them for the reason given here. [The rationale is that one's] hands touch them and they always become wound around the hands and warm them.
[The following law applies to] tickets47In the Talmudic era, laundry tickets were made of small fragments of cloth. If they were kilayim, there would be a difficulty involved. that launderers and weavers make for clothes so that each person could identify his own. If the ticket was of wool on a linen garment or a linen ticket on a woolen garment, it is forbidden even though it is not significant for him.
When a person joined a woolen cloth to a linen cloth with one thrust [of the needle and thread], they are not considered as having been joined together48This concept also has ramifications with regard to the laws of ritual purity. If they are connected so loosely and an object that conveys impurity touches one, the other does not become impure, nor is one liable for separating them on the Sabbath [Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:10)]. and they are not considered as kilayim.49In the above source, the Rambam explains that if the two cloths are pulled in opposite directions, they will separate effortlessly. If he gathered the two heads of the thread [and tied them] together50The bracketed additions are made on the basis of the commentary of the Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura to the above mishnah and the Turei Zahav 300:3. It appears from the Rambam, that he changed his understanding of the mishnah slightly, for there he interprets the two clauses as complementing each other and describing the same circumstance. Here, however, he describes them as two separate instances. or [joined the cloths with] two thrusts [of the needle and thread],51The Radbaz notes that that in Hilchot Shabbat 10:9, the Rambam rules that for a person to be liable, in addition to sewing two stitches, he must tie the threads in a knot. He explains that the laws of the Sabbath are stricter than those applying to kilayim. For one to be liable on the Sabbath, one must perform a labor that has a permanent effect, while to be liable for kilayim, all that is necessary is that the two garments be connected at the time.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 300:2) quotes the ruling of the Rambam. The Tur and the Rama follow the opinion of Rabbenu Asher who maintains that to be liable, one must tie the two threads. they are considered as kilayim.
It is permitted to make shrouds for the deceased from kilayim, for the deceased are not obligated in any mitzvot.52Tosafot, Niddah 61b notes that we must be careful not to wear tzitzit in the presence of a corpse lest this be considered as "mocking the poor," i.e., mocking the dead who can no longer observe the mitzvot [see Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 23:4)]. Nevertheless, wrapping a corpse in a garment that is forbidden is not considered as mockery, because since the person is not deriving benefit, even during his lifetime, there would be no prohibition.The Or Zerua, Vol. II, sec. 421, emphasizes that even after the resurrection of the dead, there will be no difficulty with the dead being clothed in kilayim, for in that future era, the observance of mitzvot will be nullified. [Kilayim] may be used as a saddle-blanket for a donkey53Provided it is obvious in contrast to Halachah 27. and one may sit on it, provided his flesh is not touching it.54For it is firm and thus, as stated in Halachah 13, will not become wound around his body. He should not place this saddle-blanket on his shoulder even to take out the compost.55For this is "bringing kilayim upon oneself." Furthermore, we cannot say that he is doing this unintentionally, because he is using the saddle-blankets to protect him from being sullied by the compost.
It is permissible to carry a corpse or an animal that is dressed in kilayim on one's shoulders.56This situation resembles the sellers of clothing mentioned in Halachah 16.
When a thread of linen becomes lost within a woolen garment or a thread of wool becomes lost within a linen garment, the garment should not be sold to a gentile lest the gentile sell it to a Jew.57See Halachot 6-7 above which emphasize that a thread of shaatnez can never become nullified. Nor should he make it a saddle-blanket for a donkey, lest another person find it and tear it off the saddle-blanket and wear it, because the kilayim are not discernable within it.What can be done to correct the situation regarding this garment? It should be dyed. Because wool and linen will not dye in the same manner. Thus [the lost thread] will become recognizable and then he should remove it. If it is not recognizable [after the dying], it is permitted [to use the garment], for perhaps [the lost thread] fell off. After all, he checked and did not find it. As we explained already in the laws of forbidden intimate relations,58Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:17. See also Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 16:1. any prohibition arising from a doubt is of Rabbinical origin. Therefore, [our Sages] were lenient because of the doubt.59The Ra'avad takes issue with the Rambam on this point. He agrees that according to Scriptural Law, one is not liable in a situation of doubt, but maintains that our Sages required us to be stringent when there is a doubt. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh agree with the Ra'avad in principle, but explain the Rambam's words as follows: Because all that is involved is a Rabbinic prohibition and this is an exceptional and abnormal situation, our Sages granted leniency.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 302:1) quotes the Rambam's ruling. The Tur and the Ramah follow the approach of the Ra'avad and allow leniency only when the prohibition against kilayim is Rabbinic in origin.
When a person purchases woolen garments from gentiles, he must check them very carefully, lest they be sewn with linen thread.60This law is relevant at the present time as well, because the thread and the lining of garments are often made from linen. For this reason, Sha'atnez laboratories have been established in most major cities to examine garments to see if they contain linen.
When a person sees kilayim that are forbidden by Scriptural Law on his friend - even if the latter is walking in the market place - he should jump up and rip it off him immediately.61Despite the embarrassment it might cause, because every moment he wears it, he transgresses the prohibition against kilayim.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 303:1) quotes the Rambam's ruling. The Tur and the Rama maintain that this ruling applies only when the person is conscious of the transgression he is performing. If, however, he performs the violation unintentionally, the garment should not be removed from him in public. [This applies] even to his teacher from whom he has learned wisdom.62Whom he is obligated to honor (Hilchot Talmud Torah, ch. 5). For [the obligation to] honor people at large does not supercede a negative prohibition in the Torah.63Berachot 19b quotes Proverbs 21:30: "There is no wisdom; there is no understanding; and there is no counsel against God" and concludes: "Wherever there is a desecration of God's name (i.e., the transgression of a prohibition in public), deference is not granted to a master's honor."Why is such [a prohibition] superceded with regard to returning a lost object?64I.e., the Torah forbids ignoring the lost object and not trying to return it to its owner (Hilchot Gezeilah Va'Aveidah 11:1). Nevertheless, if the person who discovers the lost object is a Torah scholar and it is compromising to his honor to return it, he is not required to do so (ibid.:13). Because the prohibition involves financial matters.65A person can waive his colleague's obligation to him with regard to financial matters. Hence, we assume that he would waive return of the article in consideration of the Sages' honor.Why is [a prohibition] superceded with regard to the ritual impurity associated with a corpse?66I.e., a priest who is ordinarily forbidden to come in contact with the ritual impurity resulting from a human corpse (Hilchot Evel 3:1) must bury a corpse that has no one else to bury it (ibid.:8). Because Scripture made an exclusion regarding his sister.67He is commanded to become impure for the burial of all his immediate relatives with the exception of his married sister (Leviticus 21:3 .According to the Oral Tradition,68Berachot, loc. cit. it was taught: For his sister, he may not become impure, but he may become impure for a corpse that it is a mitzvah to bury.If, however, a prohibition is Rabbinic in origin, it is superceded by the consideration of a person's honor in all situations. Although the Torah states [Deuteronomy 17:11]: "Do not deviate from any of the statements they relate to you,"69I.e., one of the 365 prohibitions in the Torah forbids us from deviating from the commands of the Sages [Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 312) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 496), Hilchot Mamrim 1:2]. this prohibition is superceded by considerations of a person's honor. Accordingly, if [another person] has upon him sha'atnez that is forbidden according to Rabbinical law, one may not rip it off him in the marketplace, nor must [the person himself] remove it in the marketplace until he reaches home. If [the sha'atnez was forbidden] according to Scriptural Law, he must remove it immediately.
A person who wears kilayim or covers himself with them is liable for lashes. If he was wearing kilayim the entire day, he is liable only for one set of lashes.70For it is considered as if he violated only one transgression. If he repeatedly stuck his head in and out of the garment - even though he did not take off the entire garment, he is liable for each time [he stuck his head out].71Provided he received a warning each time (Kessef Mishneh).When is he liable for only one set of lashes? When he received one warning. If, however, they warned him and told him: "Take it off, take it off," and he continued to wear it and remained wearing for the amount of time necessary to remove it and put it on after they warned him, he is liable [for lashes] for each interval that he waited,72Although a person who violates a prohibition without committing a deed is not liable for lashes, there is a difference in this instance, because wearing the garment is considered as committing a deed (Ritba, as quoted by Kessef Mishneh). for he was warned regarding it and, nevertheless, did not remove [the forbidden garment].
[The following laws apply when] a person dresses a colleague in kilayim. If the wearer acted consciously, he is liable for lashes73He is not considered as if he did not perform a deed when committing this transgression, because as in the previous halachah, wearing the garment itself can be considered a deed. Moreover, when a person dresses a colleague, the person being dressed helps to some degree. That is sufficient a deed to warrant lashes (Kessef Mishneh). and the person who dressed him is liable for "plac[ing] a stumbling block before the blind."74See Hilchot Rotzeach 12:14 which interprets this phrase from Leviticus 19:14 as a prohibition against causing a person who is unaware to commit a spiritually undesirable act. If the person wearing the garment did not know that it was kilayim and the person who dressed him acted willfully, that person is liable for lashes75In one of his Responsa (Klal 2, Responsum 16), Rabbenu Asher differs and maintains that there is no prohibition involved other than "placing a stumbling block in front of the blind" and one is not liable for lashes for violating that prohibition since it is of a general scope.The Radbaz explains that the Rambam considers the prohibition against Kilayim as also applicable to a person dressing a colleague. He questions, however, why the Rambam does not rule in a similar manner in Hilchot Nazir 5:20. and the wearer is exempt.
When priests wear their priestly garments when they are not performing service even though they are in the Temple,76The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this point, maintaining that as long as the priests are in the Temple, it is permitted for them to wear the priestly garments. they are liable for lashes because the sash contains kilayim77See Hilchot K'Lei HaMikdash 8:1, 11. The Ra'avad questions why the Rambam singles out the sash, other priestly garments (e.g., the choshen and the ephod) also contain kilayim. The Kessef Mishneh states that the Rambam chose to highlight a garment used by an ordinary priest, not one used by the High Priest. and license to wear it was granted only while performing service, for that is a positive commandment like tzitzit.78And the observance of a positive commandment supercedes that of a negative commandment.
