=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
כל כינויי נזירות – a word which is not the essence of the name is called a substituted word, like a person who calls his fellow by a nickname [Tractate Bava Metzia 58b].
האומר אהא – it is not a nickname but rather suggestions of nicknames, like a handle which the utensil is held by; such the vow is influenced by this language but our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: all nicknames/substitute words for Naziriteship are like Naziriteship and all suggestions of Naziriteship are like Naziriteship. Which are the suggestions of Naziriteship? A person who says: “I will be [such]….,” “I will be handsome,” and which are the nicknames of Naziriteship? Nazik (a substitute for Nazir), Naziah, Paziah.
האומר אהא – that he saw a Nazirite passing before him and said: “I will be,” even though he did not say, “I will be like this,” if he intended to be a Nazirite like him, behold this is a Nazirite and even though he did not utter with his lips like this.
אהא נוה – that he would grab hold of his hair and state, “I will be handsome,” implying that “I will be handsome with the growth of this hair,” and if he intended for this purpose, He is a Nazirite, and even though he did not specify that these and other similar suggestions of Naziriteship and they are like being a Nazirite.
נזיק אזיח פזיח – the expressions of the [non-Jewish] nations that they call a Nazirite as such and their expressions are close to that of Israel and are called nicknames of Naziriteship.
הריני כזה – and he gesticulates/hints to the Nazirite that is opposite him.
הריני מסלסל הריני מכלכל הריני כזה – and all of them specifically when he grabs hold of his hair and his intention is to Naziriteshiip. 
מסלסל/he curls his hair (see Talmud Nazir 3a); 
מכלכל/grows a crown of hair, and its example is from she has a full growth of hair (around the puenda) [Talmud Niddah 52b], when the hair of [her] pudenda.
הרי עלי צפרים – two turtle doves or two pigeons and they are the sacrifice of a Nazirite who has become ritually defiled and like the example of a Nazirite that passes before him.
רבי מאיר אומר נזיר – since a Nazirite passes before him and birds are the sacrifice of a Nazirite that became ritually defiled, the words prove that when he says, “I pledge myself [to offer] birds,” he is speaking about Naziriteship.
וחכמים אומרים אינו נזיר – and the Halakha is according to the Sages that he is not a Nazirite, but he brings the birds to complete his vow.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
הריני נזיר מן הגרוגרות ומן הדבילה ב"ש אומרים נזיר – since the School of Shammai holds that a person does not utter his words for no purpose (i.e., he must have meant something – see Talmud Arakhin 5a) and when he said, “I will be a Nazirite,” he said it with the intention that he will be a Nazirite, and when he retracted and said, “from the dry figs and from the cakes of pressed figs,” he retracted for he needed to retract, and even as much time as needed for an utterance, he would not be able to retract, they held that something dedicated to the Temple by error is called sanctified, and no question or retraction belongs to it. And the same law applies regarding a Nazirite, as it is written concerning him (Numbers 6:5): “it shall remain consecrated,” therefore, he is a Naziite. But the School of Hillel holds that since he did not make the vow in the manner of those who vow, he is not a Nazirite, for there is no Naziriteship from dry figs and from the cakes of pressed figs.
אמר רבי יהודה אף כשאמרו ב"ש לא אמרו אלא באומר הרי עלי קרבן – for the Schools of Shammai and Hillel did not dispute that with regard to Naziriteship, that he was not Nazirite, they did not dispute other than with someone who says in my heart that the dry figs are to me as a Korban/sacrifice. The School of Shammai holds that this was a vow from eating dry figs and the School of Hillel holds that this was not a vow.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
מי שאמר הריני נזיר מגלח יום שלשים ואחד – for an unspecified Naziriteship is thirty days.
ואם גלח יום שלשים יצא – for part of a day is considered an entire day.
הריני נזיר שלשים יום אם גלח יום ל' לא יצא – for since he specified thirty complete days as stated.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
מי שאמר הריני נזיר. כולם נזירים – and he who caused each one of them to be seized within the time that is needed for an utterance by his fellow incidentally while the student greets his teacher, which is in order that he can say, “peace be upon you, my teacher [and rabbi].”
פי כפיו כו' – and he that would say, “my mouth is like his mouth [concerning abstention] from wine and my hair is like his hair from being sheared.
ושמע בעלה ואמר ואני אינו יכול להפר – for he already fulfilled her vow when he said: “and I [too],” but if his wife made a vow to be a Nazirite and another person heard it and said, “and I [also],” and afterwards her husband annulled it, it is not annulled for this one who said, “an I [also],” for the husband cannot abrogate a vow from its essence like a Sage.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
בית שמאי אומרים הקדש טעות הקדש – for we derive it from the exchange of one sacrificial animal for another, which is, even by mistake/error, as it is written (Leviticus 27:10): “the thing vowed and its substitute shall be holy,” and we expound/interpret it to include something done inadvertently like something done willfully.
וב"ה אומרים אינו הקדש – that we don’t learn the beginning of consecration is a matter that does not come from the power of consecration from the exchange of one sacrificial animal for another, which is the end of consecration which comes from the power of another thing that was consecrated.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
שלשה מינים אסורין בנזיר הטומאה – as it is written (Numbers 6:5): “no razor shall touch his head.”


והיוצא מן הגפן – as for example, moist/fresh and dry grapes, the exterior and interior [of grapes] combine to make olive’s bulk to be flogged for them [by violating consumption of these things].
אינו חייב עד שיאכל מן הענבים כזית – and the same law applies regarding the measure for drinking up to an olive’s bulk for since it is written (Numbers 6:3): “nor eat fresh or dried,” we derive from it – just as “eating” is up to an olive’s bulk, so also, “drinking” is up to an olive’s bulk.
משנה ראשונה עד שישתה רביעית יין – but the earlier version of the Mishnah is the opposite as we learn that we derive “eating” from “drinking” for the measure of ‘drinking” for a Nazirite [that is prohibited] is a Revi’it/one-quarter of a LOG (i.e., a LOG equals the volume of six eggs or a bottom of two fingers by two with the height of one and five-sixth of a finger) that we derive from [the analogy of] (Leviticus 10:9): “Drink no wine or other intoxicant, [you and your sons] שכר\שכר (Numbers 6:3): “he shall not drink vinegar of wine or of any other intoxicant,” from the Temple (see Leviticus 10:9 above). And just as the measurement of the prohibition of “drinking,” is one-quarter of a LOG, so also, the measurement of [prohibited] eating is one-quarter of a LOG.”
אפילו שרה פתו ביין ויש בה כדי לצרף כזית חייב – for Rabbi Akiva holds that the measurement of prohibition for a Nazirite whether in regard to “eating,” or “drinking,” is [the equivalent] of an olive’s bulk [collectively], and the permitted combines with that which is prohibited to complete up to the [obligated] measure, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiva.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
כהן גדול ונזיר אינן מטמאין לקרוביהן – as it is written in the Torah portion of Emor (Leviticus 21:11 – “He shall not defile himself even for his father or mother.”) and the Torah portion of Naso (Numbers 6:7: “Even if his father or mother, or his brother or sister should die, he must not defile himself for them, since hair set apart for his God is upon his head.”)
היו מהלכים בדרך – not specifically regarding the High Priest do they dispute (i.e., Rabbi Eliezer and the Sages), for the same law applies regarding the common priest, they also dispute, and it is one reason.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
שני נזירים שאמר להם אחד כו' – and they are silent for if they contradict, he is not believed, for one witness in a place where they contradict him is not believed, and our Mishnah speaks as for example that this person, the witness was not with them. But rather, he said, “I saw from afar defilement that was cast between them, that if the witness was with them in their place, it would be a case of uncertainty concerning ritual impurity in the public domain. And uncertain ritual purity in the public domain, in its uncertain state is [spiritually] pure, for uncertainty concerning ritual impurity we derive from the Sotah (i.e., the woman who is suspected of infidelity by her husband), as it is written regarding her (Numbers 5:13): “and she keeps secret the fact that she has defiled herself [without being forced, and there was no witness against her], and they were not other than her, and the person who engaged in sexual relations with her, and her uncertain state is seen as defiled. But whenever that they are more than two [people], even within the house, her uncertain state is seen as pure, and this is like uncertainty regarding ritual impurity in the public domain. Therefore, one must say that the witness was not with them in their place at the time of the uncertainty regarding ritual impurity.
וסופרים ל' יום – as for example when both made the vow of Naziriteship together and they took a vow of an undefined period of Naziriteship (i.e., thirty days). And the same law applies if both of them had taken a vow together and delineated their period of Naziriteship for a limited period, for after they had brought the sacrifice for defilement and the sacrifice of purity, they return and count the limited time period for their Naziriteship, and they set aside the sacrifice of spiritual purity.
וקרבן טומאה ספק – the sin-offering of fowl that comes for uncertain defilement and is not eaten.
אלא מביא חטאת עוף – for an uncertain defilement of Naziriteship. And he doesn’t bring the guilt-offering according to the Rabbis who state above that he brought his sin offering and did not bring his guilt-offering, he counts [his period of Naziriteship].
נמצא זה מביא קרבנותיו לחצאים – if he is a pure Nazirite, for the first burnt-offering was obligatory and now, he is offering the sin – offering and the peace-offering.
אבל הודו חכמים לבן זומא – and they did not take into consideration on one who brings his sacrifices in bits and pieces, and the Halakha is according to Ben Zoma.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
הגוים אין להם נזירות – even though that heathens sacrifice offerings for vows and free-will donations like Israelites, if he took the vow of becoming a Nazirite, the laws of the Nazirite vow do not apply to him and he is permitted to drink wine and defile himself through contact with the dead, as it is written at the beginning of the portion of the Nazirite (Numbers 6:2): “Speak to the Israelites.” Israelites take the vow of becoming a Nazirite; heathens do not take the vow of becoming a Nazirite.
שהוא כופה את עבדו – h forces him (i.e. his slave) to drink wine and to become defiled through contact with the dead against his will.
ואינו כופה את אשתו – against her will and in other vows which have affliction of the soul or being idle from work, the master cannot force the slave , but rather they are idle from them on their own, as it is written (Numbers 30:2): “[or takes an oath] imposing an obligation on himself;” he whose soul is acquired by him, excluding a slave whose soul is no acquired by him and similarly all of the oaths that a slave took whether they have an affliction of the soul or whether they don’t have an affliction of the soul or his master must force him for on their own they are idle, for he has no domain to himself, but vows which lack affliction of the soul nor have idleness from work to his master, the slave is obligated to fulfill them and his master is not able to force him upon them to cancel them.
מיפר נדרי שאתו ואינו מיפר נדרו עבדו – if he is satisfied/reconciled with the vow that his wife made after he nullified it, and he wants that she should fulfill it, she is not obligated to fulfill it after he has nullified it one time, and if he forces his slave to transgress his vow and afterwards he wants to have him fulfill it, the slave is obligated to fulfill it.
הפר לעבדו יצא לחירות משלים נזירותו – not specifically voided, but rather, forced his slave to drink wine and/or to defile himself through contact with the dead, and afterwards, the slave went free, the [now-former] slave is obligated to complete his Naziriteship after he went out to freedom. And Maimonides explained if he annulled his slave, he goes out to freedom, for a person who says to his slave, “it is annulled for you,” the master’s privilege over the slave rebounds from him (i.e., has no legal effect) and the slaves goes out to freedom on account of this but he must complete his Naziriteship, but my heart hesitates at this explanation.
עבד מכנגד פניו – [a slave] who fled from his master after he took the vow of Naziriteship.
ר"מ אומר לא ישתה יין – in order that he will suffer and return to his master who will force him to violate his vow and he will be permitted to drink wine.
ור' יוסי אומר ישתה – that he will not get sick and die for he will eventually return to his master and his master will search for him and return him, and it is found that it is as if he is in the domain of his master.
