=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive Torah commandment1See Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 59), which mentions this in the reckoning of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.Significantly, however, the Rambam's appreciation of this mitzvah differs in the Mishneh Torah from that in Sefer HaMitzvot. To explain: Following the verse quoted here by the Rambam as a proof-text, the Torah continues [Numbers 10:10]: "On the days of your rejoicing, on your festivals, and on your new moon [celebrations], you shall sound the trumpets for your burnt offerings and for your peace offerings."In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam writes:We are commanded to sound the trumpets in the Temple when offering sacrifices that are offered only at appointed times.... [Also,] we are commanded to sound the trumpets at a time of distress and difficulty when we pray to Him.In Sefer HaMitzvot (and similarly in Sefer HaChinuch, Mitzvah 384), the emphasis of the mitzvah is clearly on the sounding of the trumpets during the sacrifices. In the Mishneh Torah, when listing the 613 mitzvot at the beginning of the text, the Rambam mentions the sounding of the trumpets both for the sacrifices and in times of distress. Nevertheless, further on in the beginning of the text, when delineating the mitzvot according to subjects, he places the emphasis on crying out to God at a time of distress (seemingly, including crying out verbally and crying out with the trumpets in the same mitzvah). Significantly, in Hilchot Klei HaMikdash, Chapter 3, where the Rambam mentions the practice of sounding the trumpets in connection with the offering of the sacrifices, he does not mention it as a component of this or any other specific mitzvah.(Note also the commentary of the Maggid Mishneh, which questions why these two different rites were included as a single mitzvah at the outset. Even in the Torah, they are included in two separate verses.) to cry out2in prayer. Our Sages (Sifre, VaEtchanan) explain that זעקה is one of the ten verbs used for prayer. and to sound3The verb להריע refers to the sounding of a series of staccato notes referred to as teru'ah. See Hilchot Shofar 3:2-4. Significantly, although in practice, both types of notes were sounded, with regard to the sounding of the trumpets at the offerings, the Torah uses the verb ותקעתם, which refers to sounding a teki'ah, a single long note. trumpets4In the Temple, these were made of silver (Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 3:5). Josephus describes them as being approximately a cubit long, slightly thicker than an ordinary flute, and having a bell-like end. It is questionable whether it was necessary for them to be silver outside the Temple as well.See also the Ramban (Drashot l'Rosh HaShanah), who mentions an opinion that the shofar, and not a trumpet, should be sounded in time of communal distress. The Maggid Mishneh also notes this opinion and states that either instrument, a shofar or a trumpet, is acceptable, but that - outside of the Temple premises - only one of the two should be used in time of distress. Some support for this position can be drawn from Halachah 6. in the event of any difficulty that arises which affects the community, as [Numbers 10:9] states: "[When you go out to war... against] an enemy who attacks you and you sound the trumpets...."[This5As obvious from Halachah 4, this practice was observed throughout Eretz Yisrael, and not only in the Temple. Nor is its observance dependent on the existence of the Temple, nor does the Rambam specify that it must be fulfilled only in Eretz Yisrael. (In this regard, there are differing opinions; see Mishnah Berurah 576:1) Accordingly, the Magen Avraham 576:1 questions: Why is the rite of sounding the trumpets (or shofarot) not observed at present?The resolution of this question lies in the Rambam's words, "any difficulty that arises which affects the community." This rite should not be observed when an individual, or even a group of individuals, are in distress, but only when a "community" is affected.Pesachim 54b explains that communal fasts are possible only within Eretz Yisrael. There is no concept of taking such a unified communal act of this nature in the diaspora. Therefore, this mitzvah was not relevant in all the generations of our people's existence in the diaspora. (See also the Drashot l'Rosh HaShanah of the Ramban.)A question arises, however, with regard to the situation at present, with the renewal of the Jewish settlement in Eretz Yisrael. As explained in the commentary on Chapter 3, Halachah 11, there are opinions (see the gloss of the Birkei Yosef to the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 575) that maintain that at present, the concept of community also applies in Eretz Yisrael.According to this view, without entering into the discussion regarding the halachic status of the present government, it would appear that it would be proper for this mitzvah to be observed, since its observance is not dependent on the Temple. commandment is not restricted to such a limited scope;6i.e., it does not apply to war alone, as might be understood from the verse. rather] the intent is: Whenever you are distressed by difficulties7e.g., famine, plague - Note Ta'anit 22b, which states that the trumpets should not be sounded in the case of a plague even during the week. Since a plague is a very severe matter, were the trumpets to be sounded during the week, they might also be sounded when a plague took place on the Sabbath, and thus a prohibition would be violated. The Rambam discusses this question in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Ta'anit 3:3). Similarly, in Chapter 2, Halachah 1, the Rambam rules that the trumpets are sounded when a plague occurs. - e.g., famine, plague, locusts, or the like8i.e., circumstances that cause distress to the community as a whole. - cry out [to God] because of them and sound the trumpets.9See Hilchot Teshuvah 2:6, where the Rambam gives the assurance that if the Jews cry out to God as a community, He will surely heed their prayers.
This practice is one of the paths of repentance,1Note the conclusion of Hilchot Temurah, where the Rambam writes that although all the mitzvot of the Torah are Divine decrees and thus unfathomable in nature, we should meditate upon them and, to the fullest extent of our potential, try to explain them. Similarly, with regard to the mitzvah under discussion, without claiming to be able to fathom it in its entirety, the Rambam gives a rational explanation for the practice. for when a difficulty arises, and the people cry out [to God] and sound the trumpets, everyone will realize2The very sound of the trumpets will have a startling effect, arousing the people to inspect their conduct. Similarly, in Hilchot Teshuvah 3:4, the Rambam writes:Although the sounding of the shofar on Rosh HaShanah is a mitzvah, it also contains an allusion. [It is as if the shofar is saying,] "Wake up you sleepy ones.... You who forget the truth in the vanities of time... look to your souls and improve your conduct." that [the difficulty] occurred because of their evil conduct, as [Jeremiah 5:25] states: "Your sins have turned away [the rains and the harvest climate]."3See Hilchot Teshuvah 9:1, where the Rambam explains that God has instituted a cycle of causation into the world in which performing a mitzvah brings an individual - or a community - blessing and prosperity, which enable them to perform more mitzvot. Conversely, the failure to observe mitzvot brings about misfortune, which, in turn, makes it even harder to observe mitzvot. This [realization] will cause the removal of this difficulty.4For when the Jews turn to God in repentance, He will remove their hardships.
Conversely, should the people fail to cry out [to God] and sound the trumpets, and instead say, "What has happened to us is merely a natural phenomenon and this difficulty is merely a chance occurrence,"1Rather than seeing their difficulty as part of a Divinely structured plan to motivate their repentance. this is a cruel conception of things,2Misfortune is definitely not pleasant. Nevertheless, when one conceives of it as a message from God, intended to motivate a change in one's conduct, one can appreciate that, ultimately, its intent is mercy. In contrast, when one does not appreciate God's hand, one is left with a conception of an existential and cruel world in which there is no force working for man's benefit. which causes them to remain attached to their wicked deeds.3for they refuse to pay attention to the external cues God gives to motivate repentance. Thus, this time of distress will lead to further distresses.4Note the conclusion of Hilchot Tum'at Tzara'at, where the Rambam explains that when a person remains indifferent to the punishment God gives him, God brings more severe punishment upon him.This is implied by the Torah's statement [Leviticus 26:27-28]: "If you remain indifferent to Me, I will be indifferent to you with a vengeance."5מקרה, the Hebrew for "chance occurrence," shares the same root as קרי, "indifferent." Thus The implication of the verse is: When I bring difficulties upon you so that you shall repent and you say it is a chance occurrence, I will add to your [punishment] an expression of vengeance for that indifference [to Divine Providence].
In addition,1to the obligation to cry out and sound the trumpets incumbent upon us from the Torah it is a Rabbinic ordinance to fast2The Or Sameach mentions that this practice has its source in Biblical times. II Chronicles 20:3 relates that Yehoshafat called a communal fast when beset by war. whenever there is a difficulty that affects the community3These difficulties are listed in Chapter 2. until there is a manifestation of Divine mercy.4I.e., we are not required to fast only once when a distressing situation occurs. Instead, we are obligated to continue fasting until God shows us His mercies and eliminates the source of distress.Ta'anit 14b quotes a Rabbinic opinion that maintains that no more than thirteen communal fasts should be ordained because of a difficulty. The Talmud, however, explains that this statement was made with regard to drought alone. With regard to other difficulties, we should continue to fast until our prayers are answered. This conclusion is alluded to by the Rambam's choice of wording in Chapter 3, Halachah 9, and is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:6).On these fast days, we cry out in prayer, offer supplications, and sound the trumpets5blow a series of teru'ah notes only.6I.e., with no other instrument to accompany them. In the Temple, we sound both the trumpets and the shofar.7From the Mishnah (Rosh HaShanah 3:3), it would appear that two shofarot were sounded together (Minchat Chinuch). The shofar blasts should be shortened and the trumpet blasts extended,8I.e., the trumpet blasts should continue even after the shofar blasts have ceased. for the mitzvah of the day is with the trumpets.9Note the contrast to Hilchot Shofar 1:2. The trumpets are sounded together with the shofar only in the Temple, as [can be inferred from Psalms 98:6]: "Sound trumpets and shofar blasts before God, the King."10I.e., only "before God," in the Temple, where His Presence is manifest, should these two instruments be sounded together, not elsewhere.
These fasts ordained for the community because of difficulties should not be consecutive,1day after day. for2even though it would be permitted to eat at night the community would not be able to observe such a practice.3And an ordinance for the community is not instituted unless it is possible for the majority of the community to observe it (Hilchot Mamrim 2:5). Were a communal ordinance that could not be observed by the majority of the community to be instituted, the people's observance, not only of that particular ordinance, but of the Torah as a whole, would be weakened.A communal fast should be ordained only on a Monday,4See the commentary on the following halachah, which deals with the question of communal fasts being instituted on days other than Monday or Thursday. on the subsequent Thursday, and on the subsequent Monday.5Mondays and Thursdays are days associated with significant spiritual influences. Also, in this manner, the fasts are separated from each other and from the Sabbath.In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Ta'anit 2:9), the Rambam explains that communal fasts should be held first on Mondays, because were they to be held on Thursday, the shopkeepers would assume that the possibilities for famine are great - for otherwise why would a public fast be instituted before the Sabbath - and they would raise the prices of foodstuffs.(This rationale differs slightly from Rashi's interpretation of the Mishnah. Significantly, many of the traditional commentaries on the Mishneh Torah do not mention the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah. See the Sefer HaKovetz.) This pattern6Monday, Thursday, Monday - should be followed until [God manifests His] mercies. - From the wording of this halachah, it would appear that the second Thursday should be skipped, and the second series of three fasts begun on the third Monday. The commentaries note that although there is justification for this position in the Jerusalem Talmud (Ta'anit 2:13), the Babylonian Talmud (Ta'anit 15b) rules that there is no need to interrupt the sequence of fasts on the second Thursday. This ruling is also borne out by the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (loc. cit.) and some authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. There are, however, other Rabbinic opinions - which are also supported by different manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah (see the commentary on Chapter 3, Halachah 3) - that maintain that a series of communal fasts should always begin on a Monday. - Monday, Thursday, Monday - should be followed until [God manifests His] mercies.
A communal fast should not be decreed on a Sabbath, nor on a festival.1for the reasons mentioned above.The Merchevat HaMishneh HaSefaradit raises a question regarding this statement. From the previous halachah, it would appear that a communal fast is ordained only on Mondays and Thursdays, and from this halachah one might assume that, since it is necessary to exclude the Sabbath, such a fast might be ordained for other days.In resolution, it is explained that the previous halachah refers only to the thirteen communal fasts instituted when the rains fail to descend. When a difficulty of another nature arises, a fast may be instituted on a day other than Monday or Thursday. Alternatively, it can be explained that if the difficulty is not a matter of immediate emergency, the fast is put off for a Monday, as mentioned above. In the case of an immediate emergency, however, a fast may be held on any day other than those mentioned in this and the following halachah. On these days, neither a shofar nor a trumpet should be sounded, nor do we cry out [to God] or offer supplications in prayer.2Because of the atmosphere of rest and pleasure that permeates the Sabbath, it is improper to make requests about matters that are not immediate necessities. See Hilchot Shabbat 30:12The [only] exceptions are3See also Chapter 2, Halachah 2, which states that we should cry out in prayer, even on the Sabbath, if our source of sustenance is threatened. a city surrounded by gentiles or a [flooding] river and a ship that is sinking at sea.4for these are situations where human life is in immediate danger. [In these instances, and indeed,] even when a single individual is being pursued by gentiles, by thieves, or by an evil spirit5i.e., he loses control of his behavior and may harm himself (Rashi, Ta'anit 22b) (we may fast because of them on the Sabbath),6This phrase is set off by parentheses in most contemporary editions of the Mishneh Torah, because it is not included in the quotation of this halachah in the Tur (Orach Chayim 576). In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Karo brings support for the omission of this phrase, noting that in Hilchot Shabbat 2:24 and 30:12, where the Rambam discusses praying to God in the event of such imminent disasters on the Sabbath, he does not mention fasting. Hence, when mentioning appealing to God with regard to these difficulties on the Sabbath in the Shulchan Aruch (288:9, 576:12), Rav Yosef Karo omits the mention of fasting. cry out [to God], and offer supplications on their behalf in prayer.7Ta'anit 14a states that this refers to the addition of the prayer Anenu. According to the authorities who maintain that we may fast on the Sabbath (and even according to some who forbid fasting), this refers to the blessing Anenu added to the Shemoneh Esreh). According to the other opinions, it refers to the seven blessings mentioned in Chapter 4 that begin "May He who answered... answer you" (Maggid Mishneh). [The trumpets] should not be sounded8Sounding a trumpet is not one of the forbidden Sabbath labors; it is, nevertheless, forbidden because of a Rabbinical decree (see Hilchot Shofar 2:7). for them,9as an expression of prayer to arouse God's mercies. however, unless they are being sounded to gather together the people to help them and [try to] save them.10I.e., they may be sounded as an alarm to call people to come to their assistance, for the Sabbath laws may be violated for the sake of saving lives (Maggid Mishneh).Note Chapter 2, Halachah 14, which states that if a community's source of sustenance is threatened מתריעים (the verb that generally means "we sound the trumpets") on the Sabbath. Note the commentary on that halachah for an explanation.
Similarly, at the outset, a fast should not be ordained on Rosh Chodesh,1Rashi (Ta'anit 15b) cites Numbers 10:10 as an indication that Rosh Chodesh is described as "a festival." As such, it is inappropriate for a fast to be held on such a day. Chanukah, Purim,2Tosafot, Ta'anit 18b, note that Esther 9:22 describes Purim as "days of celebration and joy." Thus, fasting is inappropriate. or Chol HaMo'ed.3Although it is a logical addition, it must be noted that Chol HaMo'ed is not mentioned in the source for this halachah, Ta'anit 2:10, nor is it mentioned in the Tur (Orach Chayim 572). The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 572:2) quotes the Rambam's ruling. If, however, the community has begun to fast because of a distressing situation for even a single day, and the schedule of fasts requires that a fast be held on one of the days mentioned above, we should fast, and [indeed,] fast for the entire day.4Although the Mishnah (ibid.) states that the fast should be interrupted before nightfall because of the positive nature of these days, Ta'anit 18b quotes a majority opinion that maintains that the fast should be completed.
Pregnant women, nursing women,1lest their fetus or child be endangered by the lack of nourishment. and children2The Magen Avraham 576:10 questions the mention of children in this halachah, for it is accepted that children are never obligated to fast. He explains that, in this instance, the term refers to children past the age of majority. Males are not obligated to observe fasts of this nature until they are 18, nor females until they are 15.The B'nei Binyamin offers another explanation, noting that on Yom Kippur children should be trained to fast by withholding food from them for several hours (Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor 2:10). This practice need not be observed on these fast days. need not fast3Nevertheless, as mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachah 5, they should not indulge in food and drink for the sake of pleasure. on communal fasts that are instituted because of difficulties of this nature.4In contrast, these women are required to fast on the seven fasts observed for a lack of rain (ibid.).[With regard to these fasts,] even though we are required to fast during the day, we are allowed to eat on [the preceding] night, with the exception of the fasts instituted for [a lack of] rain, as will be explained.5in Chapter 3, Halachot 3 and 5. Whenever we are allowed to eat on the night of a fast, whether a communal fast or an individual fast, a person is allowed to eat until dawn, provided he does not sleep. If he goes to sleep,6Ta'anit 12b emphasizes that this refers to a sound sleep. If one merely dozes off briefly, one may eat. he may not eat after arising.7even if he wakes up before dawn.The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 564:1) state that if, before going to sleep, a person stipulates that he desires to rise before dawn and eat, he is allowed to eat, and yet his fast is still considered to be a fast.
Just as the community should fast because of distress, so too, each individual should fast [when confronted by] distress.1The Maggid Mishneh interprets this as an obligation. Not only is fasting advisable for a person as a means to secure Divine favor, it is an obligation incumbent upon him. What is implied? When an individual to whom a person [feels close] is sick,2The B'nei Binyamin cites the example of King David, who fasted when the first son born to him by Batsheva fell ill (II Samuel 12:15-16). lost in the desert, or imprisoned, one should fast for his sake,3Significantly, the Rambam mentions fasting on behalf of another person. Surely, one should fast for one's own sake if that is possible. In many situations, however, were a person who confronts distress to fast, he would lack the strength to cope with the crisis he is facing. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 571:3.)Nevertheless, Ta'anit 8b gives advice regarding such a situation as well, counselling one to vow to fast in the future. This will be considered as if the person fasted already, as implied by Daniel 10:12, "From the day on which you first considered... fasting before your Lord, your words were heeded." ask for mercy for him in prayer, and say [the passage] Anenu4See Hilchot Tefillah 2:14. in5the blessing Shome'a Tefillah in all the Shemoneh Esreh prayers recited [that day]. One should not fast on the Sabbath, on festivals, on Rosh Chodesh, on Chanukah, or on Purim.6The Maggid Mishneh interprets this as a prohibition. Although a community may observe a fast on some of these days, as stated in Halachah 7, an individual may not. (See also Halachah 12.)Note the Lechem Mishneh, which raises questions about this decision, citing Hilchot Nedarim 3:9, where the Rambam states:If a person vowed to fast for several days, and those days included Chanukah and Purim, his vow is nullified and he should not fast. [The celebration of] these days was instituted by the Rabbis, and hence, it should be reinforced.One might infer that on the other days that should be celebrated because of the Torah's decree, a vow to fast takes precedence. Some commentaries, however, differentiate between a vow to fast and a commitment to fast made in the afternoon service of the preceding day, as mentioned in the following halachah. In practice, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 578:1) rules that one should not fast on these days.
Whenever an individual did not accept a fast [on the previous day] before sunset, it is not considered to be a fast.1Ta'anit 12a describes a person who fasts without having made such a commitment to be "a bellows full of air" - i.e., he receives no reward for refraining from eating. Note the Lechem Mishneh, who questions why such a person does not receive at least the reward of an hourly fast, as mentioned in Halachah 13.He explains that since the person desired his fast to be considered as a full day fast, it is impossible for him to receive the merit of an hourly fast. (See also Mishnah Berurah 562:42.)How does one accept a fast? After reciting the afternoon prayers,2i.e., after reciting the verse, Yih'yu l'ratzon, but before concluding one's prayers entirely.Significantly, the Maggid Mishneh notes that some texts of the Mishneh Torah state that one should make this commitment in the blessing Shome'a Tefillah, reciting the prayer Anenu. Although the Kessef Mishneh and others take issue with this concept, its authenticity is borne out by two responsa ascribed to the Rambam.In practice, the Shulchan Aruch 562:6 mentions both possibilities, while the Ramah states that it is preferable to make this statement after the Shemoneh Esreh. Interestingly, the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 127:2 fuses together both options, stating that one should make a mental resolve while reciting the blessing Shome'a Tefillah, and a verbal statement after reciting the verse, Yih'yu l'ratzon. one states, "Tomorrow I will fast," and resolves to do so.3From the Rambam's statements, it appears that a mental resolve is not sufficient. This is borne out by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 563:1). Note the ruling of the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) and the Mishnah Berurah 563:3, which state that, after the fact, it is sufficient to have made a mental resolve for one's commitment to fast to be binding. Although one eats at night, this does not detract from one's commitment to fast.4In contrast to what might be inferred from the Rambam's statements and the ruling of the Shulchan Aruch (ibid.), the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) and the Mishnah Berurah (ibid.) also mention that, after the fact, it is not necessary for the commitment to be made in the afternoon service. As long as it was made during the previous day, whether before the service (according to the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch only) or afterwards (according to both sources), it is binding.Similarly, if one resolved to fast for three or four days consecutively and accepts such a fast upon oneself, the fact that one eats each night does not detract from his fast.5provided that in the daylight hours one refrains from eating. It is unnecessary for him to state his intent on the afternoon before each succeeding day.6The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 562:8) questions whether this applies only when one intends to fast on several consecutive days. If, however, one intends to fast on several non-consecutive days - e.g., on a Monday, on the following Thursday, and on the following Monday - perhaps one is required to make a separate commitment for each day.With regard to the fasts of B'hav (the Monday-Thursday-Monday sequence of fasts which follow the festivals), the authorities agree that a single statement of intent is sufficient. In other instances, however, the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 127:1 and others require a separate commitment.The Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 127:3 mentions another leniency in this instance. Were a person to desire to retract his commitment to fast on the subsequent days, he is allowed, since he did not make an explicit statement to the effect that he would fast.This view is not, however, accepted by all authorities. The Mishnah Berurah 162:39 cites opinions that require him to honor his commitment on the subsequent days as well.
When a person accepted a resolution to fast on the following day, and indeed, did fast, and on the night [following his fast], changed his mind and decided to [continue his] fast on the following day, it is not considered a fast,1Note the comments of the Lechem Mishneh cited in the commentary on the previous halachah with regard to whether the person receives the rewards of an hourly fast. because he did not accept [this commitment] while it was still day.2This halachah, quoted from Ta'anit 11b, illustrates clearly the principles stated in the previous halachah. [This applies] even if he continued his fast overnight. Needless to say, if he ate and drank at night and woke up in the morning and desired to fast, it is not considered a fast at all.
A person who has a disturbing dream must fast1i.e., the Rambam sees this as an obligation. Other authorities differ, as mentioned in the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 127:18. on the following day, so that he will be motivated to improve his conduct, inspect his deeds, and turn [to God] in repentance.2As the Rambam mentioned at the beginning of this text, the purpose of fasting is not the fast itself, but the repentance evoked by the fast.He should undertake such a fast even on the Sabbath,3Berachot 31b states that a person who fasts on the Sabbath will cause a decree of seventy years standing against him to be rent.Shulchan Aruch HaRav 288:3 explains that such a person is allowed to fast on the Sabbath, because the disturbing nature of his dream will prevent him from appreciating the Sabbath pleasures. It is fasting and not indulgence that will bring such a person satisfaction.Note that the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 288:5) explains that at present, it is customary to fast on the Sabbath only for certain disturbing dreams, since we are not as aware of the proper interpretation of dreams as were the Sages of the previous generations. reciting the passage Anenu in each of the prayer services.4During the week, this passage should be recited in the blessing Shome'a Tefillah as usual. On the Sabbath, one should recite Anenu in the passage E-lohai Netzor (Maggid Mishneh). [This applies] even though he did not resolve on the previous day to fast.5This is the only exception to the rule mentioned in Halachah 10. The positive influences aroused by fasting are most effective immediately after the disturbing dream (Ta'anit 12b).When a person fasts on the Sabbath, he must fast on another day as well, [to atone for] nullifying [the mitzvah of indulging in] pleasurable activities on the Sabbath.6i.e., indulging in the Sabbath meals. Although one is obligated (or at least advised) to fast on the Sabbath, one is not absolved from the mitzvah of Sabbath pleasure. Hence, one must fast again in atonement.
A person may fast for several hours1i.e., although a person did not undertake a full day fast, the fact that he refrains from eating for several hours can be considered to be a fast. Although his merit is less than that of a person who undertakes and completes a full day fast, he still receives reward for his conduct. - i.e., that he not eat anything for the remainder of a day.2This phrase has its source in Ta'anit 12a and serves as a point of difference between the Rambam and other authorities (among them, the Ra'avad and the Maggid Mishneh). The others maintain that it should be rendered "provided he has not eaten anything the entire day." Based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Nedarim 8:1), the Rambam maintains that even if a person has eaten, if he does not eat for the remainder of the day, he receives merit for fasting. What is implied? A person was involved with his affairs and tended to his concerns without eating until noon or until three in the afternoon.3Although the person actually fasted for the entire day, it is considered only an hourly fast, since he did not make a commitment on the previous day. Should he make a decision to fast for the remaining hours of the day, he should fast for that time4and he is given merit for having fasted and recite [the passage] Anenu,5in the afternoon service because he accepted the fast before the hours of the fast.6Hence, the fact that he refrains from eating is considered significant. Similarly, if a person ate or drank and then began to fast for the entire day, it is considered to be a fast for several hours.7As mentioned above, this is a point of difference between the Rambam and other commentaries. In his responsa (Vol. I, Responsum 6), the Rashba writes that the Rambam altered his opinion in his later years and accepted the majority view. The majority opinion is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 562:10).Significantly, the Shulchan Aruch also mentions a more stringent view (that of Rabbenu Asher). According to this opinion, even an hourly fast has to be accepted on the previous day. Thus, an hourly fast refers to an instance when a person previously made a commitment to fast for half a day, and then decided to extend the fast for the entire day.It must be noted that at present, when individuals find fasting difficult, it is customary for a community to declare an hourly fast. In these instances, the members of the community make a commitment not to eat until the afternoon. They recite the afternoon service early, and each individual recites Anenu (Ramah, Orach Chayim 562:1; Mishnah Berurah 562:6). This passage is not, however, recited in the repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh by the chazan (Ramah, Orach Chayim 562:1).
Whenever a person is fasting, whether he is fasting because of an individual distress, a disturbing dream, or distress of a communal nature, he should not indulge in pleasures, act frivolously, or be happy and of good spirits. Instead, [his conduct] should be characterized by serious concern, [as if he were] in mourning, as [implied by Eichah 3:39]: "Over what should a living man be concerned? [Each] man over his sins."3Here again, the Rambam reemphasizes the theme stated at the beginning of the text, that the purpose of fasting is to motivate a person to sincere repentance. (See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 568:12.) The Chesed L'Avraham states that on such days a person should make a special effort to refrain from becoming angry and should try to carry out all his dealings with his colleagues in a pleasant manner.It is permitted for [a person who is fasting] to taste even a revi'it4But no more. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 567:1-2.) A revi'it is 66.4 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 150 cc according to the Chazon Ish. The Ramah writes that it is customary not to take this leniency on a communal fast day. of food, provided he spits it out without swallowing it.5Note the contrast to Hilchot Berachot 1:2 (D'var Torah). If [a person who is fasting] forgets and eats,6This discussion applies when he eats a k'zayit of food (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 568:1). Other authorities mention slightly larger amounts. he should complete his fast.7The Ra'avad states that this applies only when the person made a commitment to fast on that specific day. If he made a commitment to fast for one day without specifying the day, he is required to fast another full day afterwards. The Maggid Mishneh notes that this interpretation is borne out by the Rambam's own statements, Hilchot Nedarim 4:16. This is the ruling quoted in the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.).The Ramah adds that even when a person ate despite making a commitment to fast on a specific day, he is required to fast on another day as well. (See Mishnah Berurah 568:8.)See also the Mishnah Berurah 568:3, which states that on a communal fast, such a person may recite Anenu in the afternoon service. On an individual fast, however, he may not add this passage.
When an individual was fasting for a sick person, and the latter recovered, or because of a distressing situation, and the difficulty passed - he should complete his fast.8Note the contrast to a communal fast mentioned in the following halachah.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 569:1) states that if the person had accepted several fasts upon himself, he is obligated to complete them all, even when the distressing situation passes after he completes the first fast. If, however, the distressing situation passes before he has begun to fast, he need not fast (loc. cit.:2).A person who travels from a place where [the community] is fasting to a place where [the community] is not fasting should complete his fast.9Rashi (Ta'anit 10b) explains that in this instance, we follow the principle that the person is obligated to observe the stringencies applicable to the city which he left and those of the city to which he goes.The Lechem Mishneh questions whether the Rambam obligates the person to complete all the fast days accepted by the town he left, or if it is sufficient for him to complete the one fast alone.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 574:1) states that he is obligated to complete these fasts only when he intends to return to his original city. The Mishnah Berurah 574:1 states that this applies only when he did not explicitly accept these fasts. If he accepted the fasts himself, he is obligated to observe his commitment. One who travels from a place where [the community] is not fasting to a place where [the community] is fasting should fast together with them.10Since he did not accept the fast previously himself, he has no obligation to fast. Nevertheless, while he is in the city, he must join together with them. The Tur (Orach Chayim 574) quotes an opinion which states that even within the city he is not obligated to fast, if he can find a private place to eat. Nevertheless, neither the Rambam nor the Shulchan Aruch accept this leniency. If he forgets and eats and drinks, he should not let himself be seen, nor should he indulge in pleasures.11The intent is that one should not show that one is enjoying comfort while others are in distress. Ta'anit 10b derives this principle from Jacob's instructions to his children (Genesis 42:1  to avoid contact with Esau's and Ishmael's descendants. At that time, Jacob and his family had grain, but the others did not, and Jacob did not want to arouse ill-feeling.The Talmud (ibid. 11a) concludes its discussion of this issue with the following principle: Whoever separates himself from the community will not witness their being comforted. In contrast, one who joins in their distress will merit to join in their being comforted.
When a community is fasting for the sake of rain, and it begins to rain before noon, the people should not complete their fast.1This teaching, quoted from the Mishnah (Ta'anit 3:9), conveys an important lesson. We must always be ready to praise God for His mercies and to do so with joy. Instead, they should eat, drink, and gather together to read the Great Hallel,2The term Hallel means "songs of praise." Generally, Hallel refers to the passages from Psalm 113 to Psalm 118. The Great Hallel, in contrast, refers to Psalm 136 (Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 8:10).Pesachim 118a explains that this psalm is given this title because it contains the verse, "He grants bread to all flesh, His kindnesses are everlasting." This is the greatest praise of God, that although He utterly transcends our world, He provides each creation with its needs. for the Great Hallel is recited only when one's spirit is satisfied and one's belly is full.3Hence, we do not recite these verses of praise until we have eaten.If [the rains descended] after noon, since the majority of the day had passed in holiness,4i.e., in separation from material concerns they should complete their fast.5From this explicit teaching regarding rain, the Rambam infers that Similar [rules apply] if [a community]6in contrast to an individual, as mentioned in the previous halachah was fasting because of a distressing situation and the distress passed, or because of a harsh decree and the decree was nullified:7The Mishnah Berurah 569:5 quotes a difference of opinion among the Rabbis whether the leniency to be mentioned applies if the prayers of the community were not answered, but the reason for which they are fasting ceases to become relevant. For example, the people were fasting for the recovery of a sick person and he died. [If this occurred] before noon, they need not complete their fast;8The Ra'avad objects to this decision, explaining that the leniency of stopping a communal fast applies only with regard to the fasts associated with rain. In other instances, it is impossible to be certain that the distressing situation has entirely passed before noon.The Maggid Mishneh justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that although the Ra'avad's rationale is generally applicable, if - in fact - the distressing situation passes before noon, the fast may be halted.The Maggid Mishneh also states two reasons for the difference between an individual fast and a communal fast:a) Leniency was granted to the community because of the greater scale of the difficulty involved in such a fast;b) When the court called the communal fast, it had in mind that were the community's prayers to be answered, the fast could be terminated.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 569:1) rules that if the Torah scholars and the majority of the members of the community desire to continue the fast, all the members of the community are obligated to abide by their decision. after noon, they should complete their fast.9There are opinions which rule that if the community receives word after noon that the difficulty for which they are fasting was averted before noon, they need not continue their fast.
Whenever there is a communal fast that was instituted for a distressing circumstance, the [community's] court and [its] elders sit in the synagogue and review the conduct of the city's [inhabitants] from the time the morning prayers were concluded until noon. They remove the stumbling blocks that lead to sin. They give warnings, enquire, and investigate all those who pursue violence and sin, and [encourage them] to depart [from these ways]. Similarly, [they investigate] people who coerce others and humble them. They also occupy themselves with other similar matters.12This continues the theme developed by the Rambam at the beginning of the text, that the difficulties God brings upon a community should motivate them to repentance.Significantly, the Rambam does not mention reading the Torah in the morning service. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 566:2) mentions that the Torah should be read in the morning, as on other communal fasts, and mentions that the reading Vay'chal, which is usually read on a communal fast day, should be read on such an occasion as well.[This is what would happen] from noon until the evening: During the [third] quarter of the day, they would read the blessings and the curses in the Torah13This refers to the portion of Bechukotai (Leviticus, Chapter 26), and not the blessings and curses in the book of Deuteronomy (Rashi, Megillah 31a). (See also Hilchot Tefillah 13:18.)The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) states that at present, the custom is to read the portion Vay'chal as on other public fast days. (See also the Maggid Mishneh.) [as implied by Proverbs 3:11]: "My son, do not despise the instruction of the Lord, and do not reject His rebuke."14Significantly, Ta'anit 12b, the source for the division of the day in this manner, quotes a different proof-text, "And they read from the Torah scroll of their Lord" (Nechemiah 9:3 . The verse cited by the Rambam is mentioned by Megillah 31b in another context.This reflects a pattern common within the Mishneh Torah. Frequently, the Rambam cites verses independently of the manner in which they appear in the previous works of our Sages. As the haftarah,15At present, the custom is to recite the haftarah, Dirshu, as is done on other public fasts. It must be noted that Rav Kapach maintains that the Rambam's intent is not that these passages from the Torah and the Prophets should be read communally with blessings recited beforehand and afterwards, as is our present custom. Instead, the intent is that they should be read merely to motivate repentance in a manner similar to the recitation of Eichah on Tish'ah B'Av. These statements are based on Hilchot Tefillah 13:18. they would read a portion from the prophets appropriate to the distress [for which they are fasting].During the [fourth] quarter of the day, the afternoon service is recited, supplications are made, [the people] cry out [to God] and confess according to their capability.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
We should fast and sound the trumpets in the [following] situations of communal distress:1Having explained the nature of the obligations to fast and sound the trumpets in the previous chapter, the Rambam devotes this chapter to explaining the various situations in which these obligations apply.It must be noted that the advances of civilization have cushioned us against many of these natural disasters and it is not common for us to fast because of these situations. Nevertheless, the obligation for a community to fast in such times of distress applies even in the present age and in the diaspora. Thus, both the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch devote an entire chapter (576) to the discussion of fasts of this nature. Nevertheless, in the present era, even in times of genuine communal distress, it is infrequent for the Rabbis to declare a communal fast, because our physical stamina is not as great as that of the previous generations. because of the distress that the enemies of the Jews cause the Jews, because of [the passage of] an armed [force], because of a plague, because of a wild animal [on a rampage], because of various species of locusts,2Both Hebrew terms arbeh and chasil refer to species of locusts. The exact names of the species intended is a source of debate. because of the black blight and the yellow blight, because of falling buildings,3And because of earthquakes or hurricanes strong enough to cause buildings to topple. because of an epidemic, because of [the loss of our source of] sustenance, and because of rain [or a lack of it].4The lack of rain is the most common and the most widely discussed of all the phenomena mentioned. Nevertheless, it is precisely for that reason that it is discussed last. All the other phenomena are discussed briefly in this chapter, while the fasts concerning rain are discussed in several halachot in this chapter and in the following two chapters in their entirety.
A city afflicted by any of these difficulties should fast and sound the trumpets until the difficulty passes.5From Chapter 1, Halachah 5, it appears that the the intent is not to fast on consecutive days until the difficulty passes, but rather to fast on the Mondays and Thursdays in this period. Nevertheless, in times of great distress, the Rabbis occasionally ordained consecutive fasts. The inhabitants of the surrounding area should fast,6Only the people in the immediate vicinity of the distressed area are obligated to fast. Were we to be obligated to fast for difficulties in distant places, we would be constantly fasting, for there are, ל"ע, a multitude of difficulties throughout the world (Kessef Mishneh). Although this ruling is generally followed, there are times when public fasts are called when Jews in distant lands are in profound distress. In particular, this applies with regard to the Jews in Eretz Yisrael. (See Halachah 6.) but should not sound the trumpets. They should, however, ask for mercy on [their brethren's] behalf. We do not cry out [to God] or sound the trumpets on the Sabbath, as was explained,7Chapter 1, Halachah 6. See also Hilchot Shabbat 2:24. except in the case of distress over [the loss of our source of] sustenance. In this instance, we cry out [to God] even on the Sabbath,8In that halachah, it is mentioned that we also cry out to God in prayer on the Sabbath on behalf of people whose lives are in immediate danger - e.g., a besieged city or a ship in danger of sinking. but we do not sound the trumpets for this reason on the Sabbath.
What is meant by "the distress that the enemies of the Jews cause the Jews"? When gentiles come to wage war against the Jews, to impose a tax upon them,9This refers to an unfair tax imposed on the Jews alone, and not a tax on all the inhabitants of the country. to take land away from them, or to pass a decree [restricting the observance of our faith,]10Here too, mortal danger is involved. As the Rambam writes in Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 5:3, we are obligated to sacrifice our lives if gentiles pass a decree forbidding the observance of even a seemingly slight mitzvah (Kinat Eliyahu). even concerning merely a slight mitzvah, we should fast and sound the trumpets until [God shows] mercy.All the surrounding cities should fast, but they should not sound the trumpets unless they are doing so to gather the people together to come to their aid.11For the latter purpose, this is permitted even on the Sabbath, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 6.
What is meant by "[the passage of] an armed [force]"? This applies even to an armed [force] that has peaceful intentions. For example, gentiles were waging war against other gentiles and they passed a Jewish settlement.12This also refers to Jewish settlements in the diaspora. Although they are not at war with the Jews, this is still considered a time of distress13Although the Rambam proves his point through Biblical exegesis, anyone who reads the chronicles of the rampages of "friendly" armies through the various periods of Jewish history will realize how the passage of any armed forces can constitute communal distress for our people. for which we should fast, as [implied by the blessing, Leviticus 26:6] "A sword will not pass through your land." From this, it can be understood14I.e., since the lack of passage of an armed force is considered a blessing, it can be assumed that the passage of an armed force is the opposite. that seeing war is itself a sign of distress.
"Because of plague." What constitutes a plague? When three people die on three consecutive days15The Lechem Mishneh associates this ruling with the concept of chazakah, i.e., once a phenomenon is repeated three times, it can be presumed to recur. in a city that has 500 male inhabitants,16In one of his responsa, the Rambam writes that the numbers mentioned in this halachah also include gentiles. If a city is smitten by a plague, it will spread among all its inhabitants, whether Jew or gentile. This concept is quoted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 576:3). this is considered to be a plague. If [this many people] die on one day or on four days, it is not considered a plague.If a city has 1000 male inhabitants and six people die on three consecutive days, it is considered to be a plague. If [this many people] die on one day or on four days, it is not considered a plague. Similarly, this ratio should be followed [with regard to all cities, regardless of their size].Women, children, and older men who no longer work are not included in the census in this context.17The Maggid Mishneh notes that the Mishnah (Ta'anit 3:1) uses the expression רגלי for inhabitants. From Exodus 12:37, "600,000 men on foot (רגלי) aside from children," we know that the term refers to adult males able to perform military service (i.e., below the age of sixty). The commentaries explain that elderly men, children, and women are considered to have a weaker constitution than adult males. Hence, it is only when a significant number of adult males die that one may be sure that the deaths can be attributed to a plague. (See also the Jerusalem Talmud, Ta'anit 3:5.)
If there is a plague in Eretz Yisrael, [the Jews in] the diaspora should fast on [its inhabitants'] behalf.18Ta'anit 21b explains the rationale for this halachah: "If a Matron (Eretz Yisrael) is stricken, is it not likely that the maid-servant (the diaspora) will be stricken." The welfare of the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael is a matter of concern for all Jews.The Ramah (Orach Chayim 576:2) states that this applies only when the plague has affected Eretz Yisrael in its entirety. If there was a plague in one country and caravans frequently travel from it to another country, they should both fast,19The Magen Avraham 576:2 states that it is not customary at present to fast because of a plague. The nature of our physical constitutions has changed, and, were the inhabitants of a city afflicted by a plague to fast, it is more likely that they would succumb to it. Similarly, if caravans frequently travel from one city to another, there is the danger of infection. Therefore, even people in the distant city should not fast (Mishnah Berurah 576:10). even if they are distant from each other.20As mentioned in Halachah 2, in such an instance the surrounding cities should fast as long as there is no danger of infection (ibid.).
We do not fast because of a wild animal unless it is on a rampage.21We have translate the word משלחת in this manner so that its intent will be easily understood. It is, however, worthy to mention the interpretation of Rashi, Ta'anit 22a, who interprets the word as "sent from Heaven," i.e., a minister of Divine retribution. (See also the gloss of the Ra'avad to Halachah 9.) This implies that the animal is not acting according to its natural pattern and is therefore more dangerous than normal. What is implied? If it is seen in a city during the day, it is on a rampage.22A wild animal would not ordinarily enter a populated area during the daytime. Should it be seen in a field during the day, encounter two men and not flee from them, it is on a rampage.23Although wild animals occasionally wander through fields, their tendency is to flee when they encounter humans. If the field was close to a swamp, and it saw two men and pursued them, it is on a rampage; if it did not pursue them, it is not on a rampage.24As the Rambam mentions, it is common to find wild animals in a swamp. Therefore, the fact that they do not flee when discovered close to a swamp is not considered extraordinary. If, however, the animal pursues them, this is considered a departure from the norm and a sign that it was "sent from Heaven."If it was in a swamp, even if it pursued them, it is not considered to be on a rampage25It is not out of the ordinary for a wild animal to pursue intruders to its natural home. unless it slew both of them and ate [only] one.26The fact that the animal ate only one of the men is a clear indication that it was motivated by reasons other than natural hunger when it slew the men. If, however, it ate both of them in a swamp, it is not considered to be on a rampage, for this is its place, and it slew them because it was hungry, not because it was on a rampage.27The Mishnah Berurah 576:23 states that a deep forest is governed by the same laws as a swamp.
When houses are constructed in deserts or in other abandoned areas,28Ta'anit 22a mentions this teaching in connection with hunters' huts. since this is a natural place for bands of wild animals, [it is only when] an animal climbs to the top of a roof and takes a baby from a cradle that it is considered to be "on a rampage." Otherwise, it is not considered to be "on a rampage." [The fault lies rather] with these people who endangered their lives and came to a place where wild animals live.
When there is a rampage of swarming animals29Reptiles as opposed to mammals. - e.g., snakes or scorpions - or swarming birds that cause injury,30The Ra'avad protests, stating that if these animals kill humans, that is a sign that they were chosen as "messengers of God," and fasting should be instituted because of them. Although the Maggid Mishneh does not accept this ruling, the Kessef Mishneh takes note of the term "that cause injury," and explains that the Rambam himself would accept the Ra'avad's view when it has been demonstrated that these animals have deadly intentions. In his Beit Yosef and Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 576:7), Rav Yosef Karo quotes and even extends this interpretation. we do not fast or sound the trumpets because of them. We do, however, call out [to God] without trumpet blasts. Needless to say, [this applies to swarms of] hornets, mosquitoes, and the like.
"Because of various species of locusts." Even if only one fleet31Our translation of kanaf is taken from Rav Kapach, whose interpretation is based on the Arabic term used by the Rambam for that word in the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. 1, Chapter 43. In his commentary, he also sheds light on the tendencies of the various insects mentioned by the Rambam. Others interpret kanaf as referring to a single locust. is seen in all of Eretz Yisrael, [the entire country] should fast and sound the trumpets because of them.32Locusts multiply speedily. If one fleet is seen, we can assume that soon there will be swarms of them that will cover the entire countryside. [The same applies if] even the slightest amount of govai appear.33Govai is also a species of locusts. They are more dangerous than the others For chagav,34Chagav is also a species of locusts; they are smaller than the others and do not pose a serious danger to the crops. At present, we are unfamiliar with the exact names of all the various species of locusts. Therefore, it is customary to fast and sound the trumpets whenever any locusts are sighted (Ra'avad, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 576:9). however, we do not fast or sound the trumpets; nevertheless, we do call out [to God] without sounding the trumpets.
"Because of the black blight and the yellow blight."35We have followed the translation of "The Living Torah" (Deuteronomy 28:22 , for it appears appropriate in the immediate context. Both these terms appear to refer to agricultural afflictions that affect crops and spread from field to field. Others, however, render either or both of these terms as damage to crops from a searing hot wind or burning sun. As soon as these affect the crops, even if they affect only a small amount of grain,36As mentioned, the fear is that the contagion will spread from field to field. For this reason, the entire region in which the blight is found is required to fast (Ramah, Orach Chayim 576:8). [an area the size of] the opening of an oven,37I.e., a portion of the field the size of the opening of an oven. Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Ta'anit 3:5). The Maggid Mishneh and others offer a different explanation, "the amount of grain necessary to bake enough bread to fill the mouth of an oven." a fast is called and the trumpets are sounded.
What is meant by "because of falling buildings"? When many38The Mishnah Berurah 576:11 quotes the Ritba as explaining that this refers to the walls of three homes. strong walls that are not located on the banks of a river39If, however, the houses are located on a river bank, the fact that the walls fall can be attributed to the erosion of their foundations by the water. begin to fall in a city,40In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Ta'anit 3:4), the Rambam writes that this refers to walls that fall without any apparent reason. this is a difficulty [that warrants] fasting and the sounding of the trumpets.Similarly, we should fast and sound the trumpets because of earthquakes and strong winds that destroy buildings and kill people.
What is meant by "because of an epidemic"? When one illness - e.g., a throat infection41The Hebrew אסכרה is related to the root סוכר, which means "close." It refers to a throat infection which forces a person to keep his mouth closed (Ramah, Orach Chayim 576:5). or polio42Our translation, admittedly somewhat of an extension, is based on the commentary of Rav Sa'adiah Gaon on Deuteronomy 28:22. Rashi describes it as a disease that causes a person to run a very high fever and to constantly thirst for water; perhaps typhoid. - affects many people in a city and people die because of this illness,43The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 576) questions why the Rambam does not mention that the situation warrants a fast only when three people die in three days, as he did with regard to plague (Halachah 5). He concludes that there is a more severe element to these epidemics than plague, and even if fewer than three people die each day, a communal fast should be held. The Ramah (Orach Chayim 576:5) quotes this as halachah.The Lechem Mishneh explains the difference between the two as follows: Plague refers to an instance when death hits the city before there is an outbreak of illness. In contrast, the epidemic mentioned in this halachah refers to an instance where both illness and death are manifest in the city. this is considered to be a matter of communal distress. A fast is called and the trumpets are sounded.Similarly, if running sores44Literally, "a moist itch" - i.e., a skin inflammation that is aggravating and produces lymph secretions. Bava Kama 80b states that we cry out to God for relief from this ailment, even on the Sabbath. The Lechem Mishneh questions why the Rambam does not quote this concept. affect the majority of the community, it is considered like boils, and they should fast and sound the trumpets. For a dry itch [which affects the entire community], we merely cry out [to God].
What is meant by "because of [the loss of our source of] sustenance"? That the price of the articles on which the livelihood of most of the inhabitants of a city depend - e.g., linen goods in Babylon and wine and oil in Eretz Yisrael - has fallen, and the trade in these articles has decreased to the extent that a merchant must offer them for sale at only 60% of their real value in order to be able to find a purchaser. This is considered a communal distress [that warrants] us to raise a clamor45Although we have translated מתריעים as "sound the trumpets" throughout the text, we have altered our translation in this halachah, because in Halachah 2, the Rambam explicitly states that we call out to God on the Sabbath because of the loss of our source of sustenance, but we may not sound the trumpets. The word מתריעים is used as a quote from Bava Batra 91a. and cry out to God,46Significantly, Bava Batra (ibid.) does not mention fasting for this reason. Accordingly, the Ritba (Ta'anit 19b) states that this is not cause for a public fast. The ruling of most authorities (see Mishnah Berurah 576:29) is that a communal fast should be called. even on the Sabbath.47As mentioned in Halachah 2, this and the instances when people's lives are in immediate danger are the only times when such prayers are offered on the Sabbath.
What is meant by "because of rain"? When the rainfall is so abundant that it causes difficulty, prayers should be recited. There is no greater difficulty than this, that homes should fall and become the graves [of their inhabitants].48Ta'anit 22b mentions this with regard to Babylon, which is a valley and whose homes are not built with sturdy foundations.Note the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch, who quote the Rambam's statements (Orach Chayim 576:11), but also mention (577:1) a less extreme instance of abundant rainfall, in which the rains prevent the land from being tilled properly.In Eretz Yisrael, we do not pray [for the cessation of the rains] when there is an abundant rainfall. It is a mountainous land, and its houses are made of stone.49Hence, abundant rainfall does not pose a danger. An abundance of rain is of benefit,50For there are few rivers, and the winter rains are the primary source of water throughout the entire year. and we should not fast to cause a benefit to pass.
If, after grain has already sprouted, the rains cease51This and the following two halachot, in contrast to the fasts for lack of rain mentioned in Chapter 3, describe a situation in which rain has already begun to descend and then ceases. To a certain degree, since crops have already sprouted, this situation is more distressing than if the rains had never descended at all. These three halachot are quoted without emendation in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:8). and the produce begins to dry, the people should fast and cry out [to God] until rain descends or the produce dries out entirely.52At which point, there would be no purpose in continuing the fast.Similarly, if the Pesach season, which is the time when the trees flower in Eretz Yisrael, arrives and there is no rainfall,53At this time, more water is necessary to allow the trees to produce fruit. the people should fast and cry out [to God] until rain that is fit for trees descends or until the season passes.
Similarly, if the festival of Sukkot54This and the previous halachah apply only in Eretz Yisrael where the rains are seasonal in this manner. In other countries, different principles apply.Most texts of the Jerusalem Talmud (Ta'anit 3:2) which is the direct source for this halachah, state Atzeret (Shavuot), rather than Sukkot. The Rambam's choice of this version of the text can be explained in that it is very unlikely for rain to descend in the summer (the season of Shavuot) in Eretz Yisrael. In contrast, it is possible for rain to descend on Sukkot, although this is slightly earlier than usual. Thus the Rambam chose the version that is closer to the prevailing circumstances. arrived and a sufficient amount of rain had not descended to fill the storage vats, the irrigation ditches, and the caverns, the people should fast until sufficient rain descends for the storage vats.If the people have no water to drink, they should fast for rain at all times whenever there is no water to drink, even in the summer.55The Ritba states that, in such circumstances, one should call out for Divine mercy, even on the Sabbath.
When the rains ceased for more than forty days in the rainy season, it is a drought, and the people should fast and cry out [to God] until the rains descend or until the rainy season passes.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
[We should adhere to the following procedure when] no rain at all has descended from the beginning of the rainy season onward:1Ta'anit 6a relates that the rainy season in Eretz Yisrael begins in the month of Marcheshvan. The third of the month is considered to be the earliest time rain can be expected to descend.In other lands, such fasts should be held when, ע"ל, they are necessary according to the local needs and climate (Halachah 10; Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 575:9). If the seventeenth of Marcheshvan arrives and no rains have descended,2The rains have already been delayed. To hasten the manifestation of Divine blessing the Torah scholars should begin to fast,3and repent. Nevertheless, the situation is not serious enough to alarm the people at large. [starting on] a Monday4i.e., the Monday closest to the seventeenth of Marcheshvan, for, as explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 5, a series of communal fasts should always begin on a Monday. [and continuing on] the [following] Thursday, and the [following] Monday.5These fasts begin at dawn; work, anointing oneself, wearing shoes, and sexual relations are permitted.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:1) emphasizes that these fasts are considered individual fasts and not communal fasts. All students [of the Torah] are fit to accept these [fasts] upon themselves.6At certain times, ordinary students are advised to refrain from accepting stringencies intended for the Torah sages, lest they appear overly proud. In this instance, however, Ta'anit 10b suggests that all students of the Torah accept these fasts if possible.
If Rosh Chodesh Kislev arrives without the rains having descended,1The drought is considered serious enough to warrant that the court should decree three communal fasts, [starting on] a Monday,2If, however, Rosh Chodesh Kislev itself falls on a Monday, the fast is not held until the Monday of the following week. [and continuing on] the [following] Thursday, and the [following] Monday.3As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 5, when necessary the court ordains a series of three fasts to evoke Divine favor. It is permitted to eat and drink at night.4until dawn, or until one goes to sleep. (See Chapter 1, Halachah 8.) The men serving in the [weekly] priestly watch5See Hilchot Klei Hamikdash 3:9, which states that the prophet Samuel and King David ordained 24 priestly watches, which rotated in the Temple service. Each week, a different watch would serve. should not fast with them because they are involved in the Temple service.6This leniency includes even the members of the families who are not obligated to serve in the Temple on that day, for many sacrifices may be brought unexpectedly and they may be called to assist in the service. Were they to be fasting, they would not be able to perform this service properly (Ta'anit 2:6).On these days, the entire people should enter the synagogue, pray, cry out [to God],7i.e., the prayer Anenu is recited in the Shemoneh Esreh, and other supplicatory prayers are recited. and make supplications as is customary on all fasts.8The trumpets, however, are not sounded.
If these [fasts] pass without [their prayers] being answered,1By choosing this wording (quoted from Ta'anit 1:6), the Rambam teaches us a lesson in the service of God. It could have said, "If these fasts pass without rain having descended." The Rambam and the Mishnah, however, want to emphasize that the ultimate reason why rain descends or does not descend is not dependent on natural factors, but rather on God's mercies. the court should decree an additional three communal fasts.2of a more severe nature.There are some texts of the Mishneh Torah that read "[starting on] a Monday, [and continuing on] the [following] Thursday, and the [following] Monday," and other texts read "[starting on] Thursday, [and continuing on] the [following] Monday, and the [following] Thursday."The difference between these two versions depends on the difference of opinion mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 5, concerning the question: Should the second series of fasts begin on a Thursday or not? On these fasts, we eat and drink while it is still day [on the day before the fast], as on the fast of Yom Kippur.3I.e., as on Yom Kippur, we are forbidden to eat and drink after sunset. The Magen Avraham 575:2, however, explains that unlike Yom Kippur (Hilchot Sh'vitat Esor 1:6), there is no obligation to begin the fast before sunset.The men serving in the [weekly] priestly watch should fast for part of the day,4because these fasts are more severe and also because, at the beginning of the day, it was less likely that they be called to assist in the Temple service but should not complete the fast.5lest they become weak and be unable to serve in the Temple when called. The men of the beit av6those individuals who are involved in the Temple service that day - should not fast at all - for the above reason. - those individuals who are involved in the Temple service that day - should not fast at all.On a fast for which we are required to cease eating while it is still day, once a person has ceased eating7concluded his meal and decided not to eat any more,8for this is considered as if he accepted the fast upon himself he may not change his mind and eat, even though there is still time during the day.9The Ramban and the Maggid Mishneh differ with the Rambam on this point and maintain that as long as one has not made an explicit statement to the fact that one has accepted the fast, one is allowed to change one's mind and eat. The rationale for their ruling is that, as explained above, on these fasts, in contrast to Yom Kippur, there is no obligation to begin the fast before sunset.With regard to the laws of Tish'ah B'Av - and from there we can extrapolate to the instance at hand - the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 553:1) accepts the Ramban's ruling. The Mishneh Berurah 553:2, however, states that a mental resolve to accept the fast is also sufficient to cause one to be forbidden to eat further.
On these three fasts, all people are forbidden1As the Rambam mentions in Chapter 1, Halachah 4, all the fasts mentioned in this text are Rabbinic in origin. The only fast mentioned in the Torah is Yom Kippur. Accordingly, when the Sages instituted communal fasts, they used Yom Kippur as a paradigm. Therefore, just as it is forbidden to perform work, wash, anoint oneself, engage in sexual relations, or wear shoes on that holy day, these activities were also forbidden on other fast days.Nevertheless, on fast days other than Yom Kippur, certain leniencies were instituted, and these restrictions were not enforced to the same degree as on Yom Kippur. to perform work during the day,2Ta'anit 12b brings support for this concept from the exegesis of Joel 2:15: "Sanctify the fast day; call an assembly, and collect the elders." The word for "assembly," עצרה, resembles the Biblical name for the holiday of Shavuot, עצרת. Just as it is forbidden to work on Shavuot, so too, it is forbidden to work on a fast day. but they are permitted during the [previous] night.3Ta'anit, ibid., continues using exegesis to show that, in contrast to Shavuot, working on the night of a fast day is permitted. It is forbidden for a person to wash his entire body in hot water,4but one may wash one's body with cold water (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 575:3). but one may wash one's face, hands, and feet.5even in hot water (loc. cit.). For this reason, the bathhouses are closed.6to ensure that this prohibition is observed.It is forbidden to anoint oneself.7for the sake of pleasure. One may, however, do so to remove filth.8or for medicinal reasons (Mishnah Berurah 575:7). Sexual relations are forbidden,9This applies even on the night of a woman's ritual immersion (Mishnah Berurah 575:8). as is wearing shoes in a city. One may, however, wear shoes on a journey.10for making a journey without proper shoes is extremely uncomfortable. We pray in the synagogues,11As opposed to the following sequence of fasts, whose prayer services are held in the streets of the city, as explained in Chapter 4. cry out [to God], and make supplications as is customary on all fasts.12The trumpets, however, are not sounded.
If these [fasts] pass without [their prayers] being answered, the court decrees another seven communal fasts, [beginning on the next] Monday, [and continuing as follows]: Thursday, Monday, Thursday, Monday, Thursday, and Monday.It is only on these seven fasts1The Rambam, based on his interpretation of Ta'anit 14a, does not consider the nature of the situation during the first two sets of fasts serious enough to warrant that these women fast. During these seven fasts, in contrast, the drought has become a real danger. Hence, they are also required to fast.This ruling is not accepted by many other authorities. Most follow Rashi's interpretation of the passage, which requires these women to fast during the second set of three fasts only. The rationale for that ruling is that he feels that the drought has already become serious enough to warrant their fasting during the second set of three fasts. In principle, these women should also fast during the final seven fasts, but the Rabbis felt that such a long period of fasting would be too taxing for them. Hence, they restricted their fasts to the second set alone. This is the ruling quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:5). that pregnant and nursing women2The same applies to other individuals who are ill and would suffer from the fast. are required to fast. [On the other fast days,] although they are not obligated to fast,3It is significant to mention the statement of the Ramah (Orach Chayim, ibid.), "It is forbidden for them to be stringent with themselves and fast." they should not indulge in delicacies. Instead, they should eat only what is necessary to maintain their babies.
On these seven fasts the men serving in the [weekly] priestly watch should fast for the entire day. The men of the beit av should fast for a portion of the day, but should not complete their fast.4Because of the severity of the situation, the leniencies that applied in the previous sets of fasts were withdrawn, and the men of the priestly watch who were not required to serve in the Temple that day were required to complete the fast. Even those who were required to serve in the Temple on that day (the men of the beit av) were obligated to fast for a portion of the day. All the prohibitions in force during the second set of fasts are also in force during these last seven fasts.5Nevertheless, with the exception of the factors mentioned in the following halachah, these fasts are also not more severe. Hence, the leniencies with regard to work, washing, anointing oneself, and wearing shoes mentioned in the previous halachah also apply.
There are additional dimensions [of severity] to these [fasts]:1The first four points mentioned in this halachah are described at length in Chapter 4. it is on these alone that we sound the trumpets,2as required in a time of distress (Chapter 1, Halachah 1). In Chapter 4, Halachot 14-17, the manner in which the trumpets are sounded is explained. pray in the street of the city,3See Chapter 4, Halachah 1 call on an elder to admonish the people [and motivate] them to repent from their [evil] ways,4See Chapter 4, Halachah 2 add six blessings in the morning5See Chapter 4, Halachot 7-14 and afternoon prayers6Although the Talmud does not mention that these six blessings were added in both prayer services, were this not to be the case, it would have been proper to state that they were added only in the morning service (Maggid Mishneh). - thus, we recite twenty-four blessings,7More precisely 25. The Rambam is quoting the Mishnah (Ta'anit 2:2), which refers to the era before the nineteenth blessing was added to the daily Shemoneh Esreh. (See Hilchot Tefillah 2:1.) and close the stores.8with the leniencies to be mentioned. The stores are closed to intensify the people's consciousness of the fast (Rashi, Ta'anit 14b).On Mondays, the doors of the stores9From the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:4), the Ramah, and other commentaries, it appears that the leniencies mentioned here refer only to stores that sell food, but not those that carry other merchandise. are left slightly ajar towards evening10but they should not be opened completely and they may be opened [for business].11to allow people to purchase food for the evening meal. There are, however, certain restrictions; for example, the products in the store may not be taken out to the store's display area (Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Ta'anit 1:6). On Thursdays, [the stores] may be opened the entire day [to allow people to purchase food] in honor of the Sabbath.12The following restriction should be adhered to: If a store has two entrances, one entrance should be opened and the other closed.13From the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (loc. cit.), it appears that this restriction applies on Mondays as well as on Thursdays. If the store has a display area14a bench for the storekeeper and/or customers to sit and a place for merchandise to be placed in front of it, it may be opened in the normal manner on a Thursday without concern [for the above restriction].15Rashi, Ta'anit 14b, explains that the display area prevents the entrances to the store from being seen. Hence, there is no difficulty in leaving them both open.
If these [fasts] pass without [their prayers] being answered,1no other communal fasts are ordained, as explained in the following halachah. The fact that no other fasts are called does not mean that the community may return to their ordinary pattern of conduct. Quite the contrary: the period is regarded as one of Divine disfavor. Hence, we should minimize our commercial activity,2The restrictions that follow were instituted to reduce joy. In contrast, this restriction appears to include all commercial activity, even that which is not directed associated with happiness (Lechem Mishneh). Seemingly, the intent is that since the time is not favorable, it is unwise to invest money and effort in commercial endeavors (Kinat Eliyahu).There are, however, authorities who maintain that here also, the restriction involves only commercial activity associated with joy - e.g., preparing for a child's wedding or purchasing valuable articles, but ordinary business activities are permitted (Mishnah Berurah 575:18). construction projects associated with joy3e.g., those involving decorative patterns on the ceilings and walls - In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Ta'anit 1:7), the Rambam states that this refers to ornate buildings erected by the wealthy. There is, however, no restriction on ordinary building projects necessary for one's everyday purposes.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:7) describes the prohibition as applying to "buildings of joy." The Mishnah Berurah 575:18 (based on the Tur) explains that this refers to all buildings that are unnecessary and are constructed for beauty and comfort. - e.g., those involving decorative patterns on the ceilings and walls, plantings4In this instance, the differences between Hebrew and English have caused our translation to be non-literal. In Hebrew, the word נטיעה refers to both planting trees and setting up tents. associated with joy5e.g., that of myrtle trees - In his Commentary on the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam explains that this refers to spice and flower gardens planted for pleasure. One may, however, plant orchards for the purpose of growing fruit. There are no restrictions on such activity. - e.g., that of myrtle trees, and the erection of tents.6This also refers to tents set up for festive purposes; there is no restriction against pitching tents for ordinary purposes.We also minimize betrothals and marriages,7The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 575) interprets this to mean that a person who has fulfilled the mitzvah of fathering children should not become betrothed or marry at all. unless one has not fulfilled the mitzvah of being fruitful and multiplying.8This involves fathering a son and a daughter. (See Hilchot Ishut 15:4.) Whoever has fulfilled this mitzvah is forbidden to engage in sexual relations in a year of famine.9Ta'anit 11a derives this concept from Genesis 41:50, which states that Joseph's children were born before the famine. One can infer that during the famine he did not engage in relations.This restriction was instituted because it is proper to reduce our indulgence in pleasure in a time of communal distress.We also reduce the exchange of greetings, and the Torah sages should not exchange greetings at all.10Needless to say, frivolity and jests are also forbidden. Rather, [they should conduct themselves as people] who have been rebuffed and ostracized by God.11A person under a ban of ostracism is forbidden to greet others or to return greetings. Hence the above prohibition.Ta'anit 14b states that it is proper to cover one's head with a cloak as mourners do. Nevertheless, neither the Rambam nor the Shulchan Aruch quotes this obligation (perhaps because even mourners did not generally observe this custom after the Talmudic era). When a common person greets them, they may return the greeting12lest the person become offended (Rashi, Ta'anit 14b); but when doing so, they should respond in a weak and concerned tone.13so that he will appreciate that the greeting was not in place.
The Torah scholars alone continue to fast,1The commentaries do not mention whether it is preferable that all the students of the Torah join in these fasts, as was stated in Halachah 1. One might presume, however, that they should. Indeed, the entire community should have been required to observe these fasts, and it is only because the Rabbis thought that this would be too difficult for them that they were released from this obligation. [beginning on the next] Monday, [and continuing on the following] Thursday and Monday2As mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 5, and in Halachah 3 of this chapter, there are opinions that maintain that if a cycle of fasts ends on Monday - as does the cycle of the seven communal fasts - the next cycle of fasts may be started on the Thursday of that week. Other opinions - and these are followed by the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah - maintain that all cycles of fasts begin on Monday. Hence, if a cycle of fasts ends on Monday, the next cycle begins on the following Monday.This difference of opinion involves much more than one day, for these fasts are decreed in series of three. Thus, according to the opinion followed by the standard texts, the scholars would fast three days in every two weeks for the duration of the period. The other view, in contrast, would require them to fast on every Monday and Thursday. [in this manner] until the month of Nisan3Ta'anit 1:7 states that these fasts should continue "until Nisan passes." In the Jerusalem Talmud's explanation of this Mishnah, it is explained that this refers to Nisan - as determined in relation to the spring season4which always begins in the month of Nisan. In Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 9:3, the Rambam defines the beginning of spring as the time the sun enters the zodiac constellation of the goat. This is the beginning of April according to the secular calendar. - passes. This is not, however, required of the community. No more than these thirteen communal fasts are decreed because of a lack of rainfall.5Ta'anit 14b considered thirteen fasts as the maximum a community should be required to undertake for this reason. More fasts would be considered an excessive burden. (Significantly, according to Kabbalah, the number thirteen is identified with God's attributes of mercy.)As mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 4, this limit applies only regarding fasts decreed because of a lack of rain. When communal fasts are decreed because of other distressing circumstances, we should continue fasting until our prayers are answered.When these individuals fast until Nisan passes, they are allowed to eat at night6i.e., the fast begins at dawn. See Chapter 1, Halachah 8. and are allowed to perform work, to wash, to anoint themselves, to engage in sexual relations, and to wear shoes as on other fast days.7These restrictions apply only on Yom Kippur, Tish'ah B'Av, and the latter ten fasts decreed because of a lack of rain. They do not fast on Rashei Chodashim, nor on Purim.8As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 9, an individual should not fast on these days. Although many individuals may participate in these fasts, they are still deemed individual - and not communal - fasts.After the month of Nisan, as determined in relation to the spring season, passes9i.e. - one month after the spring season begins - i.e., when the sun enters the sign10i.e., the zodiac constellation of the bull11This is at the beginning of the secular month of May. - they should cease fasting. Since no rain has descended from the beginning of the year, rain in this season would be a sign of a curse.12Since the land has already become parched, the rain will be of no benefit. For God to display His beneficence at such a time, after the time had passed when the rain could have helped, is a further sign of Divine disfavor (Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro).
Where does the above apply? In Eretz Yisrael and in similar lands.6As mentioned, in Eretz Yisrael, the rainy season should begin at the start of Marcheshvan. In contrast, in places where the rainy season begins before or after the seventeenth of Marcheshvan,7The Mishnah Berurah 575:24 states that this applies even if a country's rainy season begins after Shavuot. Note also Hilchot Tefillah 2:16-17, in which the Rambam discusses the question of requesting rain in lands other than Eretz Yisrael. This question is particularly relevant in regard to countries in the southern hemisphere. when the time [for the rains] arrives and no rain descends, individuals should [begin a series of three] fasts, [starting on] Monday [and continuing on the following] Thursday and Monday. They should not fast on Rashei Chodashim, Chanukah, or Purim.8For individual fasts should not be held on these days.Afterwards, they should wait approximately seven days.9This is approximately the time between the conclusion of the three fasts begun on the seventeenth of Cheshvan, and the beginning of the second series of fasts after Rosh Chodesh Kislev. (See Kessef Mishneh.) If rain does not descend, the court should decree thirteen communal fasts, according to the order described above.10As explained in the following halachah, there are, however, certain differences in the severity of the fasts.
[The following laws apply to] all the communal fasts decreed in the diaspora: It is permitted to eat during the night,11Until dawn. See Chapter 1, Halachah 8. and they are governed by the same laws as other fasts.12See Halachah 9. Thus, there are no prohibitions against work, washing, anointing oneself, sexual relations, and wearing shoes on these fasts. A communal fast resembling Yom Kippur is decreed only in Eretz Yisrael,13Ta'anit 11b states, "There is no communal fast in Babylon other than Tish'ah B'Av" - i.e., in Babylon, there is no fast as severe as Yom Kippur, with the exception of Tish'ah B'Av. Significantly, Tosafot (loc. cit.) and Rashi (Pesachim 54b) explain that this refers to the land of Babylon, where rains were always plentiful and there was never a need for fasts.The Rambam - and other commentaries and authorities, including the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575:10) - explain that the law which applies to Babylon, applies to the entire diaspora. It is not that there can be no need for a communal fast of this nature, but rather that, outside of Eretz Yisrael, the Jewish court lacks the authority to declare such a fast. (See the Jerusalem Talmud, Ta'anit 2:1.)The Ramban explains that the reason for the lack of authority is that there is no Nasi in the diaspora, and the declaration of a communal fast would require his approval. The Rashba states that the lack of authority stems from the lack of judges who have received the semichah (ordination) extending back in a chain to Moses. (See Hilchot Sanhedrin, Chapter 4.) According to these opinions, even in Eretz Yisrael today it is impossible to ordain communal fasts of this nature. Note the gloss of the Birkei Yosef on the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 575), where this concept is discussed and a rationale is given for fasting in Eretz Yisrael today.(Homiletically, it can be explained that the unity necessary to establish a community is possible only in Eretz Yisrael. In contrast, in the diaspora our greater involvement with material affairs prevents the establishment of true oneness among our people.) and only because of [a lack of] rain.14Thus, such severe fasts are not ordained for any of the other difficulties mentioned in the second chapter. Although the Ramban differs with the Rambam on this point, the Rambam's view is accepted as halachah. This refers to the latter ten fasts - i.e., the middle series of three fasts and the final series of seven fasts.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
On each and every day of the final seven fasts for lack of rain, we pray in the [following] manner. The ark is taken out to the street of the city, and all the people gather together, while dressed in sackcloth.Ashes are placed on the ark and on the Torah scroll to heighten the grief and humble [the people's] hearts. One of the people should take some ashes and place them on the head of the Nasi and on the head of the chief justice, so that they will be ashamed and repent. [The ashes] are placed on the place where one puts on tefillin. Everyone else should take ashes and place them on his [own] head.
Afterwards, one of the wise elders [of the community] stands before them while they are sitting. If there is no wise elder, a man of wisdom should be chosen. If there is no man of wisdom, a man of stature should be chosen.He should speak words of rebuke to them, telling them: "Brethren, it is not sackcloth and fasting that will have an effect, but rather repentance and good deeds. This is evident from [the story of] Nineveh. It is not stated with regard to the people of Nineveh, 'And God saw their sackcloth and their fasting,' but rather, 'And God saw their deeds' [Jonah 3:10]. Similarly, in the words of the prophetic tradition, it is written, 'Rend your hearts and not your garments' [Joel 2:13]." He should continue in this vein according to his ability until they are humbled and turn [to God] in complete repentance.
After this person has completed his words of rebuke, the community stands up to pray. They should choose a person suitable to serve as a leader of prayer on such fast days.1A chazan is not considered a mere functionary. Rather, since he is the leader of prayer, it is hoped that he will motivate all the members of the community to sincere prayer. Moreover, his personal merits can influence the standing of the community as a whole and cause their prayers to be acceptable more readily. If the person who spoke the words of rebuke is suitable to [lead the congregation in] prayer, he should.2Since he is the wisest and most distinguished member of the community, it would be appropriate for him to lead the prayers. If not, another person should be chosen.
Who is fit to [lead the congregation in] prayer on these fasts? A person who leads the prayers frequently and who frequently reads the Torah, the Prophets, and the Sacred Writings. He should have children, but lack means and have work in the field.None of his children, nor any member of his household, nor any of his relatives who are dependent upon him, should be transgressors; rather, his house should be empty of sin; nor should any unfavorable report have been made concerning him during his childhood.He should be humble, appreciated by the community, and have a voice that is appealing and sweet. If he possesses all these virtues and is also an elder, this is most desirable. [Nevertheless, even when he] is not an elder, since he does possess these virtues, he is fit to [lead the congregation in] prayer.
The chazan should begin and recite the Shemoneh Esreh [in the usual fashion]3The Tur (Orach Chayim 579) maintains that changes are made in the previous blessing, S'lach lanu, as well. To the usual text of that blessing, we add the confessional prayers recited on Yom Kippur. until the blessing Go'el Yisrael.4Go'el Yisrael, "the Redeemer of Israel," is the seventh blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh. Instead of reciting that blessing in its usual manner, the following additions should be made.The Maggid Mishneh notes that the Rambam apparently had a different version of the Mishnah, Ta'anit 2:3. According to the version of the Mishnah in common use at present, the six passages mentioned above form the body of the six blessings added on these fasts. In contrast, according to the simple interpretation of the Rambam's text, all these passages should be added in the blessing Go'el Yisrael. Significantly, almost all other authorities follow the former view. He then recites Zichronot5Verses recalling God's remembrance of the Jewish people. (See Hilchot Shofar 3:8-9.) and Shofarot6Verses recalling the unique influence of the shofar. (See Hilchot Shofar, ibid.) that relate to the difficulty [facing the people].7I.e., the chazan does not recite the same verses that are recited in the Rosh HaShanah prayers, but different verses, more appropriate to the present circumstances. He should also recite the psalms, "I called to God in my distress and He answered me" (Psalm 120), "I lift up my eyes to the mountains" (Psalm 121), "Out of the depths, I called to You, O God" (Psalm 130), "A prayer of the afflicted, when he becomes faint" (Psalm 102).
[In this blessing,] he recites supplicatory prayers according to his ability.8I.e., according to the Rambam, there is no set text for these prayers, and their text is chosen by the chazan. He says, "Please, behold our affliction and wage our battle; speed our redemption."9This is the text of the blessing Go'el Yisrael that is recited every day. He then recites supplications and states at the conclusion of these supplications, "He who answered Abraham our patriarch at Mount Moriah,10I.e., at the binding of Isaac. The Jerusalem Talmud (Ta'anit 2:4) questions the nature of this reference. The intention surely is not that Abraham prayed to God to spare Isaac, for he was totally willing to sacrifice him to fulfill God's will. Instead, this refers to a short prayer that Abraham recited after God told him not to sacrifice his son. In this prayer, he implored God to remember the merit of his act and come to the assistance of his descendants whenever they would be in distress. God "answered Abraham" and acquiesced. will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You, God, Redeemer of Israel."
He then begins to add six blessings; these are added one after the other. In each of them, he recites supplicatory prayers which include pleas [for mercy] and verses11I.e., according to the Rambam, there is no set text for the main body of these six blessings. Instead, it must be chosen by the chazan. The conclusions for each of these blessings are listed in the halachot that follow. from the Prophets and the Holy Writings with which he is familiar.12As mentioned above, for this reason it is necessary that the chazan be familiar with the entire Bible. He concludes each of these blessings with the concluding phrases mentioned below.
For the first of these blessings, he concludes: "He who answered Moses and our ancestors at the Red Sea13There they prayed to be saved from their Egyptian pursuers. (See Exodus 14:15 and Rashi's commentary.) will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You God, who remembers the forgotten."14Rashi, Ta'anit 15a, explains that this conclusion is appropriate because after the many years of exile in Egypt, the Jews despaired of being redeemed and considered themselves to have been forgotten by God.This differs from the conclusion of the Zichronot blessing on Rosh HaShanah, which is "...who remembers the covenant." Significantly, even the Tur (Orach Chayim 579) and the authorities who differ with the Rambam and maintain that the six passages mentioned in Halachah 5 form the body of these six blessings agree with the Rambam concerning the conclusion of this blessing.See also Rashi (Ta'anit 15a), who explains the connection between each of the blessings and the correspondent passage of these six.
For the second of these blessings, he concludes: "He who answered Joshua at Gilgal15This refers to Joshua's prayers that he be able to conquer Jericho. That city fell after the people encircled it blowing the shofar. Joshua's prayer is mentioned as Gilgal because that was the site of the encampment of the Jewish people at that time. (See Joshua, Chapter 5.) will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You, God, who hears the sounding [of the trumpets]."16This is the conclusion of the Shofarot blessing on Rosh HaShanah, according to the Rambam. The Tur has a different text in both places. See note 14.
For the third of these blessings, he concludes: "He who answered Samuel at Mitzpeh17This refers to Samuel's prayer that the Jews be rescued from the Philistines. (See I Samuel 7:8-10.) will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You, God, who hears an outcry."18The verses cited in the previous note speak of Samuel "crying out to God."
For the fourth of these blessings, he concludes: "He who answered Elijah at Mount Carmel19This refers to Elijah's confrontation with the prophets of Baal. Elijah prayed to God to accept his offering. Afterwards, he also prayed on Mount Carmel for rain. (See I Kings, Chapter 18.) will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You, God, who hears prayer."20Despite the use of this conclusion for one of the blessings of the daily Shemoneh Esreh, it is also employed here.
For the fifth of these blessings, he concludes: "He who answered Jonah in the belly of the fish21After fleeing from the fulfillment of the mission which God had assigned him, Jonah was thrown to the sea and swallowed by a large fish. Out of the fish's belly, he called out in prayer to God. (See Jonah, Chapter 2.) will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You, God, who answers in a time of distress."22Jonah began his prayer, "I cried out to God in my distress and He heard me."
For the sixth of these blessings, he concludes: "He who answered David and Solomon, his son, in Jerusalem23Rashi, Ta'anit 15a, explains that this refers to David's prayer, II Samuel 21:1, after the land suffered a famine for three successive years. Solomon's prayer refers to the prayer he uttered at the dedication of the Temple, I Kings 8:22-53, in which he beseeched God to hear the prayers of the Jews in their time of need. will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day. Blessed are You God, who has mercy on the land."24Although King David and King Solomon preceded Elijah and Jonah chronologically, the prayers of the former are chosen as the subject for this concluding blessing, because the intent of their prayers resembles that of the people praying in these communal fasts, that God have mercy on His people and on His holy land in a time of distress (Tosafot, Ta'anit 16b).The people all answer Amen after each of these blessings25The Rambam emphasizes this point, because when these blessings are recited in the Temple, the people respond in a different manner, as explained in Halachah 15. in the same manner as Amen is recited after all blessings.26See Hilchot Berachot 1:13-14.
For the seventh of these blessings, he begins, "Heal us, O God, and we will be healed," and concludes the Shemoneh Esreh in its usual order. The trumpets are sounded. This is the order of prayer [on these fasts] in all places.
When [the people] would pray according to this order in Jerusalem, they would gather on the Temple Mount, before the eastern gate, and pray in this manner. When the chazan reached the passage, "He who answered Abraham,..." he would say, "Blessed are You God, our Lord, the Lord of Israel, for all eternity. Blessed are You God, Redeemer of Israel." They would respond to him, "Blessed be His name and the glory of His kingdom for ever and ever."The attendant to the synagogue would tell those who blow [the trumpets]: "Sound a teki'ah, priests. Sound a teki'ah." The person reciting the prayers then repeats, "He who answered Abraham our patriarch at Mount Moriah, will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day." Afterwards, the priests [blow the trumpets,] sounding a teki'ah, a series of teru'ot, and a teki'ah.
Similarly, in the second of these blessings, which is the first of the six [blessings] that are added, the chazan concludes the blessing, "Blessed are You, God, our Lord, the Lord of Israel, for all eternity. Blessed are You, God, who remembers the forgotten." [The people] would respond to him, "Blessed be His name and the glory of His kingdom for ever and ever."The attendant to the synagogue would tell those who blow [the trumpets]: "Sound a teru'ah, sons of Aaron.27"Sons of Aaron" is analogous to "priests." Sound a teru'ah."28The repetition of the phrase "Sound a teru'ah," implies that a series teru'ah, teki'ah, teru'ah is sounded. The person reciting the prayers then repeats, "He who answered Moses and our ancestors at the Red Sea, will answer you and will hear the sound of your outcry on this day." Afterwards, the priests [blow the trumpets,] sounding a series of teru'ot, a teki'ah, and a series of teru'ot.
Similarly for each [of these] blessings: for one, he announces "Sound a teki'ah," and for the other, he announces "Sound a teru'ah," until all seven blessings are concluded. Thus, at times, the priests blow a series, teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah, and at times, they blow a series, teru'ah, teki'ah, teru'ah.29The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam on this point, explaining that when the announcement "Sound a teki'ah" was made, only a teki'ah was sounded. Conversely, when the announcement "Sound a teru'ah" was made, only a teru'ah was sounded. The B'nei Binyamin (based on his text of the Tosefta, Ta'anit 1:10) mentions a third opinion, that for all seven times, they blew a series teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah. Seven series are blown.This order is followed only on the Temple Mount. When they blow teki'ot and teru'ot there, they sound the trumpets and the shofar together, as explained.30See Chapter 1, Halachah 4. Only in the Temple is the shofar sounded together with the trumpets. Outside the Temple, only the trumpets - or according to the Maggid Mishneh, either the trumpets or the shofar - is sounded.
In all places31I.e., throughout Eretz Yisrael and also in the diaspora, not only on the Temple Mount as in the previous halachot. where these seven fasts are decreed, all the people go out to the cemetery after praying and weep and offer supplications, as if to say, "Unless you return from your [sinful] ways, you are like these deceased people."32This emphasizes the theme expressed several times in this text, that distress and relief from it are dependent on our virtuous conduct or lack thereof.Significantly, Ta'anit 16a gives two rationales for this custom: the one quoted by the Rambam, and a second one, "so that the dead will intercede on our behalf." That passage continues, "What is the difference between these two opinions? A non-Jewish cemetery."Rashi explains that in a non-Jewish cemetery, there is no concept of the dead interceding on our behalf. Nevertheless, even such a place is sufficient to communicate the message "Unless you return...." In light of this, the Lechem Mishneh mentions that if there is no Jewish cemetery available, the community may go to a non-Jewish cemetery. Significantly, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 579:3) quotes this as halachah. (Note, however, the Mishnah Berurah 579:4.)In each of the communal fast days that are decreed because of distressing circumstances,33This includes all the thirteen fasts declared because of rain and all communal fasts decreed because of the distressing circumstances mentioned in Chapter 2. As the Rambam explicitly states (Hilchot Nesiat Kapayim 14:2), Ne'ilah is not recited on commemorative fasts such as Tish'ah B'Av or the Seventeenth of Tammuz. It is, however, recited on Yom Kippur. the Ne'ilah service34The word Ne'ilah means "closing." It refers to "the closing of the gates of heaven for the setting sun" (Hilchot Tefillah 1:7). This service is added just before sunset. Thus, on communal fasts, four services are recited.The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 4:1) states that this extra prayer service was added because "All those who increase their prayers are answered." is recited in all places.
When the rains descend [in response to] their [prayers] - to what extent is it necessary for them to descend in order for the community to cease fasting?35See Chapter 1, Halachah 16. When they descend a handbreadth into parched earth, two handbreadths into ordinary earth, and three handbreadths into cultivated earth.36In all three instances, a similar amount of rain is required. Parched earth does not allow the water to penetrate easily. Conversely, cultivated earth is broken up and thus allows for greater penetration.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
There are days when the entire Jewish people1All healthy adult men and women fast2It appears that the Rambam considers these fasts to be obligatory in the present era. Based on his interpretation of Rosh HaShanah 18b in his Commentary on the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 1:3, the Rambam explains that in the era of the Second Temple, these fasts were of an optional nature. After the destruction of the Temple, however, every Jew is required to observe them. This obligation is also explicitly stated by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 549:1, 550:1). because of the calamities that occurred to them then,3Here, the Rambam employs the same principle he developed at the beginning of this text regarding fasts instituted because of difficulties of an immediate nature, with regard to these fasts which were instituted for these national calamities.Fasting in and of itself is not a purpose. Fasting can, however, serve to arouse [their] hearts and initiate [them in] the paths of repentance.4This is the intent of the fasts, and not merely refraining from eating. For this reason, the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 121:1 harshly reproves those who fast, but spend their days taking pleasure strolls and being involved in other forms of leisure activity. This will serve as a reminder of our wicked conduct and that of our ancestors, which resembles our present conduct and therefore brought these calamities upon them and upon us.5Although these tragedies took place in previous generations, we share the responsibility for them. The Jerusalem Talmud (Yoma 1:1) states, "Every generation in which the Temple is not rebuilt should consider it as if it was destroyed in its days." By reminding ourselves of these matters, we will repent6The word נשוב, translated as "we will repent," literally means, "We will return." Teshuvah involves a return to one's fundamental self, becoming aware of the fundamental Divine nature one possesses.Such a process relates to these commemorative fasts, which on the surface are associated with undesirable elements, but possess a positive core, as reflected in the Rambam's statements at the conclusion of this chapter that in the era of the Redemption, all these fast days will be transformed into days of rejoicing and celebration. and improve [our conduct], as [Leviticus 26:40] states: "And they will confess their sin and the sin of their ancestors."7See Hilchot Teshuvah 1:1-2, 2:2, where the Rambam associates the mitzvah of teshuvah with confession.
These days are the following:The1The Rambam lists these fasts, not in the order in which the events which they commemorate transpired, nor according to the order in which they are mentioned in Zechariah 8:19 (see Halachah 4), but rather in the order of the year, beginning from the month of Tishrei. Third of Tishrei. This is the day on which Gedaliah ben Achikam2The governor appointed by Nebuchadnezzar to supervise the land of Judah. The Jews who were not exiled rallied around him, and it appeared that there would be hope of maintaining a Jewish settlement in the land (Jeremiah, Chapters 40-41). was slain3According to the Radak (Jeremiah 41:1 , Gedaliah was slain on Rosh HaShanah. Because a fast could not be held on that sacred day, the commemoration of his murder was postponed until the first available weekday. and the ember of Israel that remained was extinguished, causing their exile to become complete.4After Gedaliah's murder, the Jews remaining in Eretz Yisrael feared the wrath of the Babylonians and fled to Egypt, leaving Eretz Yisrael devoid of Jewish leadership and possessing very few Jewish inhabitants. (See Jeremiah, Chapters 41-43.)The Tenth of Tevet. This is the day Nebuchadnezzar, the wicked, the King of Babylon, camped5The Hebrew term סמך, which the Rambam [and the prophet Ezekiel 24:2 ] employ, usually has a positive connotation, meaning "support." Perhaps this is also an allusion to the concept that ultimately these commemorative fasts have a positive intent, as mentioned at the conclusion of the chapter. against Jerusalem and placed the city under siege.6Our commemoration of this fast also marks two other undesirable events which occurred in the preceding days: the death of Ezra, the scribe, and the translation of the Torah into Greek at the demand of King Ptolemy (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 580).The Seventeenth of Tammuz. Five tragedies took place on this day:7Ta'anit 29a states: Undesirable events are gathered together on a day appropriate for them. The spiritual nature of the day is such, that the potential for such tragedies to occur is greater.a) The Tablets were broken;8When Moses descended with the Tablets of the Ten Commandments after being on Mount Sinai for forty days, he beheld the Golden Calf that the Jews had made. In wrath, or out of his concern for the Jewish people (see Rashi, Exodus 32:19 , Moses broke the Tablets.b) In the First Temple, the offering of the daily sacrifices9The korban tamid (Numbers 28:1-8) was nullified;10Even during the siege of Jerusalem, the Jews would offer the daily sacrifices. Despite the famine in the city, they would offer two lambs each day as sacrifices. As the siege persisted, their supply of lambs dwindled, and on the Seventeenth of Tammuz, there no longer were any lambs to sacrifice (Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro, Ta'anit 4:6).Significantly, other commentaries (Rashi, Tiferet Yisrael) on the Mishnah identify the nullification of the sacrifices on the Seventeenth of Tammuz with different events in our history.c) [The walls of] Jerusalem were breached in [the war leading to] the destruction of the Second Temple;d)11Jeremiah 39:2 states that in the destruction of the First Temple, Jerusalem's walls fell to the Babylonian conquerors on the ninth of Tammuz. Nevertheless, it is the destruction of the city by the Romans that we commemorate by fasting, because the effects of that destruction are more severe (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 549:2). The Rabbis did not institute a fast for the Ninth of Tammuz as well, for it was felt that this would be an excessive burden for the people (Mishnah Berurah 549:4).Furthermore, according to the Jerusalem Talmud, Ta'anit 4:8, because of the many difficulties suffered by the Jewish people, they miscalculated the date, and, even during the destruction of the First Temple, it was on the Seventeenth of Tammuz that Jerusalem's walls were breached. Apostmos, the wicked,12a Greek official in the Second Temple era (Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro) burned a Torah scroll;13The Meiri identifies this as the Torah scroll written by Ezra the Scribe. This scroll was kept in the Temple Courtyard and was used to check the precision of the other scrolls. In this manner, he attempted to undermine the entire Torah tradition. ande) He14Apostmos erected an idol in the Temple.15Others interpret this as a reference to the idol erected by King Menasheh in the First Temple. (See the Jerusalem Talmud, Ta'anit 4:6.)
On the Ninth of Av, five tragedies occurred:It1Here, also, we see the reflection of the concept mentioned above, that undesirable events are gathered together on a day appropriate for them. was decreed that the Jews in the desert would not enter Eretz Yisrael;The2The spies sent by Moses returned to him on the eighth of Av, bearing a malicious report about Eretz Yisrael. That night the Jewish people wept, fearful about their future. God told them, "Tonight, you have wept without reason. I will designate this night as a night of weeping for generations" (Ta'anit 29a). First and the Second Temples were destroyed;A3Ta'anit 29a reconciles a seeming contradiction in chronology between II Kings 25:8-9 and Jeremiah 52:12-13, explaining that the Babylonians first entered the Temple on the seventh of Av. They reveled and wrought havoc there until the afternoon of the ninth of Av, when they set fire to the building. The fire continued burning throughout the tenth of Av.The Sages (ibid.) do not cite a specific source for the tradition that the Second Temple was also destroyed on that day. Nevertheless, the tradition is universally accepted. large city named Betar was captured. Thousands and myriads of Jews inhabited it.4This was Bar Kochba's capital in his war against the Romans, 52 years after the destruction of the Temple. They were ruled by a great king whom the entire Jewish people and the leading Sages considered to be the Messianic king.5See the Rambam's comments concerning Bar Kochva, Hilchot Melachim 11:3. The city fell to the Romans and they were all slain, causing a national catastrophe equivalent to that of the Temple's destruction.6The extent of the carnage that accompanied Betar's fall was awesome. Gittin 57a states that rivers of blood flowed into the Mediterranean Sea, forty miles away.On that day designated for retribution, the wicked Tineius Rufus7a Roman officer plowed the site of the Temple and its surroundings,8According to Ta'anit 29a, this took place while Rabban Gamliel was living, shortly after the destruction of the Temple. thereby fulfilling the prophecy [Micah 3:12], "Zion will be plowed like a field."9The citation of this prophecy communicates a fundamental point: that the destruction of Jerusalem was not an end in its own right. Just as a field is plowed to produce crops, Jerusalem was plowed to allow the city to blossom into its ultimate fulfillment in the era of the Redemption.
These four fasts are explicitly mentioned in the prophetic tradition [Zechariah 8:19]: "The fast of the fourth [month],1In this verse and in the Rambam's reference to it, the months are counted from Nisan onward. the fast of the fifth [month]...." "The fast of the fourth [month]" refers to the Seventeenth of Tammuz,2Zechariah lived after the destruction of the First Temple and is referring to the fasts instituted because of its destruction. Accordingly, the fast of Tammuz in his time was the on ninth of the month, as mentioned above. The Rambam mentions it as referring to the seventeenth, because this is when the fast of the breaching of the city's walls is observed at present. which is in the fourth month; "the fast of the fifth [month]," to Tish'ah B'Av, which is in the fifth month; "the fast of the seventh [month]," to the Third of Tishrei which is in the seventh month; "the fast of the tenth [month]," to the Tenth of Tevet, which is in the tenth month.3Note the positive references to this prophecy at the conclusion of the chapter.
And the entire Jewish people follow the custom of fasting at these times and on the Thirteenth of Adar,1The Maggid Mishneh interprets this phrase to mean that our obligation to fast on these days is a custom accepted by the Jewish people after the destruction of the Second Temple. As mentioned above, others interpret this obligation as stemming from the exegesis of the verse from Zechariah mentioned in the previous halachah, as found in Rosh HaShanah 18b.Our translation follows the standard published texts of the Mishneh Torah. Many authoritative manuscripts make a small change in the wording, which would cause the lines to be rendered as: "And in these times, the entire Jewish people follow the custom of fasting on the Thirteenth of Adar." in commemoration of the fasts that [the people] took upon themselves in the time of Haman,2The Rabbis question precisely which fasts are being commemorated. Some maintain that since the Thirteenth of Adar was a day of battle on which the Jews waged war against their enemies, they fasted at that time to arouse Divine mercy (Maggid Mishneh). Others maintain that it is improper to fast in a time of war, lest this sap one's strength, and instead the Jews merely vowed to fast, but conducted the actual fasts at a later time.A third opinion maintains that this refers to the three-day fast that Esther called before approaching Achashverosh. Although this fast was held in the month of Nisan, it is commemorated in connection with the Purim holiday. as mentioned [in Esther 9:31]: "the matter of the fasts and the outcries."If3The Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 141:2 writes that the commemoration of this fast makes us conscious of how God "hears each person's prayer in his time of distress when he fasts and repents... as He did on behalf of our ancestors in those days."The fast of the Thirteenth of Adar is also referred to as Ta'anit Esther, "the fast of Esther."When the fast of Esther became a formal part of Jewish observance is a matter of question. It is not mentioned in the Talmud. Furthermore, Megillat Ta'anit, a text which mentions all the fasts and festivals observed in the Talmudic era, does not mention this fast and speaks of the thirteenth of Adar, the day on which the fast of Esther is observed, as a day of celebration, the Day of Nicanor, marking the defeat of the Greek general of that name in the Hasmonean wars. It was not until after the destruction of the Temple that the observance of the dates mentioned in Megillat Ta'anit was nullified. This would appear to indicate that the observance of the Fast of Esther was of later origin.In contrast, there is evidence pointing to the establishment of the Fast of Esther early in the Talmudic period. The Sheiltot of Rav Achai Gaon, Parshat Vayakhel 67, speak of the observance of the Fast of Esther in the time of the Mishnah. Even if this teaching is not accepted as historical fact, we can glean from it that in Rav Achai's time, shortly after the conclusion of the Talmud, the fast was already a long-standing custom.Significantly, because of the difference in status between it and the other commemorative fasts, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 686:2) rules far more leniently in regard to this fast than in regard to the others. the Thirteenth of Adar falls on the Sabbath, the fast is pushed forward4It is not postponed until after the Sabbath, because Purim is Sunday and the celebration of Purim cannot be postponed. Nor is it appropriate to hold this fast after Purim. and held on Thursday, which is the eleventh of Adar.5As the Rambam mentions, if the date of a commemorative fast falls on Friday, the fast is held on that day. Nevertheless, it is improper for a fast that is not scheduled for such a day to be held then, since this is not proper reverence for the Sabbath (Maggid Mishneh). If, however, any of the [dates of] other fasts fall on the Sabbath, the fasts are postponed until after the Sabbath.6Megillah 5a states that the rationale is "we do not bring close [the recollection of] Divine retribution." If [the dates of] these fasts fall on Friday, we should fast on Friday.7According to the fixed calendar we follow at present, this is a rare occurrence. Only the Tenth of Tevet (in the northern hemisphere a relatively short fast) can fall on Friday. Even this does not happen frequently.On all these fasts, the trumpets are not sounded, nor is the Ne'ilah service recited.8These measures are taken only in times of current distress. The passage Vay'chal9beginning Exodus 32:11. is read from the Torah, however, in both the morning and the afternoon services.10See Hilchot Tefillah 13:18. As mentioned there, on Tish'ah B'Av a different passage (beginning Deuteronomy 4:25  is read in the morning. Significantly, the Rambam does not mention the custom of reciting the haftarah in the afternoon service.On all these [fasts], with the exception of Tish'ah B'Av, we may eat and drink at night.11Similarly, on these days, work, wearing shoes, washing, anointing oneself, and sexual relations are permitted (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 550:2).
When the month of Av enters,1Significantly, the Rambam does not mention any restrictions from the period beginning the Seventeenth of Tammuz. During this period, it is the Askenazic custom (see Ramah, Orach Chayim 551:2,4; Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 122:1-3) to observe certain restrictions - e.g., prohibitions against marrying, against reciting the blessing Shehecheyanu, and against cutting one's hair. From the beginning of Av, however, other restrictions are also added. we reduce our joy.2The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 551:1-2) state that the restrictions mentioned by the Rambam in Chapter 3, Halachah 8, are applicable during this period. During the week of Tish'ah B'Av,3from the Sabbath before the fast onward.According to Ashkenazic custom, all the activities mentioned by the Rambam are forbidden from Rosh Chodesh Av onward. it is forbidden to cut one's hair,4or to shave, even in a manner permitted by halachic authorities (Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 122:3) to do laundry,5it is customary to observe this prohibition even if one does not intend to wear the garment until after the fast (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 551:3). or to wear a pressed garment6We have used a modern translation for the Hebrew term גהוץ. In Talmudic times, it referred to smoothing out the creases of a garment with a flat stone (Aruch).The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 551:3) also prohibits wearing clothes that are merely laundered, even if they have not been pressed. There are halachic authorities who will grant leniencies in this context with regard to underwear and the like. - even one of linen7Linen garments will not appear as distinguished after washing as those of other fabrics (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 551). - until after the fast.8As mentioned in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 558:1) and commentaries, these and the following restrictions should be followed for a certain amount of time on the Tenth of Av, as well, to commemorate the fact that the Temple continued burning on that day as well.According to the Ashkenazic custom, in which these practices are observed from Rosh Chodesh onward, there are certain leniencies, depending on one's community, with regard to wearing laundered and pressed clothes on the Sabbath before Tish'ah B'Av.It has already been accepted as a Jewish custom not to eat meat9or fowl. Bava Batra 60b states that it would have been proper for the Jews to refrain from eating meat and drinking wine at all times in mourning over the loss of the opportunity to partake of the sacrificial meat and the loss of the wine libations. The Sages felt, however, that such a decree would be too stringent for the people to observe and hence, did not institute it. or enter a bathhouse during this week until after the fast.10The prohibition applies only to washing for pleasure. Needless to say, washing associated with a mitzvah - e.g., a woman in preparation for her ritual immersion or washing necessary for hygienic purposes - is permitted. There are places that follow the custom of refraining from slaughtering from Rosh Chodesh Av until after the fast.11This custom has not been accepted throughout the Jewish community. Today, animals are slaughtered so that those who do not observe the restriction against eating meat will at least eat kosher meat, and so that meat will be available for others after the fast.
All [the restrictions of] Tish'ah B'Av1mentioned in Halachot 10 and 11 apply at night as well as during the day. One may not eat after sunset [of the previous day];2Similarly, if one resolved to accept the fast beforehand, one may no longer eat (Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Ta'anit 4:6). The Ramah (Orach Chayim 553:1) states that only when one makes a verbal statement to this effect is the resolution binding. [it is forbidden to eat] between sunset and the appearance of the stars,3Shabbat 34b explains that the Sages were undecided whether this period of time, known as beyn hash'mashot, should be considered to be part of the night or the day. Hence, it is necessary to be stringent both at the entry and the departure of a day associated with halachic restrictions. as on Yom Kippur.4In his Commentary on the Mishnah, loc. cit., the Rambam writes that, as on Yom Kippur, we are obligated to include a certain portion of the previous day in all the restrictions observed on that day.Significantly, some of the foremost commentators on the Mishneh Torah (the Maggid Mishneh and the Radbaz) either were not aware of this statement or maintained that the Rambam changed his mind on this issue, for they ruled that no such obligation applies in connection with Tish'ah B'Av. Their opinion is accepted as halachah at present (Mishnah Berurah 553:3).One should not eat meat or drink wine at the meal before the fast.5the seudah hamafseket. Even a person who does not observe the custom of refraining from these foods during the week of Tish'ah B'Av (or the Nine Days according to Ashkenazic custom), should refrain from partaking of them in this meal. This meal should be characterized by mourning and sadness, and these foods bring happiness.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 554:25) associates Ezekiel 32:27: "And their sins will be upon their bones" with eating meat and drinking wine at this meal. One may, however, drink grape juice that has not been left [to ferment] for three days.6For it has no alcoholic content, and will not lead to happiness. One may eat salted meat that was slaughtered more than three days previously.7The prohibition against eating meat was derived from the fact that with the Temple's destruction, the sacrifices were nullified. Since no sacrificial meat could be eaten on the third day and afterwards, this restriction does not apply to such meat (Mishnah Berurah 552:5).It must be emphasized that the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 552:2) and the later authorities explain that, at present, it is customary to refrain from partaking of even these foods at this meal. One should not eat two cooked dishes.8This restriction was instituted because when two or more dishes are served, a meal is considered important, and partaking of such a meal is inappropriate at this time (Rabbenu Asher).The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 552:3-5) discusses in detail what is excluded by the phrase "two cooked dishes."
When does the1need to observe the restrictions mentioned above apply? When one ate [this meal] in the afternoon on the day preceding Tish'ah B'Av.2The governing principle for this and the previous and following halachot is that unlike the meal before the fast on Yom Kippur, the meal before the fast of Tish'ah B'Av is somber in nature. The atmosphere of mourning that prevails throughout the fast has already begun, and therefore, eating a normal meal should be out of the question. If, however, one eats a meal before noon, although this is the last meal one eats before the fast, one may eat all that one desires.3For then, one is still far removed from the fast itself.When the day before Tish'ah B'Av falls on the Sabbath,4the obligation to honor the Sabbath surpasses the need to commemorate the destruction of the Temple. Therefore, one may eat and drink to the full extent of one's needs, and one may serve even a meal resembling Solomon's feasts at one's table.5There are some authorities (Hagahot Maimoniot) who recommend observing certain practices associated with mourning at the third Sabbath meal. Their opinions are not, however, accepted as halachah.There is, however, one aspect in which this third Sabbath meal differs from the way this meal is eaten throughout the year. Generally, we are allowed to continue this meal into the night. When the fast of Tish'ah B'Av begins on Sunday, however, we must cease eating at sunset. (See Ramah, Orach Chayim 552:10.)Similarly, when Tish'ah B'Av falls on the Sabbath,6since the observance of the fast is postponed, there is no need to minimize one's Sabbath joy, and one need not withhold anything at all.7Significantly, the Rambam does not mention any mourning rites in connection with such a day. In contrast, the decisions of the Ramah (Orach Chayim 554:19) reflect the following principles. All expressions of mourning that would be noticed by the public should be forbidden. Those practices of mourning which are private in nature - e.g., the prohibition of sexual relations - should be observed.
This is the rite observed by the people as a whole who cannot endure more. In contrast, the rite observed by the pious of the earlier generations was as follows:4Ta'anit 30a,b describes Rabbi Yehudah bar Ilai as eating this meal in this fashion. A person would sit alone between the oven and the cooking range. Others would bring him dried bread and salt. He would dip it in water and drink a pitcher of water while worried, forlorn, and in tears, as one whose dead was lying before him.The scholars should act in this or a similar manner.5At present, our custom is to eat a filling meal in the late afternoon. Afterwards, shortly before the fast, one eats a slight meal with bread and eggs dipped in ashes. Nevertheless, anyone who feels able to endure the fast when eating less is encouraged to do so. Three people should not sit together, so as not to become obligated in a zimun. (See Ramah, Orach Chayim 552:9; Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 123:3.) We never ate cooked food, even lentils, on the day before Tish'ah B'Av, except on the Sabbath.
Pregnant women and those who are nursing1although absolved from fasting on the other commemorative fasts must complete their fasts on Tish'ah B'Av.2Needless to say, they or any other person who feels that fasting will threaten their health may eat and drink. (See Ramah, Orach Chayim 554:6.)[On this day,] it is forbidden to wash in either hot or cold water;3for the sake of pleasure. One may, however, wash one's hands to remove filth or for ritual purposes. (See the Shulchan Aruch and commentaries, Orach Chayim 544:9-10.) it is even forbidden to place one's finger in water.4without any valid reason. One may, however, pass through water to greet one's teacher or to watch one's crops (ibid.:12-13). Similarly, a woman is allowed to wash food that she will serve children, even though her hands also become wet (Mishnah Berurah 554:19).The Rambam does not elaborate on these leniencies here, because he has already mentioned them at length with regard to Yom Kippur in Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor 3:1-7. Similarly, anointing oneself for the sake of pleasure,5in contrast to anointment for hygienic or medicinal reasons wearing6leather shoes,7is forbidden. One may, however, wear shoes made from other materials. Even leather shoes are permitted in certain instances. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 554:17.) and sexual relations are forbidden,8See Mishnah Berurah 554:37, where the question is raised whether one may touch one's wife or not. as on Yom Kippur.9With this phrase, the Rambam refers the reader to his discussion of these prohibitions and the leniencies that may be granted in Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor.In places where it is customary to do work,10The word "work" in this context does not refer to the thirty-nine labors prohibited on the Sabbath, but rather to concentrated activity that would distract one's attention from mourning (Mishnah Berurah 554:43). one may work.11If, however, a person desires to refrain from working because of the unique nature of the day, he may. In places where it is not customary to work, one should not.12The Mishnah Berurah 554:45 states that this is the custom in the Ashkenazic community at present. Torah scholars everywhere should remain idle on this day.13For they should set examples to the people at large. Note the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Ta'anit 4:6, where he writes that "Performing work on this day is very disgraceful." Our Sages said,14Ta'anit 30b "Whoever performs work on this day will never see a sign of blessing forever."15Rashi and Tosafot interpret this as referring to the work performed on Tish'ah B'Av itself. This interpretation is quoted in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 554:24).
Torah scholars1Indeed, this applies also the people as a whole. Torah scholars are mentioned because they are expected to be more sensitive to the tragedy of our loss on Tish'ah B'Av.The Rambam's choice of wording is based on his interpretation of the Tosefta, Ta'anit 3:11, "Chaverim should not exchange greetings on Tish'ah B'Av," for the term chaverim is often used as a reference to Torah scholars. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 554:20), however, interprets chaverim in its literal sense, that it means "friends." should not exchange greetings on Tish'ah B'Av.2Nor should gifts or other social amenities be exchanged (Mishnah Berurah 554:41). Instead, they should sit in agony and frustration like mourners.3Nothing should be done to distract one's attention from the loss.With the above expression, the Rambam also explains the rationale for these laws. When the Sages ordained the commemoration of Tish'ah B'Av, they structured its observance to resemble Yom Kippur in certain contexts, and to resemble the laws of mourning in others. If a common person greets them, they should reply to him4lest he become upset, but this should be done weakly, in a somber tone.5So that he also appreciates the nature of the day. See also Chapter 3, Halachah 8.On Tish'ah B'Av, it is forbidden to read from the Torah, the Prophets, or the Sacred Writings [or to study] the Mishnah, Torah law, the Talmud, or the Aggadic works.6Because "the precepts of God... make the heart glad" (Psalms 19:9 . Even this joy is inappropriate on Tish'ah B'Av (Ta'anit 30a). One may study only7Torah works that are somber in nature - e.g., Job,8which recounts his grief and suffering over the tribulations which beset him Eichah,9the Book of Lamentations for the Temple's destruction. This text is read communally on Tish'ah B'Av and may be studied by individuals as well. and the prophecies of retribution in Jeremiah.10In addition, one may study the Talmudic passages describing the Temple's destruction (from the chapter Hanezikin, Gittin, Chapter 5, in the Babylonian Talmud, and the last chapter of Ta'anit in the Jerusalem Talmud), the Midrashim on Eichah, the laws of Tish'ah B'Av, the laws of mourning, and other similar texts.One should, however, recite all the passages from the Bible and the Talmud that are included in the daily prayer service. Children should not study in school on this day.11for they also derive happiness from their study (Ta'anit, ibid.).There are some sages who do not wear the head tefillin.12A mourner does not wear tefillin on the first day of mourning (Hilchot Eivel 4:9). In particular, support for this custom is derived from Eichah 2:1, which states, "He cast down the glory of Israel from the heaven to the earth." "The glory of Israel" is a reference to tefillin.The Rambam's choice of wording appears to indicate that the arm tefillin may be worn. Similarly, he does not mention any change in practice regarding the tallit gadol. The custom at present in most communities (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 555:1) is not to wear tefillin - neither the head tefillin nor the arm tefillin - nor to wear the tallit gadol in the morning service. A tallit k'tan is worn, but a blessing is not recited over it.For the afternoon service, the tallit gadol and both the head and arm tefillin are worn.
After the Temple was destroyed, the Sages of that generation ordained6From Bava Batra 60b, one may infer that this refers to the destruction of the Second Temple. that one should never build a building7The Be'ur Halachah 560 cites texts which maintain that this prohibition applies only to a person's private home, but not to synagogues or houses of study. These may be built ornately. whose walls are decorated with ornate designs like the palaces of kings. Instead, one should cover the walls of one's home with mortar and paint over them with lime, leaving a space one cubit square opposite the doorway8So that it will be noticed upon entry. that is unpainted.9From the Rambam's expression (which is quoted in the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 560), it appears that even after leaving the square cubit space unpainted, one should not have ornate walls. The Tur (Orach Chayim 560) differs, maintaining that if one leaves this space unpainted, one may decorate one's walls as one desires. The Mishnah Berurah 560:1 states that the Tur's opinion may be followed.The latter text (560:2, as does the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 126:1) questions why the observance of this practice is not more widespread. If, however, a person buys a dwelling whose walls have been decorated, it may remain as is; he is not obligated to scrape [the designs] from the walls.
Similarly, they ordained that a person who sets a table for guests should serve slightly less [than usual] and should leave a place empty, [so that it obviously] lacks one of the dishes that would ordinarily be placed there.10Note the Mishnah Berurah 560:5, which states that this applies even with regard to feasts served in association with a mitzvah - e.g., wedding feasts, bar-mitzvahs, and the like.When a woman has a set of jewelry made for her, she should refrain from having one of the pieces appropriate for the set made, so that her jewelry is not perfect.11The Rabbis have also cited other reasons for women to be modest in their wearing of jewelry. (See Mishnah Berurah 560:8.)Similarly, when a groom marries, he should place ashes on his forehead12Compare to Chapter 4, Halachah 1. on the place where one wears tefillin.13Although this custom is not observed in many places at present, it is customary for these reasons to break a glass under the wedding canopy (Ramah, Orach Chayim 560:2). All of these practices were instituted to recall Jerusalem, as [Psalms 137:5-6] states: "If I forget you, O Jerusalem, may my right hand lose its dexterity. Let my tongue cleave to my palate if I do not remember you, if I do not recall Jerusalem during my greatest joy."
Similarly, they ordained that one should not play melodies with any sort of musical instrument. It is forbidden to celebrate with such instruments or to listen to them being played [as an expression of mourning]14Thus, according to this opinion (which is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 560:3), listening to any music is forbidden. The Ramah, however, quotes several more lenient views. He concludes that "for the sake of a mitzvah - e.g., at a wedding feast - everything is permitted." The meaning of "for the sake of a mitzvah" has been extended by contemporary authorities to include many different situations. for the destruction.15Significantly, Sotah 48a mentions this measure as having been ordained for the nullification of the Sanhedrin (Israel's High Court), and not for the destruction of the Temple.Even songs [without musical accompaniment] that are recited over wine are forbidden, as [Isaiah 24:9] states: "Do not drink wine with song." It has, however, become accepted custom among the entire Jewish people to recite words of praise, songs of thanksgiving, and the like to God over wine.16In his responsa and in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Avot 1:17), the Rambam criticizes most singing and music, without mentioning the obligation to mourn for Jerusalem, because it caters to man's lust and material desires, rather than to his spiritual impulses.
Afterwards, they ordained that grooms17The Maggid Mishneh emphasizes that this prohibition applies to brides and grooms, who must be reminded to minimize their rejoicing at this time of celebration, but not to other individuals at ordinary times. should not wear crowns at all, nor should they wear any diadems at all,18According to Sotah 49b, this includes even a crown of flowers. as [implied by Ezekiel 21:31]: "Remove the miter and lift up the crown." Similarly, they ordained that brides should not wear crowns of silver or gold; a garland made from twisted cords is, however, permitted for a bride.19Note the Mishnah Berurah 460:18, which states that if the crown is made from fabric, it may have gold, silver, and jewels attached to it.
When a person sees the cities of Judah in a state of destruction,20One of the most sensitive differences of opinion in the religious community in Eretz Yisrael at present revolves around this law. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 561) states that the obligation to rend one's garments applies only when Eretz Yisrael is under gentile rule. The question is whether the establishment of a secular Jewish state is sufficient to have this obligation nullified or not. he should recite [Isaiah 64:9]: "Your holy cities have become like the desert," and rend his garments.21In Hilchot Eivel 9:10, the Rambam mentions this obligation, and as a proof-text cites Jeremiah 41:5, "And eighty men from Shechem, Shiloh, and Shomron came with their beards shaven and their garments rent." The commentaries on this verse explain that these measures were taken in mourning over the Temple. When one sees Jerusalem in a state of destruction,22Even if a person sees the cities of Judah, Jerusalem, and the site of the Temple on the same journey, he is obligated to rend his clothes three times. The Maggid Mishneh emphasizes, however, that the converse is not true. If one sees Jerusalem before any other city and rends one's garments on its behalf, there is no need to rend one's garments for the other cities (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 561:3). one should recite [the continuation of the verse,] "Zion is a desert...." When one sees the Temple in a state of destruction, one should recite [ibid.:10]: "Our holy and beautiful House [...has been burned with fire]" and rend one's garments.23The Bayit Chadash (Orach Chayim 561) emphasizes how one should prostrate oneself in mourning, overcome with grief at the sight of this holy place in ruins.The Mishnah Berurah 561:5 emphasizes that this refers to seeing the Temple from afar. It is forbidden to enter the Temple Mount itself, because we are all ritually impure, and the sanctity of that holy place is still intact. (See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:16.)From which point is one obligated to rend one's garments? From Tzofim.24This refers to a point from which one could see the Jerusalem of the Biblical and Talmudic eras. The location of the present city is slightly different. Tzofim is not identical with present-day Mount Scopus. Afterwards, when one reaches the Temple, one should rend them a second time.25A parallel exists in the laws of mourning. If one parent dies after one has rent one's garment over the passing of another relative, it is not sufficient merely to add slightly to the tear; one must rend the garment a second time (Hilchot Eivel 8:10). If one encountered the Temple first, because one came from the desert, one should rend one's garments because of the Temple, and add to the tear because of Jerusalem.26Here also we see a parallel in the laws of mourning. If one hears of the death of a relative other than a parent after one has rent a garment over the passing of another relative, all that is necessary is to add slightly to the tear (ibid.).
In all these situations, one must rend one's garments with one's hands and not with a utensil.27As mentioned in Hilchot Eivel 9:2, the Rambam equates the obligation to rend one's garments over the cities of Judah, Jerusalem, and the Temple with the obligation to rend one's garments over one's parent's death. In mourning over others, one may cut one's garments with a utensil (loc. cit. 8:2). For one's parents and in these situations, the tear must be made with one's hands (loc. cit. 8:3).Significantly, the Ra'avad objects to a complete equation between seeing these sites in destruction and one's parent's death, and therefore maintains that there is no obligation to rend one's garments with one's hands and reveal one's heart. The later halachic authorities, however, do not accept his ruling. While standing,28Whenever one is required to rend one's garments, one must stand (loc. cit. 8:1). the person should rend all the garments he is wearing until he reveals his heart.29In mourning over others, one need not rend one's garments more than a handbreadth (loc. cit. 8:2). For one's parents and in these situations, one must continue tearing until one's heart is revealed (loc. cit. 8:3, 9:3). He should never mend these tears at all.30This refers to a usual pattern of stitching, which does not make it obvious that the garment had been rent. If one mends a garment using a less perfect method of sewing, it is permitted, as explained below.The prohibition against mending one's garments in this manner applies in these instances and for one's parents. When mourning the passing of others, one may mend the garment afterwards (loc. cit. 9:1). He may, however, have them stitched, hemmed, gathered closed, or sewn with a ladder pattern.
[The following rules apply when a person] comes to Jerusalem frequently in his travels: If he comes within thirty days of his last visit, he is not required to rend his garments. If he comes after thirty days, he is.31At present, rather than rend one's garments every time one comes to Jerusalem, it is customary to sell one's garments to another person, so that it would be forbidden to tear them (see loc. cit. 8:7).
All these [commemorative] fasts will be nullified in the Messianic era1With the conclusion of the exile, there will be no need to mark the dates that led to it with mourning and fasting. Thus the Rambam writes at the conclusion of Hilchot Megillah: "All memories of the difficulties [endured by our people] will be nullified as [Isaiah 65:16] states: 'For the former difficulties will be forgotten.'As mentioned previously, fasting is not an end in its own right, but a means to motivate the Jews to return to God and correct the faults in their behavior. The coming of the redemption will be a sign that the service of repentance is complete, and thus there will be no further need for fasting. and, indeed ultimately, they will be transformed2Through repentance, sins are transformed into merits (Yoma 86a). And in this process, these fasts, which came as a result of the exile that stems from sin, will be transformed into holidays and days of rejoicing and celebration,3There is no possibility for the existence of an entity that is genuinely negative in nature. All those factors that appear negative represent hidden good, and furthermore, a good so powerful that the only way it can be revealed in this world is through qualities that outwardly appear negative. Their inner nature, however, is good, and in the era of the redemption when the world will be refined to the extent that it can accept this great good, this nature will be revealed. as [Zechariah 8:19] states: "Thus declares the Lord of Hosts, 'The fast of the fourth [month],4The Ninth, or at present, the Seventeenth, of Tammuz (see Halachah 4), the fast of the fifth [month],5Tish'ah B'Av the fast of the seventh [month],6the Third of Tishrei and the fast of the tenth [month]7the Tenth of Tevet will be [times of] happiness and celebration and festivals for the House of Judah. And they shall love truth and peace.'8Note the interpretation of this verse in the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, and the introduction to the tractate of Avot (Shemonah Perakim), Chapter 4. There the Rambam elaborates on how, instead of asceticism and fasting, God desires intellectual development ("truth") and emotional harmony ("peace").From a different perspective, it can be understood that by quoting the conclusion of the verse, the prophet was also alluding to the means by which the Messianic redemption - and thus the transformation of these fasts - could be brought closer.Yoma 9b relates that the Temple was destroyed because of unwarranted hatred among the Jewish people. By spreading peace and truth, we will nullify the cause for the exile, and this will cause the effect, the exile itself, also to cease (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 15, pp. 415ff.).
