=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Women,1Kiddushin 29b derives this concept from the use of the term bineichem - implying one's male offspring - in Deuteronomy 11:19, the verse which commands us to teach Torah to our children. Since others are not obligated to teach women, they are not obligated to study themselves.Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:14) quotes this law, but also states that women are obligated to study the laws pertaining to all the mitzvot that they are required to fulfill. (See also Agur, Hilchot Tefillah 2; Sefer Mitzvot Katan, Introduction; and Sefer Chassidim 313.) This includes a large number of mitzvot - e.g., Shabbat, Niddah, and Kashrut - to the extent that many men would be proud if their Torah knowledge encompassed these areas. Furthermore, women are also obligated to perform "spiritual" mitzvot - e.g., to love God, fear Him, and believe in Him. Thus, they must also study those aspects of Torah which relate to these commandments. See also Halachah 13 and its commentary. slaves,2i.e., gentile slaves. The Torah obligations of women and slaves are identical. Furthermore, Ketubot 28a states that a person is forbidden to teach Torah to his slaves. and minors3The latter are considered as lacking intellectual maturity. Hence, they are under no obligation at all according to Torah law. This concept is so clearly understood that some commentaries maintain that this word should not be included in the text of the Mishneh Torah. The authoritative Oxford manuscript of the Mishneh Torah indeed omits it. are free from the obligation of Torah study.4The question arises: Why does the Rambam begin his discussion of this mitzvah with the mention of those who are not obligated? Why does he not begin with a discussion of the obligation the mitzvah implies? Nevertheless,5though the son is not, himself, obligated to study a father is obligated6Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 11) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 419) count this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to teach his son Torah7Nazir 29a also mentions a Rabbinic obligation to train one's children in the performance of mitzvot. The Rambam mentions this obligation with regard to many of the particular mitzvot - e.g., Hilchot Chametz U'Matzah 6:10, Hilchot Sukkah 6:1 and also with regard to the responsibilities of a guardian, Hilchot Nachalot 11:10. while he is a minor, as [Deuteronomy 11:19] states: "And you shall teach them to your sons to speak about them."A8Though this verse mentions teaching Torah only to one's children, the Rambam also maintains that the mitzvah of Torah study includes an adult's study of Torah (Sefer HaMitzvot, ibid.). Nevertheless, he begins his description of the mitzvah with the obligation to teach one's sons, since that is explicitly mentioned in the Torah.It must be noted that Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.) derives this mitzvah from a different verse, Deuteronomy 6:7, "And you shall teach them to your sons..."[Homiletically, it is possible to explain that the reason the Torah mentions the commandment to study Torah with regard only to children is to teach us that we must apply ourselves to Torah study with the openness and simple faith of young children.] woman is not obligated to teach her son,9However, according to some opinions (see Sh'lah, Sha'ar Ha'otiot), she is obligated to train him in the performance of mitzvot. for only those who are obligated to learn are obligated to teach.10This is also derived by Kiddushin, ibid. However, Sefer HaChinuch (ibid.) writes:Nevertheless, it is fitting that a woman endeavor that her children not be of the common people. Even though she is not commanded, she will receive a good reward for her efforts.
Just as a person is obligated to teach his son, so, too, is he obligated to teach his grandson,1More precisely, the Hebrew should be translated as "your son's son." There is a difference between the obligation one has to one's son's son and one's obligation to one's daughter's son or one's great grandson (Kessef Mishneh). as [Deuteronomy 4:9] commands: "And you shall teach them to your sons and your grandsons."[Furthermore,2Kiddushin 30a praises the grandfather of Zevulun ben Dan for teaching him "the written law, the Mishnah, the Talmud, halachot, and aggadot." this charge is not confined] to one's children and grandchildren alone. Rather, it is a mitzvah for each and every wise man3Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah, Kuntres Acharon 1) states that this applies only to an individual who merits this description. Even a student of Torah is not bound by this obligation until he attains a sufficient degree of knowledge himself. to teach all students, even though they are not his children, as [Deuteronomy 6:7] states: "And you shall teach them to your sons..." The oral tradition4Sifre, Va'etchanan. The Hebrew, mipi hash’mua, refers to a halachah transmitted by Moses from Mount Sinai for which an allusion can be found in the written law (Yad Malachi). explains: "Your sons," these are your students, for students are also called sons,5See also Chapter 5, Halachah 12, for a different dimension of this comparison. as [II Kings 2:3] states: "And the sons of the prophets went forth."If6to greet Elisha at Bet-El. That same narrative (ibid., 12) relates how Elisha called his teacher, Elijah, "Father, Father." Sanhedrin 68a relates that Rabbi Akiva used the same expression to refer to his teacher, Rabbi Eliezar ben Horkanus.The Rambam's words are quoted from the Sifre. Similarly, Sanhedrin 19b relates, "Whoever teaches his colleague's son Torah is considered as if he sired him."Note Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 7:5, where the Rambam defines more precisely his understanding of the term, "the sons of the prophets." so, why do the commandments7cited above [explicitly mention] one's son and grandson? To grant precedence8See also the following halachah. to one's son over one's grandson, and one's grandson over the son of a colleague.9The Kessef Mishneh questions whether one is obligated to give precedence to one's other descendants over people at large. However, the Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 245:1) and Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:8) accept that principle.
Also,1i.e., another difference between one's son and others. According to some editions of the Mishneh Torah, this sentence is included in the previous halachah. one is obligated to hire a teacher for one's son,2The Lechem Mishneh questions the source for this ruling. He quotes Rav Yosef Kolon, who explains that since we find that the teachers of children are allowed to charge for their services (Halachah 7), it is obvious that the fathers are required to pay them. Others explain that since the obligation is placed upon a father's person, we may assume that it extends to his financial resources as well.Since a person is obligated to pay for his children's studies, he cannot deduct those costs from the tithe he is required to give to charity. Nevertheless, there is no need to stint in fulfilling this obligation. Beitzah 16a relates that a person's income for the entire year is fixed, with the exception of the money he spends to prepare for the Sabbaths and festivals, and that spent in teaching his sons Torah. With regard to these matters, if he spends more, he will be granted more, and if he spends less, he will be granted less.In addition, once children pass the age of six, the cost of their living expenses can be deducted from one's tithes if their time is being devoted to Torah study (Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 10:16).The commentaries question whether the obligation to pay for a teacher applies to one's grandson as well. The Maharshal and the Siftei Cohen (ibid.) impose such a requirement, while the Radbaz frees one of the obligation. while one is not required to undertake any expense to teach a colleague's son.3as part of one's obligation to teach Torah. Nevertheless, every Jew is obligated to give charity, and one of the most important priorities (particularly, at present) for charity is the education of children. (See Ramah, Choshen Mishpat 163:3; Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:3.)A person who was not instructed by his father is obligated to arrange for his own instruction4even if it involves an expense (See Halachah 7.) when he can understand,5The Tzemach Tzedek (Piskei Dinim) notes that the Rambam does not state "when he matures and can understand," and questions whether, in this unique instance, the Torah has placed an obligation on a minor. as [Deuteronomy 5:1] states: "And you shall study them and take heed to perform them."Similarly, in every place, one finds that study takes precedence over deed,6i.e., the performance of mitzvot. Kiddushin 40b relates that:Rabbi Tarfon and the elders were dining in the loft of Bet Nitzah in Lod. This question was asked before them: Is study greater or is deed greater?Rabbi Tarfon replied: "Deed is greater."Rabbi Akiva replied: "Study is greater."All of them replied: "Study is greater..." for study brings about deed.7The commentaries explain that Rabbi Tarfon maintains that a Jew's ultimate goal in life is the fulfillment of God's will as revealed in the mitzvot. By performing the mitzvot, a person steps beyond his humanity and performs Godly acts, thus establishing a connection with God's essence.Rabbi Akiva maintains that study is also a mitzvah, and thus, by doing so, one also fulfills God's will. Furthermore, through study a person can internalize his connection to Godliness and reveal the connection to Him, not only in the realm of deed, but also in thought.The Sages maintain that a person must be complete in both deed and study. Therefore, study has an advantage, for study leads to deed. In particular, this applies to a person who has never studied (see Tosafot, Kiddushin, ibid.) for, unless he studies, he will never be able to perform the mitzvot properly. However, deed does not bring about study.8This clause is the Rambam's own addition to the above Talmudic passage.
If a person wants to study Torah and he has a son whom he should teach Torah,1and his financial capability allows only one of them to study. his [study] takes priority over [that of] his son.2Kiddushin 29b relates that Rav Acha bar Ya'akov sent his son to study under Abbaye's tutelage. When his son returned, he saw that the son had not mastered his subject matter. Rav Acha told him, "Remain here, and I will go study."Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah, Kuntres Acharon 1) limits this license, noting that a father has no right to ignore his son's Torah education entirely, regardless of his own ability for advancement. Rather, this applies after the son has gained a basis of Torah knowledge and seeks to continue his studies. If his son is wiser and a more creative thinker and thus capable of understanding what he studies more than he [himself] is, his son is given priority.3even though the father has not received any grounding in Torah study (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:7).Even though his son is granted priority, he should not neglect [his own studies].4Rather, he should establish fixed times for Torah study For just as he is commanded to teach his son, he is commanded to teach himself.5i.e., though enabling one's son to study and studying by oneself are included in the same mitzvah, a person cannot fulfill his obligation solely through facilitating his son's study. Rather, he must set aside time to learn himself, because the mitzvah is twofold in nature (Kessef Mishneh).
A person should always1i.e., even if he is older than seventeen (the age, which according to the Rambam's interpretation, the Mishnah, Avot 5:22, suggests for marriage, Merchevet HaMishneh) study Torah and, afterwards, marry.2In Hilchot Ishut 15:2-3, the Rambam writes that the mitzvah of studying Torah is sufficient cause to postpone the mitzvah of having children. Furthermore, even if one's desire to study is so great that one never marries, it is not considered a sin. If he marries first, his mind will not be free for study.3"With a millstone around his neck, will he be able to occupy himself in Torah study!" (Kiddushin 29b). However, if his natural inclination overcomes him to the extent that his mind is not free,4and he is continually preoccupied with sexual thoughts. Concerning these, Yoma 29a teaches: "The thoughts of sin are more severe than sin itself." he should marry, and then study Torah.5consoling himself with the knowledge that he will still be able to study for two or three years before his financial burden becomes great (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 3:1,2).
At what age is a father obligated to teach [his son]1Though Avot 5:22 states: "At five, one should begin the study of Scripture," the Rambam, based on Sukkah 42a, explains that certain elements of a child's study must begin earlier. Torah?When he2the child begins to speak, he3the father should teach him4how to use that potential for Torah study. Two verses are selected as being of fundamental importance. Torah tzivah lanu Moshe...5"The Torah Moses commanded us is the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob." This verse emphasizes the fundamental connection a Jew has to Torah. As soon as an heir is born, he becomes the legal owner of the inheritance left to him. Thus, since the Torah is every Jew's inheritance, as soon as a child is born he acquires his full share. (See also Chapter 3, Halachah 1.) (Deuteronomy 33:4) and Shema Yisrael6"Hear Israel, God is our Lord, God is One." This verse emphasizes the fundamental unity between God and creation, teaching us, not only that there is only one God, but also that all creation is at one with Him.The Menorat HaMaor and Rashi (Deuteronomy 11:19 emphasize that the child need not understand the verses he is reciting. The recitation of these verses refines his power of speech and makes lasting impressions on his thinking processes, even though he is unaware of their intellectual message.... (ibid. 6:4).Afterwards, he should teach him [selected verses],7each containing significant lessons little by little, verse by verse, until he is six or seven8until this age, the child lacks sufficient maturity to apply himself to his studies diligently (Bava Batra 21a).The Kessef Mishneh 2:2 explains that this decision is no contradiction to the Mishnah in Avot quoted above. The latter can be interpreted to mean "after completing five years" - i.e., at the beginning of the sixth year. However, the Sefer Mitzvot Gadol (Positive Commandment 12) interprets the injunction from Avot to mean that when the child becomes five, his father teaches him to read at home, and when he becomes six or seven, he is taken to school. It is also possible to interpret the Rambam's words in this fashion.[Indeed, that interpretation is more likely. Thought the above mentioned mishnah states: "at eighteen, one should marry," the Rambam (Hilchut Ishut 15:2) states a man is obligated to marry at the age of seventeen. Thus, we see that he interprets the different clauses of the Mishnah to mean "in his)...th year, one should..."] - depending on his health9See Tosafot, Bava Batra, ibid. - [at which time] he should take him10Kiddushin 30a relates that the Sages would physically take their children to their teachers. to a teacher of young children.11where the child will begin the study of the written Torah in an organized fashion. Bava Batra (ibid.) relates that Rabbi Yehoshua ben Gamla established a fixed ruled requiring all parents to take their children to teachers at this time. (See Chapter 2, Halachot 1 and 2 for further elaboration.)
If it is local custom for a teacher of young children to take payment, he should be paid.1as stated in Halachah 3. [The father] is obligated to pay for his instruction until he can read the entire2The Kovetz and other commentaries explain that this word was added to include the works of the prophets and the holy writings (i.e., the entire T'nach). Rashi (Bava Batra, ibid.) is not of this opinion, and maintains that teaching the five books of Moses is sufficient. The Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 245:5) follows the latter opinion, while Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:1) quotes the former view. written Torah.3In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Karo notes that the Rambam's language implies that this constitutes the totality of a father's obligation, and he is not obligated to instruct his son in the Oral Law. In the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 245:6), he explains that a father's obligation also includes arranging for his son's instruction in the Oral Law, unless his financial situation is too pressing to allow him to do so.In a place where it is customary to receive a wage for teaching the written Torah, one is permitted to do so.4Nedarim 37a relates that the wage a teacher receives is not for his actual tutelage, but rather for the effort involved in caring for the children. Alternatively, the money can be taken for teaching the proper cantillation notes. [At that time, there were few if any written texts, and the students were taught the entire Torah by heart.]The difference between the two opinions is that according to the latter, one may also charge adults. Since the Rambam allows a wage to be charged without qualifying his words, one may assume that this applies even to teaching adults. This decision can also be derived from his Commentary on the Mishnah, Nedarim 4:3. However, it is forbidden to take a wage for teaching the Oral Law,5In his commentary on Nedarim, ibid., Rabbenu Nissim quotes the Jerusalem Talmud, which allows a teacher of Torah to receive compensation for the fact that were he not to teach, he could occupy himself in another profession which would yield him profit. The Hagahot Maimoniot develops this matter further, noting that Ketubot 106a relates that the Temple treasury would pay people to instruct the priests regarding the laws of ritual slaughter. He also notes that authors of works of Torah scholarship are allowed to demand pay for their services. These ideas are quoted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 246:5).Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that the Rambam would accept such an opinion. In his Commentary on the Mishnah (ibid.), he writes:According to our Torah, it is in no way permitted to take a wage for teaching any one of the Torah's professions...I am amazed at the men of stature who, aroused by desire, denied the truth and had wages designated for themselves for Torah decisions and teachings, using flimsy supports.See also the citation from the Rambam's commentary on Avot below. as [implied by Deuteronomy 4:5]: "Behold, I have taught you laws and statutes, as God commanded me."6Nedarim, ibid., interprets that verse to mean that Moses told the people: [Our Sages teach that Moses was implying:] Just as I learned at no cost,7when God instructed me, so, too, have you been taught from me at no cost.8i.e., "I have taught you" at no cost, "as God commanded (i.e., taught) me" at no cost. Moses continues, commanding the people to emulate his example Teach the coming generations in a like manner. Teach them at no cost as you have learned from9Though the resulting decision is the same, the Rambam's interpretation of this passage differs slightly from Rabbenu Asher's and Rabbenu Nissim's. me."[Nevertheless,] if a person cannot find someone to teach him at no cost, he must pay for his studies, as [implied by Proverbs 23:23]: "Buy truth."10i.e., Torah May he charge to teach others? We learn [ibid.]: "but do not sell." Thus, it can be derived that it is forbidden to charge to teach Torah even though one's teacher charged to instruct him.11In his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam interprets Avot 4:7, which states: 'Do not make it (the Torah) an axe to chop with...' do not consider it a medium with which to derive a livelihood." He continues elaborating on how it is both undesirable - and forbidden - to derive benefit from Torah study or its instruction:Some people thought foolishly that it is obligatory and fitting to support the wise men and students...who occupy themselves in Torah study...This is all erroneous. No source in the Torah or in the words of the Sages can be found to...support it.Among the Sages [of the Talmud], one does not find that they asked for money from other people. They did not receive any funding for their precious and glorious Yeshivot...Heaven forbid to say that those generations were not generous and did not give charity. Had a poor person stretched out his hand, they would have filled it with gold and pearls. But the poor person did not do so; rather, he was satisfied with what he could earn in his profession, whether a little or a lot...Hillel the Elder was a wood-chopper who would study before Shemayah and Avtalion and live in extreme poverty. He was so great that his students were compared to Moses and Aaron...There is no doubt that if he had taught the people to give him benefit, they would not have allowed him to continue chopping trees...The Sages would not allow themselves to take money from people. They considered taking such funds as a desecration of God's name in public, because the people would thus consider Torah as similar to any other profession and come to scorn it.See also Chapter 3, Halachot 10 and 11.
Every Jewish man is obligated to study Torah,1This represents the second aspect of the mitzvah of Torah study; studying oneself. whether he is poor or rich,2Yoma 35b declares: "Hillel obligates the poor [in Torah study], Rabbi Eleazar ben Chersom obligates the rich." The Talmud elaborates: Hillel would work and earn a tarp'eick [a coin of little value] daily. Half he would give to the watchman at the Hall of Study, and half he would use for his livelihood and that of his family. One day he could not find work. The watchman at the entrance did not let him enter and so he hung himself over the window to hear "the words of the living God" from Shemayah and Avtalion.In contrast, Rabbi Eleazar ben Chersom was extremely wealthy: His father left him one thousand villages on land and one thousand ships at sea. Each day, he would take a sack of flour on his shoulders and go from city to city to study Torah...Throughout his entire life, he did not go to see them [the villages and the ships], but rather sat and studied Torah the entire day and night. whether his body is healthy and whole or afflicted by difficulties,3Bava Metzia 84b relates that Rabbi Elazar ben Shimon was afflicted by severe physical difficulties. Nevertheless, he continued to persevere in his dedication to Torah study. Indeed, Eruvin 54a counsels that Torah study will help a person with health problems recover. whether he is young4and his youthful exuberance might prevent him from concentrating on his studies; or an old man whose strength has diminished.5See Halachah 10.Even if he is a poor man who derives his livelihood from charity and begs from door to door, even if he is a husband and [a father of] children,6At one extreme, Eruvin 22a relates: "Who will you find possessing Torah: A person who is cruel to his wife and children" - i.e., one who gives up some of the time he would spend with his family to dedicate himself to Torah study. However, even a person who does not make such an all-encompassing commitment to Torah must find time for study despite his family responsibilities. he must establish a fixed time for Torah study during the day and at night, as [Joshua 1:8] commands: "You shall think about it day and night."7There are two aspects to Torah study:a) One which requires total devotion, dedicating all of one's time and effort to Torah, because "the study of Torah has no limit." Though it is fitting for each Jew to apply himself to Torah study in this fashion, such a practice cannot be required of a person. Rather, this remains a voluntary decision to be made by a person, to quote Chapter 3, Halachah 6, "whose heart inspires him to fulfill this mitzvah in a fitting manner and to become crowned with the crown of Torah."b) The establishment of fixed times for Torah study. Regardless of the responsibilities and difficulties a person may have, he is obligated to set aside a certain portion of his day for Torah study.On Joshua 1:8, which commands "This Torah shall not depart from your mouth" and Deuteronomy 11:14, which relates how "you will collect your grain, your wine, and your oil," implying an involvement in work and commerce.Rabbi Yishmael explains that a person should follow "the way of the world," involving himself in work and devoting only part of his energies to Torah study. In contrast, Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai exclaims: "If a person will plow in the plowing season, sow in the sowing season,...what will happen to the Torah! Rather, when the Jews do God's will, their work is performed by others."The Talmud concludes: Many followed Rabbi Yishmael's advice and were successful. Many followed Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai's advice and were not successful.Though the complete and total dedication demanded by Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai is beyond the reach of all at present, the passage is useful in order to appreciate two different approaches to the obligation of Torah study:a) That of Rabbi Yishmael, who sees it as a responsibility to be considered within the context of our daily activities;b) That of Rabbi Shimon, who sees Torah study as the paramount aspect of a person's life, to which he should be devoted without considering the demands of his financial position.
The greater Sages of Israel included wood choppers,1Many, including the Rambam (Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 4:7), cite the example of Hillel. However, as of yet, there is no explicit Talmudic or Midrashic source which states that Hillel was occupied in this profession. Avot D'Rabbi Natan (Chapter 6) states that Rabbi Akiva was so employed. water drawers,2Ketubot 105a states that Rav Huna earned his livelihood in this manner and blind men.3Rav Yosef and Rav Sheshet, two of the more prominent Amoraim, were so afflicted (Pesachim 116b). Despite these [difficulties],4See the commentary on Halachah 7, and on Chapter 3, Halachot 9-11. they were occupied with Torah study day and night and were included among those who transmitted the Torah's teachings from [master] to [student in the chain stretching back to] Moses, our teacher.5In his introduction to the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam lists the chain of teachers who transmitted Torah from generation to generation. There he mentions that Hillel received the tradition from Shemayah and Avtalion and transmitted it to Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai. Rav Huna transmitted the tradition to Rabbah and Rav Yosef, who in turn, transmitted it to Abbaye and Ravva.
Until when is a person obligated to study Torah? Until the day he dies,1Shabbat 83b states that even when a person feels death approaching, he should not neglect his Torah studies. as [Deuteronomy 4:9] states: "Lest you remove it from your heart, all the days of your life."2The failure to study can be considered as "removing" one's previous study from one's heart because... Whenever a person is not involved with study, he forgets.3Chaggigah 15a states: "The words of Torah are as difficult to acquire as gold vessels, and as easy to lose as glass utensils." Avot D'Rabbi Natan 24:6 elaborates on how easy it is to forget one's Torah knowledge.Deuteronomy 4:9 states: "Be extremely careful... lest you forget these things." The Sefer Mitzvot Gadol, the Sefer Mitzvot Kattan, and others consider this as one of the Torah's 613 commandments, prohibiting forgetting the Torah one has studied. (See also Menachot 99b, Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura on Avot 3:10 and Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 2:4-10.) The Rambam does not include this as one of the Torah's prohibitions in Sefer HaMitzvot, nor does he explicitly mention the prohibition in our halachot. Nevertheless, it is possible to explain that he considers this charge as part of the command to study Torah for one's entire life explained in this halachah.
A person is obligated to divide his study time in three: one third should be devoted to the Written Law; one third to the Oral Law;1i.e., Mishnah. This is not intended to mean only the Mishnah authored by Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi per se, but rather "halachic decisions without being concerned with their motivating principles" (Rashi, Sotah 22a). As is obvious from his introduction to the Mishneh Torah, where he defines it as "a collection of the entire Oral Law," the Rambam desired that his Mishneh Torah serve this purpose.According to Siftei Cohen, Choshen Mishpat 25:7, the term Mishnah applies to the halachic decisions of contemporary authorities as well. Thus, today, study of texts like the Mishnah Berurah would fulfill this goal. and one third to understanding and conceptualizing the ultimate derivation of a concept from its roots, inferring one concept from another and comparing concepts,2Each law stated in a previous source has elements which are specific to the situation described, and general principles of greater relevance. In order to understand the proper course of action to follow in a different circumstance, one must be able to differentiate between the two. In this manner, one will be able to derive new halachic principles applicable to situations that were not described previously.Similarly, by understanding the process by which a halachic concept is developed, one can understand how similar laws could be derived.[Note also Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 2:1, Kuntres Acharon), which contrasts the Rambam's perspective on this issue with that of Rashi and Rabbenu Asher.] understanding [the Torah] based on the principles of Biblical exegesis,3e.g., the thirteen principles of Biblical exegesis mentioned by Rabbi Yishmael (introduction to the Sifre), the 32 principles mentioned by Rabbi Eleazar ben Yosse. until one appreciates the essence of those principles and how the prohibitions and the other decisions which one received according to the oral tradition4See the note on Halachah 2. can be derived using them. The latter topic is called Gemara.5It must be noted that most original manuscripts and early editions of the Mishneh Torah use the word Talmud rather than Gemara in this and the following halachah. This is consistent with the composition of the text, which is almost exclusively in Hebrew, with little use of Aramaic terminology.
How is the above expressed?1Kiddushin, ibid., asks this question, noting that, on the surface, it is impossible to divide one's years in three, since no one knows how long he will live.There, the Talmud explains that one must divide "one's days." Though Rashi and other commentaries explain that directive differently, the Rambam understands it to mean... A person who is a craftsman may spend three hours each day involved in his work, and [devote] nine hours to Torah study:2Examples chosen by the Rabbis reflect common situations. Thus, these statements teach us what would be considered a commonplace division of one's time in the Rambam's age. In those nine hours, he should spend three reading the Written Law; three, the Oral Law; and three, meditating with his intellect to derive one concept from another.3i.e., Gemara; dividing his daily study sessions equally among these three areas of study.The "words of the prophetic tradition"4the remainder of the Bible - i.e., the works of the prophets and the holy writings. are considered part of the Written Law;5Berachot 5a relates that the entire T'nach has its source in the revelation at Sinai. Accordingly, though in certain regards the five books of Moses are given greater prominence, the entire Written Law is generally considered on the same footing. and their explanation,6i.e., commentary and the explanation of the T'nach. part of the Oral Law. The matters referred to as Pardes7The mystic secrets describing the nature of Godliness and His creative power, which are mentioned in brief in the first four chapters of Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah. In particular, see Chapter 4, Halachah 13 there. are considered part of the Gemara.8and should be studied according to the guidelines mentioned in the halachah cited above.The above applies in the early stages of a person's study.9The Lechem Mishneh explains that the Rambam offered this explanation to resolve the apparent contradiction between the commonly accepted practice of devoting most of one's time to the study of the Babylonian Talmud, and the injunction to divide one's study time in three. In response to the same question, Tosafot, Kiddushin 30a explains that the study of the Babylonian Talmud also fulfills that directive, because it combines all three areas of study in a single text.At present, this pattern of study is not followed even in the early stages of a child's learning. Note the Maharal of Prague, Tiferet Yisrael, Chapter 56, and the Sh'lah, Masechet Shavuot, who complain that the advice given in Avot 5:22: "At five, to the study of the Written Law; at ten, to the study of the Mishnah; and at fifteen, to the study of the Gemara" is not generally followed.The basis for this departure can be explained in terms of two differences that exist between our contemporary circumstances and the situation which prevailed in Talmudic times:a) During the Talmudic era, written texts were rare, and it was necessary for a student to commit all his subject matter to memory. Thus, the emphasis was on teaching students by rote.b) Hebrew was a spoken language and, therefore, it was not necessary to spend time teaching the children the meaning of the subject matter.At present, the major emphasis is on teaching learning skills and developing a student's powers of comprehension with the understanding that once one knows how to study, since the texts are easily available, he will be able to apply himself to the actual study at his convenience. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:6, 11; Eglei Tal, Introduction.) However, when a person increases his knowledge and does not have the need to read the Written Law, or occupy himself with the Oral Law constantly,10because he has already mastered them he should study the Written Law and the oral tradition at designated times. Thus, he will not forget any aspect of the laws of the Torah.11as mentioned above, a lack of review will cause an individual to forget what he has already learned. [However,] he should focus his attention12primarily on the Gemara alone for his entire life,13choosing the subject matter and the allocation of his time... according to his ambition and his ability to concentrate.
A woman who studies Torah will receive reward.1for her efforts. However, that reward will not be [as great] as a man's, since she was not commanded [in this mitzvah]. Whoever performs a deed which he is not commanded to do, does not receive as great a reward as one who performs a mitzvah that he is commanded to do.2Tosafot, Kiddushin 31a explains that a person who is commanded to perform a mitzvah will be more conscious of his obligation and try to fulfill it more fastidiously than a person who performs the same act voluntarily.3Chassidic thought explains the concept differently. The Hebrew word mitzvah (commandment) shares the same root as the word tzavtah (connection). Fulfilling the commandments establishes a transcendent bond with Godliness. In contrast, a good deed that is not commanded, no matter how worthy, remains an act of man and does not establish such a connection. Even though she will receive a reward, the Sages commanded that a person should not teach his daughter Torah,4There is no explicit source for the Rambam's statements, though one may draw such a conclusion from Sotah 20a. That passage relates that one prominent sage, ben Azzai, did not share this opinion.As mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 1, the Rabbis require a woman to study the laws governing the mitzvot which she is obligated to fulfill. Based on that decision, many commentaries explain that the Rambam's statements refer only to intensive study of the subject matter described as Gemara in the previous halachot. because most women5Commentaries have mentioned that by adding the word "most," the Rambam implies that if a father sees that his daughter is capable of such study, he should afford her the opportunity. cannot concentrate their attention on study, and thus transform the words of Torah into idle matters because of their lack of understanding.6Kin'at Eliyahu notes the contrast between the first clause, "A woman who studies," and the command the Sages gave "a father." He differentiates between study that a woman undertakes voluntarily, which is considered desirable, and a father's training his daughter in matters which are not necessarily relevant to her.[Thus,] our Sages declared:7Sotah 21b "Whoever teaches his daughter Torah is like one who teaches her tales and parables."8Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Sotah 3:3). From Sotah 21b, it would appear that tiflos (translated as “idle matters”) could be understood as "romance." The Meiri renders it as "vanity," explaining that a woman who has studied will boast of her achievements. This applies to the Oral Law. [With regard to] the Written Law: at the outset, one should not teach one's daughter. However, if one teaches her, it is not considered as if she was taught idle things.9Though the Rambam's statements are quoted in the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 246:6), the source for his statements has been questioned.Some point to the Mishnah, Nedarim 3:3, which, in passing, mentions a daughter's study of the Written Law. However, the Rambam's own text of that Mishnah lacks the words "or daughter." Others point to Chaggigah 3a (and more specifically, to the Jerusalem Talmud, ibid. 1:1), which describes the reading of the Torah by the king during the Hakhel celebration, which women were also required to attend. Nevertheless, there is a difference between study of the Written Law in its entirety and hearing the reading of a few inspirational passages. (See Taz 246:4.)In this context, it might be noted that the Tur's text of the Rambam reverses these statements and mentioned teaching women the Oral Law as preferable to the Written Law. This can easily be reconciled with the opinions mentioned above, which require a woman to learn the laws governing the mitzvot she is obligated to fulfill. In contrast, the Written Law is a less closely defined field of study. There, a greater possibility exists that a woman who is not gifted may misinterpret the teachings.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
Teachers of small children should be appointed in each and every land, in each and every region, and in each and every village.1Bava Batra 21a declares: Remember that man for good! Yehoshua ben Gamla is his name. Were it not for him, the Torah would have been forgotten by the Jewish people.Originally, a person who had a father would be instructed by him, while a person who had no father would not be instructed...[Afterwards,] they instituted [the practice of] employing teachers of young children in Jerusalem [as implied by the verse]: "From Zion shall go forth the Torah."Nevertheless, whoever had a father would be taken [to Jerusalem], while one who did not have a father would not be taken. [Therefore,] they instituted [the practice of] employing teachers in every region. They would begin study at sixteen or at seventeen. However, if a [student's] teacher were angry with him, he would scoff at him and leave. [This situation persisted] until Yehoshua ben Gamla came and instituted [the practice of] employing teachers of young children in each and every land, in each and every region, and in each and every village. They would bring them [to the schools] at the age of six or seven. This practice was continued in the subsequent generations. Even though the dispersion of the Jewish people and the subjugation to the gentile powers made the management of their communal affairs more difficult, throughout the ages we find references to the establishment of communal programs of education in both the codes of Jewish law and the chronicles of Jewish history. (See Ramah, Choshen Mishpat, 163:3; Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:3.)Originally, it was customary for the community to impose taxes to pay for the education of all the children, whether their parents were rich or poor. However, at present it has become customary for each parent to pay for his own child's education. However, if he lacks the financial means to do so, the community is obligated to accept this burden.If a village does not have children who study Torah, its populace is placed under a ban of ostracism2See Chapter 7, Halachah 5 for a precise definition of this term. until they employ teachers for the children. If3these measures do not motivate the inhabitants to change their ways and.... they do not employ teachers, the village [deserves to be] destroyed,4The Rambam's statements are based on Shabbat 119b. Though our text of that passage differs slightly from the statements here, in the various commentaries and codes (e.g., the She'eltot of Rabbenu Achai Gaon, the Halachot of Rabbenu Yitzchak Alfasi), we find various versions of that passage. Hence, it is possible to assume that the Rambam's statements are a quote from his text of the Talmud. since the world exists only by virtue of the breath coming from the mouths of children who study Torah.5for their breath is not tainted by sin (Shabbat, ibid.). Based on the latter statement, some authorities require the community to support children's study only until they reach bar-mitzvah, since afterwards they no longer possess this quality.
Children should be brought to study [under a teacher's instruction]1As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 6 and the commentary on it, even before a child reached that age his father would teach him particular verses from the Torah. at the age of six or seven,2Note the passage from Bava Batra quoted in the previous halachah and the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 6. according to the child's health and build.3This would determine when he would be able to begin the long and rigorous study program described in this halachah. Below the age of six, he should not be brought [to a teacher].4for he will not be able to absorb his studies (Bava Batra, ibid.).At present, it is customary to send children to school at much earlier ages. They are not subjected to such a rigorous schedule and much of the time is devoted to activities other than actual study. Nevertheless, their presence in school is important to develop their character and commitment to Jewish values.A teacher may employ corporal punishment to cast fear upon [the students].5The advice that Proverbs 13:24 gives a father: "He that spares the rod, hates his son," also applies to a teacher. Indeed, Makkot 8a equates a teacher to a father in this respect.Makkot 22b relates that Zechariah 13:6, "What are these wounds?...Those which I was wounded in the house of my beloved," refers to the beatings administered to school children.See also Chapter 3, Halachah 12 and Chapter 4, Halachah 5. However, he should not beat them cruelly, like an enemy.6Note the parallel of this expression to Jeremiah 30:14. Note also Chapter 4, Halachot 4-5, which recommend restraint and patience on the teacher's part. Therefore, he should not beat them with a rod or a staff, but rather with a small strap.7Bava Batra (ibid.) relates that Rav instructed Rav Shmuel bar Shilat (a well known teacher of children): When you beat a child, beat him only with a sandal strap. If [it motivates him] to study, then he will study. If he does not study, let him be in the company of the others. From Rav's words, we can infer that corporal punishment may be employed to try to motivate a student to be more attentive. However, if it does not prove to be a successful tool, it should not be used further, lest it create a permanent aversion to Torah study.[The teacher] should sit and instruct them the entire day and for a portion of the night, to train them to study during the day and night.8So that as adults, they will be accustomed to fulfilling the obligation mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 8. The children should not neglect [their studies] at all, except at the end of the day on the eve of the Sabbaths and festivals9i.e., they should study on the mornings of these days, but not in the afternoons.The commentaries have questioned the source for the Rambam's statements. Some have pointed to Sukkah 28a, which praises Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai for never leaving the house of study except on the eve of Pesach and the eve of Yom Kippur. Similarly, Pesachim 109a applies such praise to Rabbi Akiva. However, it is difficult to say that these are the sources for the Rambam's statements. Firstly, the passages refer to adults and not to children. Also, the fact that these passages cite the behavior of these Sages as worthy of praise seems to imply that it was exceptional and not the rule followed by most. and on the festivals themselves.10for study might disturb a child's conception of the air of rejoicing and celebration that must accompany the festivals. It must be noted that the Rambam suggests that adults use some of their time on the festivals to study (Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 6:19). On the Sabbath,11They should not cease their studies. Nevertheless... they should not begin new material.12for grasping it may involve difficulty and strain, which should be avoided on the Sabbath. (See Nedarim 37a.) However, they should review what was learned already.13for this does not involve tremendous strain.The children should never be interrupted from their studies, even for the building of the Temple.14Shabbat 119b makes this statement in the context of its description of the great merit of the children's study, as mentioned in the previous halachah. Indeed, this appears to be the Rambam's logic in the entire halachah. Since children's study is so important, no unnecessary interruptions should be made. This rigorous schedule of study is not followed today. Among the reasons given are the different goals for Torah study at present from those in the previous generations, as described in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 12. Alternatively, if today youth were subjected to such a schedule, they might rebel and no value would come of it.
A teacher of children who leaves the children and goes out,1Bava Batra 8b relates that Rav once found Rav Shmuel bar Shilat strolling in a garden. He reproved him: "Have you abandoned your faithfulness?"Rav Shmuel answered him: "You haven't seen me [strolling like this] for thirteen years. Furthermore, even now I am thinking about them." or [remains] with them but performs other work,2The commentaries have explained the source for this halachah as follows:The Jerusalem Talmud (D'mai 7:3) relates that Rabbi Yochanan encountered a teacher who looked emaciated. When the Sage enquired about him, his colleagues explained that he fasted. Rabbi Yochanan was very critical: "If a normal hired worker is forbidden to undergo penances lest he not produce as much as desired, how much more so does this apply to someone doing God's work."Accordingly, since we find that a person hired to do one job should not perform another at the same time (Tosefta, Bava Metzia 4:7), it can be assumed that a teacher should refrain from doing so. or is lazy in their instruction,3As is obvious from Hilchot S'chirut 10:7, this includes two elements:a) one who did not instruct the students; orb) one who erred in their instruction. is included in [the admonition (Jeremiah 48:10)]: "Cursed be he who performs God's work deceitfully.” Therefore, it is only proper to select a teacher who is God-fearing, teaches them at a fast pace,4In his commentary on Halachah 6, the Kessef Mishneh interprets mahir as one who teaches a large quantity of material. In his commentary on Psalms 45:2, Rav Sa'adiah Gaon translates that word as "expert." and instructs them carefully.5Bava Batra 21a-b emphasizes the importance of precise study by relating the following story: After Yoav returned from slaying all the males of Edom (II Samuel 11:16), King David asked him to explain his actions. He replied: "Doesn't Deuteronomy 25:19 state 'Wipe out all the males (zachor) of Amalek?’“ David told him: "You are mistaken; the verse reads 'Wipe out the memory (zecher) of Amalek.’“ Yoav told him: "I learned zachor." Later, Yoav sought out his teacher and chastised him severely for his carelessness.
A man who is unmarried should not teach children, because of the mothers who visit the children.1"lest he be aroused by women" (Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, ibid.). No woman2Even if she is married (Kessef Mishneh) should teach children, because of the fathers who visit the children.3lest they transgress the prohibition against yichud (being alone in a private place with someone of the other sex, Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, loc. cit.).Some authorities maintain that these prohibitions apply only to the classrooms of previous generations, which were often private and quite secluded. In contrast, they maintain that no prohibition exists in today's large schools. However, it is questionable if that conclusion can be reached in view of the text of Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah.
[A maximum of] 25 students should study under one teacher. If there are more than 25, but fewer than 40, an1Note the commentary of the Nimukei Yosef on Bava Batra 21a, which resolves the apparent contradiction between the Rambam's decision and that passage. Rabbenu Asher interprets that passage differently. assistant should be appointed to help him in their instruction.2Rashi (Bava Batra, ibid.) states that the assistant would listen to the verses read by the teacher, and then lead the children in their repetition. If there are more than forty students,3the class should be divided and... two teachers should be appointed.4Two conclusions can be derived from these statements:a) the maximum class size desired;b) the minimum service which a community is required to afford its children.Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:3) states that the above applies only to instruction in the Written Law. Instruction in the more complicated realms of study requires even smaller classes. However, a parent cannot demand that such instruction be provided from communal funds.As explained in the commentary on Halachot 1:12, 2:2, today the goals of study differ from those of the previous generations. On that basis, some schoolmasters excuse their willingness to exceed the limits on the teacher-student ratio mentioned here. Others state that they would like to establish such a ratio, but financial pressures prevent them from doing so.
A child may be transferred from one teacher to another teacher, who is capable of teaching him at a faster pace,1Note the commentary on Halachah 4 for a definition of the word mahir. whether with regard to the Written Law itself or grammar.2In the Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Karo mentions the passage from Bava Batra 21a, which questions which is preferable: a teacher who teaches the students at a rapid pace, or one who instructs them more precisely, but at a slower speed. In the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 245:19), he concludes that it is preferable to take the latter teacher. Errors which children learn become permanent elements of their thinking processes as mentioned in the commentary to Halachah 3. This applies when both are located in the same city3The Lechem Mishneh states that the Rambam derives this concept from Bava Batra (ibid.), which states:From the time of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Gamla, a child was not transferred from city to city, but he would be transferred from synagogue to synagogue...The Rambam interprets that statement to mean that once the practice of employing qualified teachers in each community was instituted, there was no longer a need to transfer a child from his home town to another city. However, within his city itself, he could be transferred from one house of study to another if there was adequate reason. and there is not a river between them. However, a child should not be forced to travel from city to city,4because of the difficulty involved in the journey or even from one side of the river to the other in the same city,5because of the danger involved. unless there is a strong bridge, which is not likely to fall readily, over the river.
If a person [whose house opens] to an alleyway [to which other houses open] - or even one [whose house opens] to a courtyard [to which other houses open] - desires to become a teacher of children, his neighbors may not protest against his decision.Similarly, should one teacher of children come and open a schoolroom next to the place [where] a colleague [was teaching], so that other children will come to him or so that the children [studying under his] colleague shall come to him, his colleague may not lodge a protest against him,1though such a practice would not be allowed in any other profession [if the new competitor came from a different country (see Hilchot Sh'chenim 6:8)], an exception is made regarding teaching Torah because... as [Isaiah 42:21 states]: "God desired, for the sake of His righteousness, to make the Torah great and glorious."2Bava Batra 21a, the source for this halachah, does not quote this verse, but rather explains: "the envy of the teachers will increase knowledge." The Yad Malachi explains that the Rambam frequently substitutes a different verse or explanation for the one quoted by the Talmud if he feels that his choice is more explanatory. However, the advantage of the verse chosen by the Rambam over the reason given by the Talmud requires explanation. This law has two dimensions: one relevant to the laws governing the consideration neighbors must afford each other and the possibility of competition between them, and one relevant to the laws of Torah study. The Talmudic passage cited above deals primarily with the rights of neighbors. Thus, it explains to a person who might feel that a colleague has overstepped his rights that he, himself, will benefit, because the spirit of competition will motivate him to increase his own Torah knowledge. In contrast, in these halachot the Rambam deals primarily with the importance of Torah study. Hence, he quotes a verse which emphasizes how important the increase of Torah study is (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. VI, p. 299).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
Three crowns were conferred upon Israel: the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of royalty. Aaron merited1The Sifre, ibid., states: "Aaron merited and took it." The Rambam omits the latter term, since priesthood (and, similarly, royalty) are not attributes that can be acquired by human effort, but rather must be conveyed by God. the crown of priesthood,2This includes two aspects:a) that his descendants alone will serve as priests;b) that one will be chosen as the High Priest." as [Numbers 25:13] states: "And it will be an eternal covenant of priesthood for him and his descendants after3See Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 4:1. him."David merited the crown of royalty, as [Psalms 89:37] states: "His seed will continue forever, and his throne will be as the sun before Me."The4In Hilchot Melachim 1:7, the Rambam writes:Once David was anointed, he acquired the crown of royalty. Afterwards, the kingship belongs to him and his male descendants, forever.It must be noted that in the present halachah, the Rambam quotes a different verse from that in Hilchot Melachim and in Avot D'Rabbi Natan. crown of Torah is set aside, waiting, and ready for each Jew,5The Sifre, ibid., uses the expression "for all inhabitants of the earth." Though some manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah read "for all," rather than "for each Jew," the printed text can be explained on the basis of Hilchot Melachim 10:9, which states: "A gentile who studies Torah is liable for the death penalty." Similarly, on the verse from Deuteronomy quoted below, Sanhedrin 59a comments: "It is our inheritance and not theirs."[Nevertheless, it must be pointed out that the same passage in Sanhedrin also describes the high levels which a gentile can attain by studying the rules of the seven general laws of human behavior given to Noah and his descendants. All Jews are obligated to assist the gentiles in this study. (See Hilchot Melachim 8:10.)] as [implied by Deuteronomy 33:4]: "The Torah which Moses commanded us is the inheritance of the congregation of Jacob."6and thus becomes the property of every Jew as soon as he is born. Because of the fundamental message implied by this verse, the Rambam chooses to quote it, rather than the verse mentioned in Avot D'Rabbi Natan, ibid. Similarly, the message conveyed by this verse is so important that it is taught to every Jewish child as soon as he learns to talk (Chapter 1, Halachah 6).Nevertheless, although, as the above verse implies, each Jew has an inherent connection to Torah, effort must be expended in order to reveal and develop that connection. In that vein, Avot 2:15 counsels: "Prepare yourself to study Torah, for it is not an inheritance." Therefore, the Rambam continues... Whoever desires7In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 4:17, the Rambam relates the content of this halachah and uses the expression: "Whoever desires to be crowned with the crown of Torah." may8fulfill the directives mentioned in this chapter, and thus... come and take it.9come and take it. Lest you say that the other crowns surpass the crown of Torah, [Proverbs 8:15-16] states: "By me, kings reign, princes decree justice,10the latter clause is omitted in many manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah. and nobles rule." Thus, you have learned that the crown of Torah is greater than the other two.11The Sifre, ibid., states: "Who is greater, the one who conveys the crown or the one who is crowned!" Thus, we can appreciate that the crown of Torah surpasses the crown of royalty. Since a king is given greater honor than the High Priest, we can also assume that the crown of Torah is greater than the crown of priesthood (Lechem Mishneh).
Our Sages1Horayot 13a declared that even a Torah Sage who is a mamzer2a child born from certain forbidden sexual relations. See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapter 1. deserves precedence over a high priest who is unlearned,3Though such a phenomenon was undesirable, it often occurred in the Second Temple period, when the High Priests were appointed by the Romans in return for excessive bribes. (See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Yoma 1:3.) as [implied by Proverbs 3:15]: "It is more precious than pearls."4Because of the similarity between the Hebrew for "pearls," peninim, and the Hebrew for "inner," p’nim. [That verse can be interpreted:]5Horayot, ibid., to mean: more precious than the High Priest who enters the innermost chambers.6i.e., the Holy of Holies.In the introduction to this text, the Rambam explained that he structured it to be halachot, halachot (law after law), implying that he would include only statements of Torah law. In contrast, other concepts, though ethically or philosophically significant, were not included.Accordingly, this halachah and the others in this chapter which praise Torah study must be understood as behavioral directives applicable with regard to:a) the arrangements of one's own priorities and goals in life;b) the order in which people must be given honor and respect.
None of the other mitzvot can be equated to the study of Torah. Rather, the study of Torah can be equated to all the mitzvot,1The Kessef Mishneh cites Pe'ah 1:1 as the source for this statement. That Mishnah lists a number of mitzvot whose "benefits are enjoyed in this world, though the principle [reward] remains for the world to come" and concludes "the study of Torah is equivalent to them all."However, the Lev Shlomo notes that the antecedents of the phrase "them all" are the various mitzvot which are mentioned previously in the mishnah and not "all the mitzvot of the Torah." Hence, he refers to the Jerusalem Talmud (Pe'ah 1:1), which states: "All the mitzvot of the Torah are not worth one word of the Torah." because study leads to deed.2for without study, one will never know how to fulfill the mitzvot properly. Therefore, study takes precedence over deed3See Chapter 1, Halachah 3, and the commentary on it.Though there is a similarity between the halachah cited above and the present one, the two are not redundant. That halachah deals with the course of action proper for a person whose father has not instructed him in Torah study. Thus, the Rambam tells him that rather than ignore Torah study and devote himself to the performance of good deeds alone, he should study.This chapter centers around the principle that Torah study is the highest rung a person can reach. Accordingly, the advice in this and the following halachah applies to even a person who has established a basis of Torah knowledge. It teaches him to seek personal fulfillment in study rather than in deed. Similarly, it advises us that the most propitious way to use each moment of spare time is to devote these moments to Torah study. in all cases.4with the exception of the instance mentioned in the following halachah.
[The following rules apply] when a person is confronted with the performance of a mitzvah and the study of Torah:1and the performance of the mitzvah would cause him to interrupt his studies. If the mitzvah can be performed by another individual, he should not interrupt his studies.2The Kessef Mishneh cites the following narrative from the Jerusalem Talmud (Pesachim 3:7):Rabbi Abahu sent his son to study in Tiberias. When he came to visit him, the local people praised his son for his piety in burying the dead. When he heard this, Rabbi Abahu rebuked his son severely, "Is it because there are no graves in Caesarea that I sent you to Tiberias?"Mo'ed Katan 9b derives the priority of study over the performance of mitzvot as follows:Proverbs 3:15 states: "None of your desires can be equated to it [the Torah]," implying that "your desires" - i.e., things which man wants - cannot be equated to Torah study, but "God's desires" - i.e., the mitzvot - can be equated with it.In contrast, Proverbs 8:11 states: "No desire" - seemingly implying even God's desires, the mitzvot - "can be equated to it." How can the two be resolved? When it is possible for the mitzvah to be performed by another individual, nothing takes precedence over Torah study. However, if there is no one else to perform the mitzvah, the performance of the mitzvah is given priority. If not,3If there is no way the mitzvah can be performed by another person - e.g., paying honor to a deceased person or collecting for charity, when one's position will cause one's words to have a greater effect than those of other people... he should perform the mitzvah,4Berachot 17a teaches: "The ultimate of knowledge is Teshuvah and good deeds." Similarly, the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 1:2) states that it would be preferable for a person who studies without performing the mitzvot never to have been created. Thus, the Jerusalem Talmud (Shabbat 1:2) relates that Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai, who would not interrupt his studies even for prayer, would stop studying to build a sukkah and to bind his lulav. The rationale behind the above statements can be explained as follows: As explained in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 3, the ultimate level of fulfillment man can reach is to step beyond his humanity and fulfill God's will, as revealed in the mitzvot. Nevertheless, priority is given to Torah study, because it possesses a twofold advantage over the other mitzvot: first, it leads to their fulfillment; second, it allows for an internalized connection to be established between the person and God. However, when the person ignores the fulfillment of the mitzvot, both those advantages are lost. Obviously, the study does not lead to deed, and, furthermore, his intellectual activity appears to be a matter of personal interest and not a process of connection to God. and then return to his studies.
The first aspect of a person's judgement [in the world to come] will center on Torah study. Only afterwards will his other deeds [be considered].1The statement is based on Sanhedrin 7a. Other sources (Shabbat 31a) state that the first question posed to a person in the world to come will be: "Did you deal faithfully in business?"Tosafot, Sanhedrin ibid., offers two possible resolutions to this apparent contradiction:a) A person who never studied at all is judged first regarding Torah study. However, one who studied, but did not establish fixed times for study is judged first regarding his business affairs;b) Even though the first question that the soul is asked centers on his business affairs, the first retribution he will receive will result from his neglect of Torah study.Accordingly, our Sages2See Pesachim 50b, Sotah 22b, Sanhedrin 105b. would say: "A person should always occupy himself in Torah study, whether for God's sake or even if not for God's sake,3The Rambam elaborates further on the definition of these concepts in Hilchot Teshuvah 10:4-5:The Sages of the previous generations declared: Should one say: "I will study Torah in order that I become wealthy, in order that I be called a Rabbi, or in order that I receive reward in the world to come?" The Torah teaches [Deuteronomy 11:13]: "[If you are careful to observe My commandments...] to love God;" [implying] that all that you do should be done only out of love.The Sages also said: [Psalms 112:1 instructs:] "Desire His commandments greatly." [Desire His commandments] and not the reward [that comes from] His commandments...Anyone who occupies himself with the Torah in order to receive reward or in order to protect himself from retribution is considered as one who is not occupied for God's sake.[In contrast,] anyone who occupies himself with it, not because of fear, nor to receive a reward, but rather because of his love for the Lord of the entire earth, Who commanded it, is one who occupies himself for God's sake. for from [the study of Torah which] is not carried out for God's sake4Rashi (Berachot 17a) and Tosafot (Ta'anit 7a) note that the Talmud is extremely critical of those who do not occupy themselves with the Torah for God's sake.Ta'anit 7a declares that whenever a person does not study Torah for God's sake, the Torah becomes a deadly potion for him. Berachot 17a states that it would have been better for a person who does not study Torah for God's sake not to have been born. In resolution, the commentaries explain that there are two levels of occupying oneself with Torah that is not for God's sake:a) to gain wealth, honor, or other benefits, as implied by the Rambam here;b) in order to vex a colleague.Our Sages suggest occupation with Torah study even if it is not intended for God's sake, if one has the former motives. However, if one's motives are the latter, then our Sages' harsh words of criticism apply. will come [the study of Torah which] is carried out for God's sake.5The introduction to Eicha Rabbah (2) quotes God as saying: "Would that Israel abandon Me and keep the Torah...for its light would ultimately return them to the good." If a Jew frequently occupies himself with Torah, the inner Godly nature of Torah will eventually have an effect upon him and motivate him to serve God with the proper intentions.There is a deeper aspect to this statement: The Hebrew mitoch, translated as "from," also can be interpreted as "from the inner part." Every element of a Jew's life is motivated by his Godly potential. Though he may think he is performing a mitzvah for selfish intent, the inner core of that service, its toch, is the Jew's desire to cling to God without any ulterior motive.The Rambam elaborates on the principle that selfish desires can be used as motivation for involvement in Torah in his Commentary on the Mishnah, in his introduction to the tenth chapter of Sanhedrin:When a young child is brought to a teacher to be taught the Torah, this is the greatest good for him, [allowing him] to attain fulfillment. However, because of his youth and underdeveloped intellect, [the child] does not comprehend this good...Therefore, it is necessary for the teacher...to motivate him to his studies with things that he loves...He should tell him: "I will give you nuts, figs, or a little honey." It is out of this motivation that the child [begins to] study. [The child studies] not because of the essence of the study, for the child has no comprehension of that, but because of the food. Eating these delicacies is more important to him than the actual study...When he becomes older and his intellect grows to the point where he realizes the worthlessness of these items, he should be encouraged and motivated to learn by the promise of things he holds dear. His teacher should tell him: "Study and I will buy you nice shoes or beautiful garments." Thus, he will study, not for the sake of the study itself, but for the garment, the garment becoming more valuable for him than the Torah...The Rambam continues mentioning other factors that may be employed to motivate older children - e.g., money or honor. He concludes:All this is degrading. Nevertheless, because of the limits of a person's intellect, it may be necessary to make the goal of wisdom something other than wisdom.In Hilchot Teshuvah (ibid.), the Rambam also emphasizes how a teacher must slowly mold a child's character and lead him, step by step, to an appreciation of the proper motives for the service of God:As their knowledge grows and their wisdom increases, this secret [service of God for His sake] should be revealed to them [slowly,] bit by bit. They should become accustomed to this concept gradually, until they grasp it and know it and begin serving [God] out of love.
A person whose heart inspires him to fulfill this mitzvah in a fitting manner1As explained in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 8, the Rambam's statements imply that there are two aspects of Torah study:a) The obligation to study Torah, which is incumbent on every individual: the establishment of fixed times for Torah study (Chapter 1, Halachah 8).b) A commitment to devote oneself to Torah study that has no limitations.The first aspect reflects a commitment that takes into consideration man's perspective, and, hence, is limited in scope. However, when a person views the Torah from God's perspective and appreciates its infinite nature, he will be inspired to make an unbounded commitment to Torah study. See also the commentary on the halachah mentioned above. and to become crowned with the crown of Torah2Note the commentary on Halachah 1. should not divert his attention to other matters.3On Deuteronomy 6:7: "Speak of them," the Sifre comments: "Speak of them, and not of other matters." He should not set his intent on acquiring Torah together with wealth and honor simultaneously.4for it is impossible to devote oneself to two different goals.[Rather,] this is the path of Torah:5This statement and the others in this halachah are a combination of quotes from Avot 6:4, 2:17 and 5:23. Eat bread with salt, drink water in small measure, sleep on the ground, live a life of difficulty, and toil in Torah.6The Rambam does not advocate ascetic penances. (See Hilchot De'ot 3:1.) Nor does he necessarily stipulate that "a life of difficulty" is a prerequisite for complete involvement in Torah study. However, it is often the only path with which one can attain that goal.Frequently, earning enough to live a life of comfort takes so much time that one will not be able to devote himself to Torah study in a fitting manner. Furthermore, indulgence in comfort often leads a person to preoccupation with his own needs and desires. Suddenly, he becomes faced with an entire host of "necessities," without which he cannot continue.The task is not incumbent upon you to complete,7If a person contemplates the totality of Torah knowledge which there is to grasp, he may be intimidated and unwilling to begin such an undertaking. Hence, he is counselled that he is not expected to complete its study. However,... nor are you free to desist from it.8and must endeavor to accomplish whatever you can. If you have acquired much Torah, you have acquired much reward,9The Mishnah continues to explain that the reward for the righteous will be in the world to come.It is difficult to understand why the Rambam emphasizes the aspect of reward, when in the previous halachah he stressed how one should not study Torah for ulterior motives. Included in the latter is also the reward in the world to come. and that reward is commensurate with the difficulty [invested].10In his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam interprets this to mean: "Your reward will be commensurate with the effort invested in Torah study." See also Halachah 12, which elaborates on the nature of the effort a person must invest in his Torah studies.In his introduction to Avot, Chapter 6, the Rambam offers a slightly different interpretation: "A person's reward will be commensurate with the effort necessary to overcome his natural inclination."
Perhaps, one will say: "[I will interrupt my studies] until after I gather money, and then I will return and study, [I will interrupt my studies] until after I buy what I need, and then, when I can divert my attention from my business, I will return and study."1Note Chapter 1, Halachah 5, which counsels studying Torah before marriage, so the yoke of financial responsibility will not interfere with one's studies. If you consider such thoughts, you will never merit the crown of Torah.2The commentaries have offered two reasons why such an individual will never merit "the crown of Torah:"a) Desire is never satisfied. "Whoever possesses one hundred, desires two hundred; whoever possesses two hundred, desires four hundred" (Kohelet Rabbah 1:34). Once a person has given his material concerns priority over Torah study, it is very difficult for him to reverse his pattern and devote himself completely to Torah study.b) The time which he lost while involved in business cannot be recovered, and thus, he will never reach the heights of Torah knowledge that he could have attained beforehand.Rather, make your work secondary, and your Torah study a fixed matter.3In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 1:14, the Rambam writes:Make your Torah study of primary importance and all your other affairs secondary. If they come your way, it is good, and if not, there is no loss in their absence.Similarly, in Hilchot De'ot 2:7, the Rambam quotes Avot 4:10, "Minimize your business involvement and occupy yourself with Torah."Nevertheless, a person need not fear that involvement in Torah study will prevent him from achieving prosperity. Berachot 35b relates:The Sages of the previous generations made their Torah study primary and their business affairs secondary, and achieved success in both. We have made our business affairs primary and our Torah study secondary, and have not achieved success in either.Do not say: "When I have free time, I will study," for perhaps, you will never have free time. - In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 2:5, the Rambam also associates this statement of Hillel's with the statement of Shammai quoted above. Do not say: "When I have free time, I will study," for perhaps you will never have free time.
It is written in the Torah [Deuteronomy1Rav Kapach renders this: "It is written about the Torah," emphasizing that according to the Rambam, the antecedent of the pronoun "it" in the above verse is Torah study and not Teshuvah, as explained by the Ramban and others. 30:12, 13]: "It is not in the heavens....It is not across the sea...." [This implies:] "It is not in the heavens"2i.e., it is not found in the proud spirited. - and self-centered. Such an attitude runs contrary to the spirit of Torah and, ultimately, prevents one from grasping it, as explained in the following halachah. - i.e., it is not found in the proud spirited. "It is not across the sea"3i.e., it is not found in those who travel across the sea - for business purposes. In contrast, one is advised to travel to study Torah, as Avot relates: "Exile yourself to a place of Torah." - i.e., it is not found in those who travel across the sea.Therefore, our Sages said:4Avot 2:5 "Not everyone who is involved in business will become wise."5In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam quotes the content of this halachah. Our Sages also commanded:6Avot 4:12 "Minimize your business activities and occupy7The Hebrew, la’asok, is also used in the Ashkenazic text of the blessings recited before Torah study. In most contexts, that word is rendered as "business." Thus, employing it in the blessing implies that the manner in which a person applies himself to Torah study should resemble the way a businessman applies himself to his business, making it the central matter of his life. yourself with Torah."8The practical applications of these concepts are found in the following halachah.
The words of Torah can be compared to water, as [Isaiah 55:1] states: "Behold, all who are thirsty, come to the water."1Ta'anit 7a mentions the ideas related by the Rambam as well as other dimensions of the comparison between Torah and water. This teaches you that just as water does not collect on an incline, but rather flows from it and collects in a low place, similarly, the words of Torah will not be found in the arrogant or in the hearts of any of the haughty,2i.e., the nature of such a personality does not allow an individual to grasp the words of Torah. As obvious from the contrast with the humble, pride prevents one from grasping Torah for two reasons:a) A proud person will be less likely to make the effort necessary to open himself up to the instruction of a master;b) Pride often leads a person to material desire, whose pursuit will take a person away from devotion to Torah study. but rather in the humble and lowly, who sit in the dust at the feet of the Sages3The Rambam borrows the phraseology of Avot 1:4. Others render the phrase: "Become dusty [pursuing] the Sages' feet" - i.e., follow them everywhere out of thirst to learn from them.and remove the desires and pleasures of the times from their hearts - See Halachah 12. and remove the desires and pleasures of the times from their hearts. They do only a minimal amount of work each day [to earn] their livelihood if they have nothing else to eat.4Note the narrative from Yoma 35b quoted in the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 8, which describes Hillel's daily activities. The rest of their days and nights5See Halachah 13. are involved with Torah study.
Anyone who comes to the conclusion that he should involve himself in Torah study without doing work and derive his livelihood from charity, desecrates [God's] name,1In Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah, Chapter 5, and Hilchot Teshuvah 1:4, the Rambam mentions the severity of the sin of desecrating God's name. dishonors the Torah, extinguishes the light of faith, brings evil upon himself, and forfeits the life of the world to come, for it is forbidden to derive benefit from the words of Torah in this world.2See the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 7, which quotes the Rambam's commentary on Avot at length, strongly decrying the deriving of material benefit from one's Torah knowledge.These convictions are also expressed in Hilchot Matnot Ani'yim 10:18, which states:Even a dignified Sage who becomes poor should work in a profession, even a degrading profession, rather than seek public assistance. It is better to skin the hides of dead animals than to tell the people, "I am a Sage, support me."Our greatest Sages were wood-choppers, porters, water-drawers... They did not ask anything from the public and refused to accept anything that was given to them.The Kessef Mishneh takes issue with the Rambam's statements and states that there is no prohibition against a Torah Sage receiving support from others. Though the Rambam quotes many examples of sages who performed simple labors to earn their livelihood, the Kessef Mishneh explains how none of them can be taken to be conclusive proof of the Rambam's position.For example, the Rambam quotes Yoma 35b, which relates how Hillel would do simple work to earn his sustenance. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Talmud's statements about Hillel were made before his greatness was appreciated. There is no proof that he continued working as a common laborer afterwards.The practice of taking payment for Torah study has its source in Tosafot, Ketubot 106a, which relates that individuals who give up the opportunity to earn their livelihood in other professions so that they can teach Torah or serve as judges are able to receive remuneration, because, in essence, they are not receiving payment for their Torah, but for their time.The Kessef Mishneh concludes:It is possible to explain that our master's intention is that a person should not cast off the yoke of labor in order to receive his livelihood from others in order to study. Rather, first, he should learn a profession with which he can sustain himself. If that is sufficient for him, it is good. If not, he may receive his livelihood from the community...Even if this is not our master's intention, as apparent from his Commentary on the Mishnah, whenever one is in doubt about the halachah, one should follow the custom. We have seen all the Sages of Israel, both before and after our master, accepting their livelihood from the community.Furthermore, even if the halachah followed our master..., it is possible that all the sages of the [previous] generations agreed to do so because...if the livelihood of the scholars and the teachers were not available, they would not be able to labor in Torah as is fitting, and the Torah would be forgotten, Heaven forbid. Since it is available, they are able to study, "and Torah is magnified and becomes stronger."These ideas are quoted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 246:5). It must be noted that even the Rambam (Chapter 6, Halachah 10, Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.,Hilchot De'ot 6:2) allows a person to give a sage money to invest, or to afford him other benefits in commerce and trade.Our Sages declared:3Avot 4:5. "Whoever benefits from the words of Torah forfeits his life in the world."4The Kessef Mishneh quoted above refers to the Rambam's commentary on this Mishnah. Major portions of the Rambam's statements are cited in our commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 7. Also, they commanded and declared:5Avot, ibid. The Rambam reverses the order of the statements in the Mishnah, perhaps, because the first clause is more explicit. Alternatively, because chronologically, Hillel, the author of the latter clause, preceded Rabbi Tzadok, the author of the former. "Do not make them a crown to magnify oneself,6a source of honor, nor an axe to chop with."7i.e., a means of deriving a livelihood. Also, they commanded and declared:8Avot 1:10. "Love work and despise Rabbinic positions."9In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam writes: "Without work, it will be difficult for him for him, and he will steal and cheat. Seeking positions of honor will bring about challenges."Similarly, Avot 2:2 teaches: All Torah that is not accompanied by work will eventually be negated and lead to sin.10That Mishnah begins: "Torah is beautiful when accompanied by work." Ultimately, such a person will steal from others.11The commentaries cite Kiddushin 29a: "Whoever does not teach his son a profession is as if he taught him to steal," as the source for the Rambam's statements.
It is a tremendous advantage for a person to derive his livelihood from his own efforts.1and not from charity. This attribute was possessed by the pious of the early generations.2Among the examples of sages who worked as craftsmen mentioned in the Talmud are Rav Huna - a drawer of water (Ketubot 105a), Rabbi Meir - a barber (Eruvin 13a), Rabbi Yehudah - a porter (Nedarim 49b), and Rav Yosef - a miller, Rav Sheshet - a porter (Gittin 67b). In this manner, one will merit all [types3One of the rationales given by many of the Rabbis who permit scholars to derive benefit from their studies is that performing menial work will cheapen the common man's appreciation of them, and thus minimize the honor given to the Torah.The Rambam (see the Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.) holds the very opposite. The common people will respect a person who honestly earns his livelihood and will look down on a person who derives his income from charity. of] honor and benefit in this world4i.e., God will grant him blessing and he will be able to earn a respectable income through his efforts.In Hilchot Teshuvah 9:1, the Rambam elaborates how God will grant material blessings to a person who dedicates himself to Torah and mitzvot. These blessings will, in turn, afford him the opportunity of continuing and increasing his service of God. and in the world to come,5Though the person will also realize benefit in this world, "the principle remains for the world to come" (Pe'ah 1:1). (See also Hilchot Teshuvah, ibid.) as [Psalms 128:2] states: "If you eat the toil of your hands,6On this verse, the Rabbis commented: 'the toil of your hands,' and not 'the toil of your heads.’“ When a person works with his hands, his mind is free to think about Torah. When he returns home, he may be physically tired, but he has no pressures from his business. In contrast, those whose profession involves mental effort have more difficulty diverting their attention from these matters to Torah. you will be happy and7in this world. "It will be good for you" - in the world to come, which is entirely good. it will be good for8Berachot 8a interprets this verse to mean... you.""You will be happy" - in this world. "It will be good for you" - in the world to come, which is entirely good.
The words of Torah will not be permanently acquired by a person who applies himself feebly [to obtain] them, and not by those who study amid pleasure and [an abundance] of food and drink.1The pursuit of pleasure will prevent him from devoting himself to Torah study. During the time he is enjoying material benefits (how much more so if he has to work to earn the funds to obtain them), he could have been studying Torah. Rather, one must give up his life for them,2the words of Torah constantly straining his body to the point of discomfort,3As mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 6, the Rambam is not alluding to ascetic penances, but rather to the dedication of all one's energies to the acquisition of Torah knowledge. without granting sleep to his eyes or slumber to his eyelids.4Note the following halachah, which describes the advantages of studying at night.The Sages alluded to this concept,5Berachot 63b; Midrash Tanchumah, No'ach 3 [interpreting Numbers 19:14:] "This is the Torah, a man should he die in a tent..."6Generally, the verse would be translated: "This is the law [when] a man..." However, the literal translation of the words was quoted to demonstrate the connection to our Sages' comments more graphically. [to mean that] the Torah cannot be permanently acquired except by a person who gives up his life in the tents of wisdom.7Our Sages frequently associated the expression "tents" with houses of study. (See the commentaries on Genesis 25:27 and Deuteronomy 33:18.)Similarly, Solomon said in his wisdom [Proverbs 24:10]: "If you faint in the day of adversity, your strength is small."8When you minimize your involvement in Torah because of difficulties, then "your strength" - your Torah knowledge - will be "small" - will not remain with you (Lechem Mishneh).Others cite Berachot 63a: "Anyone who applies himself feebly to the words of Torah will not have the strength to stand in a day of adversity." He also said [Ecclesiastes 2:9]: "Also, my wisdom remained with me." [This can be interpreted to mean:] The wisdom which I learned in anger,9The Hebrew word af can have both meanings - "even" and "anger." this is what remained with me.10The commentaries interpret this as a reference to the anger displayed by the teachers during their instruction. (See Matnat K'hunah, Kohelet Rabbah 2:9.) This continues the theme that the dedication to Torah study beyond one's nature is the key to acquiring Torah as one's own.In his commentary on Avot 5:19, the Rambam quotes this verse and interpretation, and associates it with the advice he gives teachers in Chapter 4, Halachah 5, to cast fear into the hearts of the students.Our Sages declared:11Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 5:1 A covenant has been established that anyone who wearies himself in Torah study in a house of study12Many manuscripts substitute "in a synagogue," as is the text in the Jerusalem Talmud. will not forget it quickly.13i.e., the fact that study is carried out in a house of study itself contributes to its retention by the students. Accordingly, our Sages highly recommend that one study in a house of study (or at least in a synagogue) whenever possible. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 4:10.) Anyone who wearies himself in Torah study in private will become wise, as [Proverbs 11:2] states: "To the modest will come14It must be noted that Berachot 63b severely criticizes those who study Torah alone (when they have the opportunity to study with others). Similarly, in the following chapter, when the Rambam discusses the actual process of study, he continually refers to a teacher studying with many students. wisdom."Whoever raises his voice during his studies15The Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 5:1, emphasizes that one should not raise one's voice overly loud. will permanently acquire the subject matter.16II Samuel 23:5 states: "for He has made an everlasting covenant with me, ordered in all and preserved." Eruvin 54a interprets the "everlasting covenant" as a reference to the Torah, and states: "If it is ordered in all a person's 248 limbs" - i.e., if his entire body is involved in his study - "it will be preserved."The Tanya, Chapter 38, explains that a person who studies out loud and invests his energy in Torah study elevates his body and natural life force.In contrast, one who reads silently will forget quickly. - It is difficult to ignore the contrast between secular study, which is carried out in a silent library, and the study of Torah carried out in a noisy house of study, each person verbalizing the subject matter which he is studying.Based on Berachot 15b and the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 62:3, Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 2:12) states that the study of Torah is comparable to other mitzvot associated with speech. A person cannot fulfill his obligation through mere thought, and must either vocalize the words himself or hear from someone else who reads out loud. In contrast, one who reads silently will forget quickly.
Even though it is a mitzvah to study during the day and at night,1See Chapter 1, Halachah 8. it is only at night that a person acquires most of his wisdom.2Eruvin 65a states: "The moon was created only for Torah study." The term "wisdom" is interpreted as a reference to those aspects of Torah study described as Gemara or Talmud (Chapter 1, Halachah 11). At night, when a person is removed from his daytime pressures, he is able to concentrate more on these abstract subjects. Therefore, a person who desires to merit the crown of Torah3See the commentary on Halachah 1 with regard to the latter term. should be careful with all his nights, not giving up even one to sleep,4Hilchot De'ot 4:4 states that a person should sleep eight hours each night. The commentaries have questioned whether here, the Rambam is advising a person to strain himself beyond those limits, or whether the Rambam is merely stating that the nighttime hours a person has available should be devoted to Torah study. eating, drinking,5In Hilchot De'ot 5:1, the Rambam counsels: "A Torah Sage should not be a glutton. Rather, he should eat only the foods that are appropriate for his physical health and [even of those], he should not partake excessively. He should not pursue [food] after filling his gut." talk,6In general, the Rambam advises against excessive speech. Hilchot De'ot 2:4 states: "A person should also remain silent to a great extent, and speak only about words of wisdom or things he requires to maintain his existence." or the like. Rather, [they should be devoted to] the study of Torah and the words of wisdom.Our Sages declared: "The song of Torah can [be heard] only at night, as [Eichah 2:19] states: 'Arise, sing out at night...’“7Note the commentaries on Deuteronomy 31:19, which describe the Torah as God's song.Whoever occupies himself with Torah study at night will have a strand of [Divine] favor extended over him during the day, as [implied by Psalms 42:9]: "During the day, God ordains His kindness and, at night, His song is with me, a prayer to the living God."8Avodah Zarah 3b comments: "Why does 'God ordain His kindness during the day'? Because 'at night, His song (the Torah) is with me.’“[In contrast], any house in which the words of Torah cannot be heard at night will be consumed by fire, as [implied by Job 20:26]: "All the darkness9i.e., the nights is hidden away from His treasures;10the Torah. Therefore, a fire that need not be blown will consume him."[The verse, Numbers 16:31,] "He scorned the word of God," applies to someone who pays no attention to Torah at all.11This is the opinion of Rabbi Natan, as quoted in Sanhedrin 99a, and in the Sifre, Sh'lach. Similarly, anyone who has the potential to occupy himself with Torah study and does not,12Sanhedrin, op. cit.) quotes Rabbi Nehorai for this definition of the above verse. or who has studied both the Written and Oral Law and turned away to the vanities of the world, leaving behind his study and ignoring it, is included in the category13This definition is not mentioned in any of the opinions quoted in Sanhedrin or the Sifre in the definition of the above verse. of "those who scorn the word of God."14The Lechem Mishneh emphasizes that this severe condemnation applies even when a person ignores his study out of laziness and idle tendencies, without any contempt or disrespect for the Torah.Our Sages declared: "Whoever neglects Torah study when wealthy will ultimately neglect it amidst poverty. Whoever maintains the Torah in poverty will ultimately maintain it amidst prosperity."15In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam writes: A person who studies Torah in poverty and need, straining himself to study despite these pressures, will ultimately merit to study amidst prosperity without any disturbances to his study.[Conversely,] a person who neglects Torah study because he is prosperous and, therefore, is busy eating, drinking, and seeking pleasure, will ultimately become poor to the extent that the reason he neglects Torah study will be his pursuit of his daily bread. This concept is explicitly mentioned in the Torah [Deuteronomy 28:47-48], which states: "Because you did not serve God, your Lord, with happiness and good feeling when there was an abundance of everything, you shall serve your enemies,"16This interpretation of the verse resembles that of Rashi's commentary on the Torah. Note the conclusion of Hilchot Lulav, where the Rambam interprets the verse differently, stressing the importance of serving God with joy. and [Deuteronomy 8:16] states: "so that you shall suffer...so that ultimately He will make you prosper."

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
Torah should be taught only to a proper student1Psalms 50:16 states, "Wicked man, why do you discuss My laws?" - one whose deeds2his observance of the mitzvot are attractive3or to a person whose behavior is unknown. - Berachot 28a relates that Rabban Gamliel restricted entry to the house of study to any student "whose inside did not reflect his outside" - i.e., to anyone whose character did not match his external appearance as a Torah scholar.Rabban Gamliel's colleagues did not agree with this approach, and when Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah was appointed in his place, these restrictions were lifted. That day, hundreds of students streamed into the house of study, and even Rabban Gamliel felt the need to reconsider his approach. (See Lechem Mishneh.)[The Chiddushei Harim questioned Rabban Gamliel's change of heart. Did he not know that when the restrictions were lifted, more students would enter the house of study? However, Rabban Gamliel saw that once the students entered the house of study, the environment had a positive effect on their characters and prompted self-refinement. Therefore, he reconsidered.] - or to a person whose behavior is unknown. However, [a potential student] who follows bad ways should4first be influenced to correct his behavior and trained to follow a straight path.5of Torah living. [After he repents, his deeds] are examined and6only then he is allowed to enter the house of study to be instructed. Our Sages said:7Chullin 133a Whoever teaches an improper student is considered as if he throws a stone to Mercury,8i.e., Mercury, the Roman god of wayfarers. His symbol was three stones positioned in the form of a triangle. He was worshiped by throwing stones at that symbol. as [Proverbs 26:8] states: "As one who winds a stone in a sling,9the worship of Mercuryso is he who gives honor to a fool." There is no "honor" other than Torah, as [Proverbs 3:35] states: "The wise shall inherit honor." - Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Hilchot Talmud Torah 4:17 and Kuntres Acharon 4:1) emphasizes that the restriction applies only to the teacher. The student, himself, should endeavor to study, and it is hoped that the Torah will motivate him to improve his behavior. (See Chapter 3, Halachah 5.)Furthermore, if the student seeks very earnestly to study, even though he has not changed his behavior, he should be instructed, the teacher carefully balancing his reproofs with positive reinforcement. Our Sages (see the uncensored text of Sotah 47a) were highly critical of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Parchiah, who "pushed Jesus away with two hands," and thus caused him to forsake Judaism entirely. so is he who gives honor to a fool." There is no "honor" other than Torah, as [Proverbs 3:35] states: "The wise shall inherit honor."Similarly, one should not study from a teacher who does not follow a proper path, even though he10the teacher is a very wise man and his [instruction] is required by the entire nation, until he returns to a good path,11Mo'ed Katan 17a relates that there was a Torah sage whose knowledge was needed by his community. However, because of his unsavory behavior, Rav Yehudah placed him under a ban of ostracism. as [implied by Malachi 2:7]: "For the priest's lips shall keep knowledge, and they shall seek Torah from his mouth, because he is a messenger from the Lord of Hosts."Our Sages said:12Mo'ed Katan (ibid.) If a teacher resembles "a messenger13The Hebrew malach also means angel. of the Lord of Hosts," seek Torah from his mouth.14Implied is that in addition to having knowledge and the ability to communicate it, a teacher must be a paradigm of Torah behavior, fit to be emulated by his students.If he does not, do not seek Torah from his mouth. - Chaggigah 15b questions how Rabbi Meir would study from Acher, a great sage who scorned the observance of mitzvot. It explains that Rabbi Meir followed the instruction of Proverbs 22:17: "Turn your ear, hear the words of the wise, and direct your heart to My intention," which implies that one can "hear the words of the wise" and, instead of being influenced by them, "direct your heart to My (God's) intention."The Talmud continues, explaining that only a sage of stature who can "suck a pomegranate and discard its shell" may follow such a course of behavior. Most people should refrain from studying under such teachers.Accordingly, the Lechem Mishneh concludes that the Rambam did not quote the passage from Chaggigah because, at present, there are none who are of a stature great enough not to be influenced by a teacher of improper character.The Sefer Kovetz notes that the Rambam mentions this verse in the beginning of his introduction to the Guide to the Perplexed, alluding to the fact that, in composing that work, he had to follow Rabbi Meir's example and study under teachers whose behavior he would not desire to emulate. Nevertheless, this did not represent a contradiction to his omission of this teaching in the Mishneh Torah. We find that under extraordinary conditions, it is permitted to follow a minority opinion in the Talmud. Hence, when the Rambam saw the need to compose a text like the Guide to the Perplexed, he felt that under such conditions, he should follow Rabbi Meir's example. If he does not, do not seek Torah from his mouth.
How is [Torah] taught? The teacher sits at the head and the students sit around him, so that all can see the teacher and hear his words.1Keritot 6a states: "When you sit before your teacher, look at his face, as [implied by Isaiah 30:20]: 'And your eyes shall behold your teachers.54The teacher should not sit on a chair, [while] his students [sit] on the ground. Rather, either everyone should sit on the ground2Mo'ed Katan 16b praises King David for forgoing his royal honor and sitting on the floor to study together with the Rabbis. or everyone should sit on chairs.3Megillah 21a notes that God told Moses (Deuteronomy 5:28 : "stand together with me." Since God neither stands nor sits, the verse obviously refers to the proper approach to instruction, where no distinction is made between the teachers and the students.Rabbenu Nissim and other commentators cite certain Talmudic passages which appear to contradict this principle. He explains that sometimes the teacher would sit in an upraised position, so that the students could hear his words more easily. Alternatively, when a sage possessed semichah, the distinct Rabbinic ordination conveyed in a line from teacher to teacher, stretching back to Moses, he was granted greater privileges.Originally, the teacher would sit and the students would stand. - The Lechem Mishneh notes that this appears to be a direct contradiction to the principle of equality mentioned beforehand. However, he explains that the teachers were allowed to sit in order to be able to relax and transmit the subject matter more clearly. Hence, adopting that position does not represent any superiority over the students.Originally, the teacher would sit and the students would stand. [However,] before the destruction of the Second Temple, everyone followed the practice of teaching while both they and the students were seated.4Megillah (ibid.) states:From the time of Moses, our teacher, until Rabban Gamliel, people studied Torah only while standing; after Rabban Gamliel died, sickness descended on the world and they would study Torah while seated.This refers to Rabban Gamliel the elder. Sotah 9:16 relates that when he died: "The honor of the Torah was nullified." Commenting on that Mishnah, the Rambam associates the nullification of the Torah's honor with the practice of studying while seated.
If the teacher [desires] to instruct the students personally, he is entitled to do so. If he [desires to] teach through the medium of a spokesman,1There is a difference of opinion between the commentaries regarding the function of this individual. Rashi, Yoma 20b, considers him to be a translator, and, indeed, that is the literal meaning of the term metargaman. In Babylon and even in Eretz Yisrael, the popular spoken language was Aramaic, while many of the Sages preferred to teach in Hebrew. Therefore, they would speak to the spokesman in a hushed tone in Hebrew, and he would translate the teachings to Aramaic and teach them to the public in a loud voice.Others maintain that the spokesman was no more than a "human microphone." Rather than have the sage weary himself in speaking in a tone which all could hear, he would speak softly, and the spokesman would speak in a tone that all could hear. This opinion is supported by certain passages (e.g., Kiddushin 31b), which refer to the spokesman as amoriyah, which is the Aramaic for metargaman.The Ra'avad mentions a third perspective, explaining that the spokesman also communicated the teacher's words in a manner that could be understood and grasped by the students. Rabbi Shalom Dovber of Lubavitch follows a similar, but not identical, view. In Yom Tov Shel Rosh Hashanah 5666, he elaborates on this concept in detail, explaining that the teacher was on too high a level to explain his ideas in a manner which the common people could understand. Therefore, he would employ a spokesman, who, though he was able to comprehend the teacher's statements, was on a level that his explanations would not be too sophisticated for the people to grasp. (See also Kohelet Rabbah 7:12, 9:24.)The use of a spokesman was also a sign of honor and respect for the teacher. (See Rashi, Deuteronomy 32:44.) the spokesman should stand between him and the students. The teacher speaks to the spokesman2in a hushed tone and he announces the teaching to all the students.3in a manner in which they could hear. (See Sotah 40a, Chullin 15a, from which we can derive a picture of the process of instruction.)When they ask the spokesman a question, he asks the teacher.4in a hushed tone, as explained. The teacher, [in turn,] replies to the spokesman5in a hushed tone and the spokesman replies to the questioner.6out loud, so that others can hear.The teacher should not raise his voice above that of the spokesman.7The Kessef Mishneh cites Berachot 45a, which quotes the manner in which Moses relayed God's words at the giving of the Torah (Exodus 19:19  as the source for this concept. Nevertheless, others note that the passage in Berachot refers to a metargaman who translates the Torah reading for the people, and is not necessarily relevant to the situation at hand. Rather, they suggest that the descriptions of the use of spokesmen in the passages cited above serve as the source for this idea. Similarly, when the spokesman asks a question of the teacher, he should not raise his voice above that of the teacher.8as a mark of respect and deference.The spokesman is not allowed to detract from, add to, or change [the teacher's words],9The Rambam's statements are quoted from the Jerusalem Talmud, Megillah 4:10. The Ra'avad differs, and quotes a narrative from Yoma 20b, which relates how Rav served as a spokesman for Rav Shilat and altered the connotation of his words. The Ra'avad explains that since Rav's scholarship was greater than Rav Shilat's, he was entitled to do so.The Kessef Mishneh states that the Rambam did not mention such a possibility, because it is very improbable that a greater sage would serve as a spokesman for a sage of lesser stature. unless he is the teacher's father or teacher.10Rabbenu Nissim explains that a teacher or father is allowed to serve as a spokesman for his students, since they will not be jealous of the honor afforded him. The Kessef Mishneh relates that the Rambam's phraseology indicates a situation which is bidievad (after the fact), and ideally, neither a father or teacher should serve in this position.There is one exception to the above principle, and, in the following situation, the spokesman should alter the teachers words... If the teacher tells the spokesman: "My teacher told me the following..." or "My father and teacher told me the following...," when the spokesman relates the teaching to the people, he should quote the statement in the name of the sage [who authored it],11i.e., the teacher's father or teacher mentioning the name of the teacher's father or teacher, saying: "So and so, the sage, said the following..."12Kiddushin 31b relates that when Rav Ashi's son lectured, he would tell the spokesman: "This is what my father and teacher said...," and the spokesman would say: "This is what Rav Ashi said..." [This is allowed] despite the fact the teacher did not mention the sage's name, because it is forbidden to refer to one's teacher or father by name.13Kiddushin (ibid.) mentions this concept within the context of the laws governing the respect due to one's father. (See Hilchot Mamrim 6:3.) This concept is also quoted in Chapter 5, Halachah 5, as an expression of the proper respect due a teacher.
If the teacher taught [a concept] and it was not grasped by the students, he should not become upset with them1In Hilchot De'ot 2:3, the Rambam explains in detail how "anger is a very bad trait, and it is proper for a person to separate himself from it entirely."He continues (ibid. 2:5) explaining how a teacher should instruct the students "in a composed and pleasant manner, without shouting." Here, as well, he does not center on the negative aspects of anger in its own right, but rather its impropriety as an educational technique. and display anger.2Note the Mishnah, Avot 2:5, cited by the Rambam in the following halachah. Soferim 16:2 states: "One should teach the Talmud with a pleasant countenance and the aggadah with a patient countenance." Rather, he should repeat and review the matter, even if he must do so many times, until they appreciate the depth of the halachah.3Deuteronomy 31:19 states that Torah must be placed in a student's mouth. Eruvin 54b interprets this as a charge to teachers, requiring them to review the subject matter with their students until the latter comprehend it fully. The passage continues, praising Rabbi Pereidah for teaching one of his students each point four hundred times.Though patience is generally required of a teacher, there are times when he should display anger as explained in the following halachah.Similarly, the student should not say "I understood" when he did not understand.4Derech Eretz Zuta, Chapter 2, states: If you desire to study, Do not say "I have comprehended it," when you have not. Rather, he should ask again and again, even if he requires several repetitions.5The teacher's patient devotion to his students must be reflected by them. They must dedicate themselves to understanding their teacher's words and steadfastly apply themselves to their study until they comprehend. If his teacher becomes upset with him and displays anger, he should tell him: "My teacher, this is Torah. It is necessary that I study, and my powers of comprehension are weak."6Megillah 28a relates that Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi gave such a reply to Rabbi Yehoshua ben Korchah after the latter impatiently rebuked him for what seemed an irrelevant question.
A student should not be embarrassed1and therefore be prevented from asking questions. because his colleagues grasped the subject matter the first or second time, while he did not understand it until it was repeated a number of times.2On the contrary, he should ask that it be repeated, and his colleagues are obligated to show him the courtesy of patiently listening to the repetition. If he becomes embarrassed because of such matters, he will find himself going in and out of the house of study without learning anything.3Berachot 63b teaches: "Any student who humbles himself because of the words of Torah will ultimately be uplifted." Rashi explains that this refers to a student who asks all the questions that bother him even though his colleagues look down upon him.Accordingly,4This refers to both this and the previous halachah the Sages of the previous generations stated:5Avot 2:5 "A bashful person will not learn, nor should the short-tempered6The two faults lead to the same difficulty. The teacher will explain the subject matter in a manner which he thinks is correct. However, it will not be grasped by the students. teach."When does the above7the directive that a teacher should patiently repeat his words without displaying anger apply? When the students did not understand the subject matter because of its depth or because of their limited powers of comprehension. However, if it appears to the teacher that they are not applying themselves to the words of Torah and are lax about them, and, therefore, do not understand,8further repetition will not help, for the students will not concentrate then, either. Therefore, he is obligated to display anger9This translation is based on Hilchot De'ot 2:3, which explains that a person may act in an angry matter to cast fear into the hearts of others. However, he, himself, should not be angry. towards them and shame them with his words, to sharpen their powers of concentration.10Since their difficulty stemmed from their lack of concentration, by forcing the students to apply themselves, the teacher will enable them to learn. In this context, our Sages said:11Ketubot 103b relates that Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi mentioned this concept in his last will and testament. In particular, this advice was given to his son, Rabban Gamliel, with regard to the manner in which he should conduct himself as a nasi. The Rambam interprets the lesson as more general in nature and applies it to the relationship between every teacher and student. "Cast fear into the12Similarly, Shabbat 30b states that a student must sit in utter dread of his teacher. students."Therefore,13in order to cultivate this aura of respect it is not fitting for a teacher to act frivolously in the presence of his students.14In general, the Rambam advises against frivolous behavior, and favors a reserved, but pleasant and happy approach to others. (See Hilchot De'ot 2:7, 5:2.) He should not amuse himself in their presence, nor should he eat and drink with them.15This does not imply that a teacher must demonstrate a totally stern approach. Shabbat (ibid.) relates how Rabbah would begin his lectures with a witty statement. His students would laugh and, afterwards, he would sit in awe and begin the lesson. [These restrictions are intended] so that they fear him and study under him at a fast pace.
When the teacher enters the house of study, questions should not be posed to him until he gathers his powers of concentration.1lest he be prodded into responding hastily, without thinking out the matter in its entirety [Thus,] a student should not ask until he sits2as mentioned in Halachah 2 and rests.3and rests. Two should not ask at once.4First, this is proper manners. Second, it is impossible to hear two people simultaneously. A teacher should not be asked about an outside matter, but rather, [only] regarding the subject which they5he and the students are involved with, lest he6not know the answer... become embarrassed.7and give an incorrect reply. Shabbat 3b relates that Rabbi Chiyya gave Rav this advice after he asked a question of Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi concerning an unrelated matter.In the process of instruction...The teacher may [deliberately] lead the students astray with his questions8asking about matters which are unrelated, to see whether the students can follow the line of thought.Berachot 43b relates that Rabbah made certain statements that ran contrary to the Sages' teachings about the mitzvah of sending away the mother bird. The Talmud explains that he did this in order to check his students' knowledge. Eruvin 13a relates that Rabbi Akiva also made statements with a similar intent. and the deeds he carries out in their presence to sharpen their powers of concentration9e.g., Chullin 43b relates that Rabbah inspected an animal to see whether it was kosher or not, in a manner which contradicted his own teachings. Here, too, it is explained that his intention was to test his students. and to test whether they remember what he taught them or not. Needless to say, he may ask them regarding another matter, which they are not presently involved with,10Bava Metzia 97a relates that a teacher has the right to change the subject matter which the students are studying. However, it does not provide the explanation given by the Rambam here. to spur them on.11to pique their curiosity and stimulate their desire to learn.
A person should not ask a question while standing, nor should a person respond while standing.1for a person is more composed when seated. Berachot 27b and Tosafot, B'chorot 36a mention instances when questions were asked while standing. The Beit HaMelech explains that matters which do not require intense thought may be asked while standing, but matters which require concentration should be discussed when both the questioner and the teacher are seated.Avodat HaMelech explains that the Rambam does not intend to imply that the student should not stand. On the contrary, were he to stand, that would be a sign of respect. Rather, he means that questions should not be addressed to a teacher while the latter is standing. One should not ask from a high place, from far away, or from behind the elders.2This is not a sign of respect for the teacher.A question should be asked of the teacher regarding only the subject which they are reading.3The Kessef Mishneh notes the apparent redundancy between this statement and a similar one in the previous halachah, and explains that, in the previous halachah, the Rambam meant that when studying the laws of the Sabbath, a student should not ask his teachers about the laws of the festivals. In this halachah, the Rambam teaches that even within the general subject of the Sabbath laws, while studying the laws of one melachah (forbidden act), a student should not inquire regarding another.Many of the manuscript versions of the Mishneh Torah state k’inyan (to the point), rather than b’inyan sheheim koreim bo (regarding the subject they are reading). According to these texts, there is no redundancy. Rather, this halachah teaches that a student's questions should be direct, without mentioning any extraneous matters. A question should be asked only with an attitude of awe.4Just as the Jews received the Torah on Mount Sinai with fear and awe, similarly, our study of Torah must be charged with similar emotions (Berachot 22a). A person should ask concerning only three halachot [while studying] the same subject.5for it would be difficult for him to grasp more than three new concepts at a time. Also, it is not courteous to the other students for one person to be asking continually.
[The following rules apply when] two people ask questions simultaneously:1A Torah Sage is obligated to answer all questions posed to him, regardless of who the questioner is or what he asks. Thus, this halachah does not rule out a response being given to a particular questioner, but rather establishes the priorities for those responses to be given. If one question is to the point2This translation is based on the commonly published text of the Mishneh Torah. Other texts read b’inyan, which would be rendered "with regard to the matter (under discussion)." (See Rabbenu Nissim, Megillah) and the other is not to the point, attention is paid to the question which is to the point.3because it will be possible to answer in a direct manner. [If one question concerns] a matter to be applied in practice, and the other is an abstract question, attention is paid to the question which concerns the matter to be applied.4Since, as mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachah 3, the greatness of Torah is that it leads to deed, questions that are directly related to deed are given precedence.[If one question concerns] Torah law, and the other the interpretation of the verses of the Torah, attention is paid to the question which concerns Torah law.5since questions of Torah law, while not necessarily immediately relevant to actual deed, provide guidelines regarding our future behavior. In contrast, the interpretation of Torah verses is a more abstract realm of study, further removed from our immediate behavior. [If one question concerns] the interpretation of the verses of the Torah, and the other aggadah,6i.e., the ethical and metaphysical realm of Torah teachings attention is paid to the question which concerns the interpretation of the verses of the Torah.7Though they are somewhat removed from being practical guidelines for behavior, the former are still in the category of halachah - the aspect of Torah study that is related to deed and action. Hence, it is given precedence over aggadah, whose lessons are more personal and require a greater effort to internalize.[If one question concerns] aggadah, and the other the inference drawn from a minor premise to a major one,8a kal vichomer, a fortiori reasoning. This is one of the thirteen rules of Biblical exegesis mentioned by Rabbi Yishmael in the introduction to the Sifre.For example, Bava Metzia 3b attempts to derive the following concept using a kal vichomer:Just as a person's own statements, which do not obligate him to pay a fine [and hence, can be considered a minor premise], obligate him to take an oath, the testimony of witnesses, which does obligate him to pay a fine [and, hence, can be considered a major premise,] should also obligate him to take an oath. attention is paid to the question which concerns the inference drawn from a minor premise to a major one.9As above, though the latter subject matter is somewhat removed from being practical guidelines for behavior, it is still in the category of halachah - the aspect of Torah study that is related to deed and action. [If one question concerns] the inference drawn from a minor premise to a major one, and the other an analogy established on the basis of similar words,10a gezeirah shaveh. This is also one of the thirteen rules of Biblical exegesis mentioned by Rabbi Yishmael, as cited above.When a common word or phrase is found in two separate verses, an analogy is established between them, and concepts applicable to one can be related to the other. However, it must be emphasized that a gezeirah shaveh cannot be arrived at independently, but must be received from a teacher, who, in turn, received it from his teacher in a chain extending back to Moses at Mount Sinai. attention is paid to the inference drawn from a minor premise to a major one.11The Pri Chadash explains that though both of these have equal status, being included as part of the thirteen rules of Biblical exegesis, precedence is given to the gezeirah shaveh. A person is able to derive a kal vichomer on the basis of his own process of reasoning. In contrast, since a gezeirah shaveh is not the product of one's own thought process, it is more likely to be forgotten. Hence, it is given precedence.If of the two questioners, one was a sage and one was a student, attention is paid to the sage;12as mentioned in the next chapter, we are obligated to show Torah Sages respect and honor. one a student and one a commoner, attention is paid to the student.13Though a student need not be honored in the same way as a sage, a student's dedication to Torah study is deserving of a certain measure of respect. However, if they are both sages, both students, or both commoners14similarly, if two people both ask questions concerning Torah law, or they both wish to reply to what has been previously stated - The translation of the latter phrase is based on the commentary of the Kessef Mishneh. - similarly, if two people both ask questions concerning Torah law, or they both wish to reply to what has been previously stated, or both questions concern actual deeds15from this point on, the spokesman - who relays the questions to the teacher, as mentioned in halachah 3. - from this point on, the spokesman has the option [of giving precedence to whichever question he desires].
One should not sleep in a house of study. When any person dozes in the house of study, his Torah will be torn in shreds. This is alluded to in Solomon's words of wisdom [Proverbs 23:21]: "Drowsiness will clothe a man in1Sanhedrin, op. cit., quotes Rabbi Zeira (see above) as making this statement. rags."Conversation in the house of study should3Berachot, loc. cit., relates that this rule was observed in Rabban Gamliel's house of study. concern only the words of Torah.2There are two reasons why unnecessary conversation is forbidden in the house of study:a) to prevent wasting time that could be used for Torah study. (See Berachot 53a);b) as a token of respect for the house of study. According to this rationale, such conversation is forbidden even when it does not involve making an interruption in one's studies. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Talmud Torah 4:11.)Even if someone sneezes, one should not wish him: "[To your] recovery" - This was the Talmudic equivalent of Gesundheit or "God bless you." Even if someone sneezes, one should not wish him: "[To your] recovery" in the house of study. Needless to say,4if such statements are forbidden...[the discussion of] other matters is prohibited. - Chaggigah 12b adds that a person who discusses other matters in a house of study will be punished by being forced to eating glowing coals. the discussion of other matters is prohibited.The sanctity of a house of study exceeds that of a synagogue.5Note Hilchot Tefillah, Chapter 11, where the Rambam discusses the sanctity of houses of study and synagogues in detail, mentioning various (restrictions) on our behavior that were ordained as a token of respect. (See also Tur and Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 151.)The greater sanctity of a house of study is expressed by the law (Hilchot Tefillah, Halachah 14), that a synagogue may be transformed into a house of study. However, a house of study should not be transformed into a synagogue.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
Just as a person is commanded to honor his father and hold him in awe,1Exodus 20:12 commands: "Honor your father and mother." Leviticus 19:3 commands: "A man shall fear his mother and father." (See Hilchot Mamrim, Chapter 6, for a discussion of these mitzvot.) so, too, is he obligated to honor his teacher and hold him in awe.2All the particulars of this halachah apply only regarding rabo hamuzhak, a teacher from whom one has learned the majority of one's wisdom (Bava Metzia 33a.) (See also the commentary on the next halachah.) However, every teacher under whom one has studied Torah deserves a certain measure of respect (Halachah 9).[Indeed, the measure of honor and awe] due one's teacher exceeds that due one's father. His father brings him into the life of this world,3i.e., he sired him and provided him with his fundamental necessities while his teacher, who teaches him wisdom, brings him into the life of the world to come.4A person's Torah study and the mitzvot it motivates are the means through which he will attain a portion of the world to come.The reason given by the Rambam has its source in Bava Metzia, ibid. Keritot 28a states a different reason: "He and his father are both obligated to honor his teacher." The Rambam quotes this in Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Mitzvah 209).[Accordingly,] if he saw a lost object belonging to his father and one belonging to his teacher, the lost object belonging to his teacher takes precedence.5Therefore, he should tend to his teacher's article first. Only after returning it should he tend to his father's. If his father and his teacher are both carrying loads, he should relieve his teacher's load, and then his father's.6In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Keritot 6:9, the Rambam equates removing a load with returning a lost article and redeeming a person from captivity in all respects. Accordingly, as explained below, if one's father is also a Torah sage, he should be given priority. However, the Kessef Mishneh explains that where there is no danger to life or property, and only honor is involved, priority should be given to one's teacher, even if one's father is a Torah sage of equivalent stature. If his father and his teacher are held as captives, he should redeem his teacher, and afterwards, redeem his father.7Note Hilchot Matnot Ani'im, 8:10-18, for a discussion of this important mitzvah. However, if his father is [also] a Torah sage,8even if he is not equivalent to his teacher (Kessef Mishneh) he should redeem his father first.9This decision is disputed with regard to the return of a lost object, as explained below. Nevertheless, with regard to the redemption of captives, all agree that because of the life-and-death nature of the question, one's father is given priority if he has achieved some level of scholarship.[Similarly,] if his father is a Torah sage10even if he is not equivalent to his teacher - he should return his lost article, and then that belonging to his teacher. - The commentaries have noted the apparent contradiction between this statement and Hilchot Aveidah 12:2, which states:[The following rule applies when] one sees a lost object belonging to his teacher and a lost object belonging to his father: If his father was equal in stature to his teacher, his father's [lost article] is given precedence. If not, his teacher's is given precedence.This applies only to a person's primary teacher, from whom he learned the majority of his wisdom.The text of Bava Metzia (ibid.), the source for this decision, is closer to the text in Hilchot Aveidah. Indeed, on that basis, the Hagahot Maimoniot and others maintain that our text contains a printing error. However, that conclusion is difficult to accept, since in his Commentary on the Mishnah, Keritot ibid., the Rambam gives a father who is a Torah sage priority over a person's teacher, without requiring that the father be of greater stature.The Lechem Mishneh explains that our text refers to a situation when it is possible to retrieve both lost objects, and the only question is whose is given priority. In contrast, Hilchot Aveidah refers to a situation where it is possible to return only one of the lost objects.Alternatively, the Tashbaytz (Responsa, Vol. III, 275) and the Radbaz (Responsa, Vol. V, 1493) explain that here we are referring to a father who has also instructed his son (albeit, not to the same degree as his teacher). In contrast, Hilchot Aveidah refers to a father who has not instructed his son at all. - even if he is not equivalent to his teacher - he should return his lost article, and then that belonging to his teacher.There is no greater honor than that due a teacher, and no greater awe than that due a teacher. Our Sages declared:11Avot 4:15 "Your fear of your teacher should be equivalent to your fear of Heaven."Therefore,12In his commentary on that Mishnah, Rashi notes that Pesachim 22b equates the deference due a Torah sage to that due God. Surely, that applies to a sage under whom one has studied. they said:13Sanhedrin 110a. The Rambam quotes the entire passage that follows below in Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive Mitzvah 209, in his description of the commandment to honor a Torah sage. Whoever disputes the authority of his teacher14i.e., "comes out against his decisions...teaching and granting decisions, without his permission" (Sefer HaMitzvot, ibid.). (See the following halachot.) is considered as if he revolts against the Divine Presence, as implied [by Numbers 26:9]: "...who led a revolt against15This verse describes Korach's revolt. Though ostensibly, the revolt was directed against Moses, the Torah considers it as directed against God, Himself. God."Whoever engages in controversy with his teacher is considered as if he engaged in controversy with the Divine Presence, as implied [by Numbers 20:13]: "...where the Jews contested with God and where He was sanctified."Whoever16Numbers 20:1-3 describes how, because of a lack of water, the Jews began quarreling with Moses. As above, God interpreted their controversy as being directed against God Himself.Whoever complains against his teacher is considered as if he complains against the Divine Presence, as implied [by Exodus 16:8]: "Your complaints are not against us, but against God." - When the Jews complained against him and Aaron because of a lack of food, Moses gave them this reply. On this verse, the Mechiltah comments: "Whoever speaks against the shepherds of the Jewish people is considered as if he spoke against God."Whoever criticizes his teacher - explaining his statements and actions in an unfavorable light (Sefer HaMitzvot, ibid.)is considered as if he criticized the Divine Presence, as implied [by Numbers 21:5]: "And the people spoke out against God and Moses." - In this case as well, the people directed their criticism over a lack of food and water to Moses; however, the Torah considers it as being directed against God. complains against his teacher is considered as if he complains against the Divine Presence, as implied [by Exodus 16:8]: "Your complaints are not against us, but against God."Whoever thinks disparagingly of his teacher is considered as if he thought disparagingly of the Divine Presence, as implied [by Numbers 21:5]: "And the people spoke out against God and Moses."
What is meant by disputing the authority of one's teacher?1As mentioned in the commentary on the previous halachah, Halachah 9 states:When does the above apply? To one's outstanding teacher (rabo hamuzhak ), from whom one has gained the majority of one's wisdom. However, a person who has not gained the majority of his wisdom under a teacher's instruction is considered to be both a student and colleague. He is not obligated to honor him in all the above matters. A person who2studied under a teacher and then establishes a house of study [where] he sits, explains, and teaches3and renders halachic decisions. The Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 242:7 (see also Kessef Mishneh) explains that the prohibition applies only to rendering halachic decisions on matters directly related to practice. There is no difficulty involved in teaching on a merely theoretical level. However, it is not clear whether the Rambam would accept this view.The Rishon Letzion explains that this prohibition applies even to establishing a house of study under one's own direction, even though one does not render any halachic decisions. without his teacher's permission4A person granted permission by his teacher is allowed to render halachic decisions outside his teacher's presence. The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 242:14) equates a teacher's granting permission to a student to render halachic decisions to the concept of semichah within its present context (in contrast to its definition in Talmudic times). in his teacher's lifetime.5It is a mark of disrespect to one's teacher to set oneself up to be an equivalent authority.Eruvin 62b relates that as long as Rav Huna was alive, Rav Chisda, his disciple, would not render any decisions, even those concerning as obvious a matter as dipping "an egg in a mixture of sour milk and bread."After the teacher's death, there is no restriction, provided one is fit to render Torah judgments. (See Halachot 3 and 4.) [This applies] even when one's teacher is in another country.6This can be derived from Eruvin 63a, which states that Rav Hamnuna would not render judgments in Rav Huna's lifetime, even though they lived in different cities.Even though a person has been granted permission by his teacher to render halachic judgments...It is forbidden to ever render a halachic judgment7except in the instances mentioned in the following halachah. The Vilna Gaon explains that this includes even teaching a halachic concept incidentally, outside the context of a house of study. in one's teacher's presence.8The Rambam defines this term in the next halachah.Ketubot 60b relates that, without considering the question of respect due one's teacher, there is an additional problem. Spiritual influences will cause a student who renders a halachic judgment in his teacher's presence to err.The Maharik (Responsum 169) states that if a student has reached a stature approximate to that of his teacher, he is permitted to render halachic judgments even in his teacher's presence. He points to many Talmudic passages which record halachic decisions given by Resh Lakish in the presence of Rabbi Yochanan (his teacher).Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 242:12) explains that it is possible to say that the Rambam would accept this decision. However, there is no intimation of such a concept in the Rambam's words. Whoever renders a halachic judgment in his teacher's presence is worthy of death.9Eruvin 63a explains that Nadav and Avihu, Aharon's sons, died (Leviticus, Chapter 10) because of this sin. (See also Berachot 31b.)Rendering a judgment outside one's teacher's presence without his permission and rendering a judgment in his presence with his permission, although forbidden, are not deserving of such a punishment.It must be emphasized that today, when most of our Torah knowledge is gained from the study of texts and not from personal instruction, many authorities maintain that this entire concept does not apply. (See Hagahot Maimoniot, Lechem Mishneh, Halachah 5.) However, this opinion is not accepted by all authorities. (See Maharik, Responsum 169.)
If a person asked [a student] regarding a halachic question and there were twelve mil1A mil is 2000 cubits, approximately a kilometer in modern measure.This distance was derived from the measurement of the camp of Israel as they journeyed through the desert. There, all halachic questions were posed to Moses, as alluded to by Exodus 33:7: "All those who sought God would go the Tent of Meeting" (Rashi, Sanhedrin 5b). (See also Hilchot Sanhedrin 20:9.)[Exodus, Chapter 18, relates how Moses appointed judges to render halachic judgments concerning cases that did not require Moses' knowledge. Nevertheless, since these judges were appointed by Moses by Divine decree, the judgments they rendered were permitted.] between him and his teacher, he is permitted to answer.2even though he was not granted permission by his teacher, as explained below. [Furthermore,] to prevent a transgression, it is permitted to give a halachic judgment even in the presence of one's teacher.3This applies both in his actual physical presence and within a radius of twelve mil.What does the above imply? For example, one saw a person perform a forbidden act because he was unaware of the prohibition or because of his perversity, he should [try to] prevent him [by] telling him: "This is forbidden."4Eruvin 63a relates that while Ravina was in the presence of Rav Ashi, his teacher, he saw a man tie a donkey to a date palm on the Sabbath. At first, he shouted at him [so that he would know it is forbidden]. When he did not respond, he placed him under a ban of ostracism.When Rav Ashi saw this, he questioned Ravina, because the latter's actions appeared to be disrespectful. Ravina explained that since a transgression was involved (making use of a tree on the Sabbath), he was obligated to take these steps. [This] applies even in his teacher's presence and even though one's teacher had not given him permission. Wherever the desecration of God's name is involved, no deference is paid to a teacher's honor.5Eruvin, ibid., derives this from Proverbs 21:30: "There is no wisdom, no understanding, and no counsel against God."The teacher's honor stems from the honor of the Torah and the honor of God. Hence, in all cases, priority is given to the Torah.When does the above apply?6This refers to the first clause, which mentions the license to respond to a question outside one's teacher's presence. With regard to a matter that came up incidentally.7Since this is a casual occurrence and his teacher is not present, the student's response is not considered to be disrespectful. However, establishing oneself as a halachic authority to sit and reply to all who ask concerning halachic matters is forbidden,8for this clearly applies that the student considers his authority as equivalent (or at least, similar) to that of his teacher. Doing so without permission is considered to be an affront to his teacher's honor. even if [the student] is at one end of the world and the teacher at the other,9i.e., geographic distance is not a factor. until either:a) the teacher dies;10at which point the honor due him takes on a different dimension. orb) the student receives permission from his teacher.11Since the teacher has given permission for the student to answer questions, doing so is not considered to be an affront to the teacher's honor.Though a student who was not granted permission by his teacher to render halachic decisions during the latter's lifetime, he may do so after his death. Nevertheless,...Not everyone whose teacher dies is permitted to sit and render judgment concerning Torah law; only one who is a student worthy of rendering judgment.12Avodah Zarah 19b requires a student to be forty years of age before he is considered to be worthy of rendering halachic judgments. In summation of that entire passage, Rabbenu Nissim writes that a Torah sage is not entitled to render a halachic judgment until he reaches 40, unless there is no sage of equivalent status in his city. He questions why the Rambam makes no mention of this requirement.Among the resolutions offered for the Rambam's decision are:a) The Rambam interprets the passage from Avodah Zarah to mean that only until he is forty years old can a worthy student hold himself back from rendering judgment because of his humility. He does not mention this law here, since the unworthy students have become so numerous, and at present, no worthy student should hesitate from rendering judgment at all (Kessef Mishneh).b) The Talmud's decision refers only to a student who received his instruction from an individual teacher. At present, since students gain their knowledge from texts which are always available, there is no such restriction (Lechem Mishneh).c) The Rambam places the entire emphasis on a student's capability and does not pay attention to the age factor (Merchevat Hamishneh).Though the latter paragraph is included in this halachah in the published texts of the Mishneh Torah, many manuscripts include it in the following halachah.
Any student who is not worthy of rendering halachic judgments and does so is foolish, wicked, and arrogant.1The Rambam's statements are based on Avot 4:9, which uses these adjectives to describe a person who "renders halachic judgments casually." In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam states that this applies to one who "does not worry about rendering a judgment and proceeds to do so without fear or proper consideration." [Proverbs 7:26:] "She has cast down many corpses" applies to him.2This concept can be derived because the word hipilah (cast down) is related to neifal, a stillborn baby (Kessef Mishneh).[Conversely,] a sage who is worthy of rendering halachic judgments3Almost parenthetically, in the midst of his critique of the underdeveloped who render halachic judgments too casually, the Rambam explains that, nevertheless, a person who is qualified should not hesitate from rendering halachic judgments. On the contrary, if he does hesitate, he is also guilty of improper conduct.[A teacher once told a student to serve as the Rabbi of a particular community. The student protested, claiming that he was afraid of the responsibility of rendering halachic judgments for such a large community.The teacher responded: "Whom should I send? Someone who is not afraid?"] and refrains from doing so holds back [the spread of] Torah4In Hilchot Sanhedrin 20:8, the Rambam makes similar statements, except that there he qualifies his condemnation of "a sage who is worthy of rendering halachic judgments and refrains from doing so" as applying only when "the generation needs him." In contrast, if [the sage] refrains because he knows that there is another individual fit to render halachic judgments, "he is praiseworthy." Similarly, in Hilchot Sanhedrin 3:10, the Rambam praises sages who flee from seeking appointment as judges. and places stumbling blocks before the blind.5Of course, the Rambam is not referring to those who are physically blind, but rather those who are intellectually unaware or spiritually handicapped, as explained in the interpretation of Leviticus 19:14: "Do not place a stumbling block before the blind." "How prodigious are those she slew" [ibid.] applies to him.6The word atzumim (prodigious) is related to the word atzum, meaning to close one's eyes (Kessef Mishneh).These underdeveloped students who have not gathered much Torah knowledge, seek to gain prestige in the eyes of the common people and the inhabitants of their city [by] jumping to sit at the head of all questions of law and halachic judgments in Israel. They spread division, destroy the world, extinguish the light of Torah, and wreak havoc7The Kessef Mishneh notes that although the Mishneh Torah was composed as a timeless book of halachah, the Rambam's harsh criticism here may have resulted from the prevalence of unqualified students who sought rabbinical positions in his time. in the vineyard of the God of Hosts.8i.e., the people of Israel. (See Isaiah 5:7.) In his wisdom, Solomon alluded to them [as follows, (Song of Songs 2:15)]: "Take for us foxes, little foxes that spoil the vineyards, [our vineyards are blooming.]"
It is forbidden for a student to refer to his teacher by name,1Sanhedrin 100a describes such a person as an epicurus (nonbeliever). Rashi states that he should state a descriptive phrase before mentioning his teacher's name, following the example of Joshua (Numbers 11:28), who said: "Moses, my master, imprison them."Compare to Hilchot Mamrim 6:3, which describes the reverence due to a father:He should not call him by name either in his lifetime or after his death. Rather, he should say, "My father, my teacher." even outside his presence.2even if he is in a different country entirely.[The version of the text which follows is based on the Oxford manuscript of the Mishneh Torah. The commonly printed text appears to contradict the passage from Hilchot Mamrim. See also Kessef Mishneh and Taz, Yoreh De'ah 242:4, who have noted difficulties with the printed text.] He should not mention his name3i.e., his teacher's name in his presence, even when referring to others with the same name as his teacher4as he does with the name of his father. Rather, he should refer to them - the other people - as he does with the name of his father. Rather, he should refer to them with different names, even after their death.5as Hilchot Mamrim (ibid.) states: "If his father's or teacher's name resembles the name of others, he should change their name."We find an example of this in the Talmud. Abbaye's name was actually Nachmani. However, since his teacher, Rabbah, had a father with that name, he coined a new name for his disciple (Ha'Aruch).The above applies when the name is unusual, and all will thus know to whom it refers.6Hilchot Mamrim (ibid.) continues: It appears to me that one must take care in this regard only when the name is unique....However, if the name is one which many people are called by e.g., Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or Moses - ...one may call others by this name outside his presence. Thus, if the teacher's name is common, it is permitted to refer by name to another person with the same name. Nevertheless, the Rambam's words raise questions concerning the commonly followed practice of naming a child after one's parent or teacher, even when that name is unique.[A student] should not greet his teacher or respond to the latter's greeting, as is customary when two friends exchange greetings. - Berachot 27b states: "A person who greets his teacher causes the Divine Presence to depart from Israel." Rashi explains that this refers to greeting him casually without a show of reverence.Rather, he should bow before him - Note Soferim 18:5, which mentions such a practice.[A student] should not greet his teacher or respond to the latter's greeting, as is customary when two friends exchange greetings. Rather, he should bow before him and say with awe and reverence: "Peace be upon you, my master."7Bava Kama 73b states that it is improper for a student to greet a teacher at all, as implied by Job 29:8: "The lads saw me and hid." If his teacher greeted him, he should respond: "Peace be upon you, my teacher and master."8Note the interchange between Rabbi Yosse and Elijah, the prophet, quoted in Berachot 3a.It must be noted that the phrase shalom elecha rebbe has been given halachic significance in totally different contexts. For example, a person who takes an oath is allowed to retract his statements if he changes his mind toch k’dei dibbur (in the midst of speaking). What is considered "in the midst of speaking"? The time it takes to say shalom elecha rebbe (Hilchot Sh'vuot 2:17). Similar laws apply with regard to witnesses who want to retract testimony made in court.
Similarly, he should not remove his tefillin in the presence of his teacher,1Rav David Arameah notes that this law is found in the Shimusha Rabbah. His version of that text leads him to the interpretation "before," rather than "in the presence of" - i.e., first, the teacher should remove his tefillin, and then the student. However, the Shibbolei HaLeket and others render the Shimusha Rabbah as translated here.The Kessef Mishneh cites Sanhedrin 101b, which forbids removing one's tefillin in the presence of a king. Since Horayot 13a relates that a Torah sage is more deserving of a honor than a king, there are those who quote this as a source for our halachah. nor should he recline in his presence.2Note Hilchot Chametz U'Matzah 7:8, which mentions this prohibition even on the Seder night, when it is a mitzvah to recline. Rather, he should sit before him as one sits before a king.3because, as mentioned in Horayot, ibid., a Torah sage deserves greater honor.A person should not pray either in front of his teacher,4Standing with one's back to one's teacher is a mark of great disrespect. Hence, it is forbidden as long as one can be seen by one's teacher (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 90, Shulchan Aruch 90:24). behind his teacher, or at his teacher's side.5Rashi, Berachot 27a, explains that doing so would be an expression of pride, implying a degree of equivalence to his teacher.The Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 242:16, states that there is no prohibition if one stands more than four cubits away from his teacher. The Beit Yosef (ibid.) also states that these restrictions apply only when praying as individuals and not when participating in communal prayer. Needless to say, one should not walk by his side.6Yoma 37a states: "A person who walks at his teacher's right is a boor." Compare with Chapter 6, Halachah 5. Rather,7when praying or walking (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah ibid.) he should distance himself behind his teacher without standing directly behind him and then pray.8i.e., standing slightly to his side and slightly behind him.One should not enter a bathhouse together with his teacher9for it is not respectful to be together with him while naked. However, if the teacher needs his assistance it is permitted, as the Rambam states in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:16. or sit in his teacher's place.10This and the following points are taken from the statements in Kiddushin 31b regarding the respect due a father. Similar statements are found in Hilchot Mamrim 6:3. One should not side against his teacher's opinion11This translation is based on the Rambam's definition of the latter expression in one of his responsa. Others define it as "favor his teacher's opinion," explaining that doing so is a mark of disrespect, because it implies that the teacher needs the student's support. in his presence12However, if one is in a different place or after the teacher's death, one is allowed to voice a different opinion. Note Hilchot Shechitah 11:10, where the Rambam states that his father held a more stringent view, while he, himself, followed a more lenient perspective. (See also Eruvin 32a.) or contradict his statements.13or contradict his statements. One should not sit in his presence until he tells him to sit.14The Midrash Rabbah, Ruth 4:2, makes similar statements, based on Boaz's instructions to the elders of Bethlehem. One should not stand before him until he tells him to stand or until he receives permission to stand.15Derech Eretz Rabbah, Chapter 5, states: "A person should not depart from a teacher or a colleague unless he takes leave of him or receives permission from him."When one departs from his teacher, one should not turn his back to him.16for turning one's back to one's teacher is not a sign of respect.Rather, one should walk backwards while facing him. - Yoma 53a relates that the priests and Levites would follow this procedure when departing from the Temple service. It continues to recommend that the same procedure be adopted by students when departing from their teachers. Rather, one should walk backwards while facing him.
A person is obligated to stand before his teacher from the time he sees him - as far away as he can see - until [he passes beyond his field of vision] and is hidden: his figure no longer visible. Then, [the student] may sit.1The above halachah states that as soon as the sage passes him, the person may sit. The requirement to show an extra degree of respect to one's own teacher can be derived from the example of Rabbi Eliezer, who showed such deference to his teacher, Rabbi Yochanan (Yoma 53a).A person is obligated to visit his teacher during the festivals.2Sukkah 27b relates:An incident occurred concerning Rabbi Ellai, who journeyed to visit his teacher, Rabbi Eliezer, in Lod during a festival.He told him: "Ellai, you are not one of those who rests on the festivals,". Rabbi Eliezer would say: "I praise the lazy ones who do not leave their homes during the festivals, because it is written: 'And you shall rejoice on your festivals.’“That is unacceptable, because Rabbi Yitzchak taught: What is the source for the obligation that a person has to visit his teacher on the festival, it is written: "Why are you going to him today? It is not a day of rest or a new moon." From this we can infer that on a day of rest and on the new moon, a person is obligated to visit his teacher.There is no difficulty: the [latter reference] applies when he can go back and forth in one day.The Rambam interprets Rabbi Yitzchak's statement simply, because, in a number of other instances (Sukkah 10b, 26a), the Talmud relates how students would visit their teachers on festivals.The Nodah Biyhudah, Orach Chayim, Vol. II, Responsum 94, notes that this law is not quoted by the Tur or the Shulchan Aruch. Therefore, he explains that it applies only in the time of the Temple. In contrast, at present, since the Temple is destroyed and the festival pilgrimages are no longer made, it is improper to make a special visit to one's teacher. Doing so would imply that one is showing him greater deference than is shown the Divine Presence.This view is not accepted by many commentators. Indeed, the Talmudic references to visiting one's teacher during the festival cited above took place in the period after the destruction of the Temple. Based on the statement quoted in Halachah 1, "Your fear for your teacher should be equivalent to your fear of Heaven," Kinat Eliyahu explains that there is a parallel between a visit to one's teacher and a pilgrimage to the Temple.
Deference should not be shown to a student while in the presence of his teacher,1Honoring a student in the presence of his teacher may be interpreted to be an affront to the latter's position. unless it is customary for his teacher also to show him deference.2Since the teacher himself shows the student deference, he will not be upset by others doing so (Rashi, Bava Batra 119b).All the services which a servant performs for his master should be performed by a student for his teacher. - as an expression of the deference and respect he has for him.All the services which a servant performs for his master should be performed by a student for his teacher. [However,]3In one situation, an exception is made to the above principle... if [the student] was in a place where he was not recognized and was not wearing tefillin4At that time, it was customary to wear tefillin the entire day. Nevertheless, if for some reason, this student was not wearing tefillin - should he5the student suspect that people6observing his behavior will say he is a servant7i.e., a "Canaanite servant," who is not considered to be a full-fledged Jew. [His failure to wear tefillin might create such an impression, since tefillin are a time-oriented mitzvah and "Canaanite slaves" are free from its observance.] - he need not put on [his teacher's] shoe or remove it.8i.e., he is freed from the performance of any menial tasks which might create this impression.Whoever prevents his student from serving him withholds kindness from him and takes away his fear of heaven.9In Hilchot De'ot 5:1, the Rambam writes that a wise man is distinguished, not only by his intellectual achievements, but by the manner in which his understanding is reflected in his everyday behavior. When a student has the opportunity to appreciate not only the intellectual gifts of his teacher, but the totality of his behavior, he becomes aware of how a Torah lifestyle is an all-encompassing commitment, affecting every aspect of his daily activity. This leads to complete fear of heaven. Any student who deals lightly with a matter related to the honor of his teacher causes the Divine Presence to depart from Israel.10Berachot 27b makes this statement regarding one who prays behind his teacher or who greets his teacher in a casual manner. (See Halachot 5 and 6.) The Rambam extrapolates that the concept also applies regarding other acts of disrespect to one's teacher.
[A student who] saw his teacher transgress the words of the Torah should1not rebuke him directly. Rather, he should.... tell him: you have taught us such and such.2Kiddushin 32a makes similar statements regarding a situation when one saw one's father transgress Torah law. The Rambam inferred that a similar concept applies regarding one's teacher (Kessef Mishneh).Others point to Berachot 16a-b, which quotes Rabban Gamliel's students as reproaching him in such a manner after carrying out a number of deeds which appeared to contradict his teachings.Whenever he3a student mentions a teaching in his4teacher's presence, he should tell him: "You have taught us the following, master."5Sanhedrin 99b, 101a states:Who is an epicurus (nonbeliever)?A person who relates a concept from another source that occurred to him while he was sitting before his teacher, and states: "This is what is said there," rather than "This is what you taught us, master."Similarly, Mo'ed Katan 7b relates that once Rabbi Chiyya mentioned a teaching before his teacher, Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi, and prefaced his statements with the expression: "You have taught us the following, master."[From that passage, it appears that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi had not actually made that statement, and Rabbi Chiyya's remarks were merely a polite token of respect.]Even when a student is not in his teacher's presence...He should not mention a concept which he did not hear from his teacher unless he mentions the name of the person who authored it. - In general, there is an obligation to mention a concept in the name of its author (Megillah 15a). However, in this instance, there is a particular obligation to do so, lest it be assumed that this teaching was authored by one's teacher.The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 2:1) mentions the following incident: Rabbi Yochanan was walking, supported by Rabbi Ya'akov bar Iddi. Rabbi Yochanan complained to him that his student, Rabbi Eliezer, never made statements in his name.Rabbi Ya'akov told him that there was a precedent to such behavior. Rabbi Meir would quote teachings in the name of Rabbi Yishmael, but would not quote teachings in the name of Rabbi Akiva, his teacher.Rabbi Yochanan answered that there was nothing wrong with that, because everyone knew that Rabbi Meir was Rabbi Akiva's disciple, and most of his teachings came from him.Rabbi Ya'akov explained that the same concept applied at present: "Everyone knows that Rabbi Eliezer is your disciple, and that most of his teachings are yours."Thus, were a student to mention a concept without mentioning its source, it is likely for the listeners to assume that it was authored by his teacher. If, in fact, it was authored by someone other than his teacher, and his teacher would not have approved of it, creating such an impression would not be respectful to his teacher. He should not mention a concept which he did not hear from his teacher unless he mentions the name of the person who authored it.When his teacher dies, he should rend all his garments until he reveals his heart.6With regard to the rending of one's garments until one's heart is revealed, see Hilchot Eivel 8:3, 9:2 and Mo'ed Katan 22a. He should never mend them.7Mo'ed Katan 26a equates garments torn over a teacher's passing with those torn over a father's passing, with regard to the latter law. On this basis, the Rambam concludes that the same principle applies regarding the extent one rends his garments.The Rambam draws this comparison from Elisha's behavior at the death of Elijah, his teacher. II Kings 2:12 relates: "He cried out, 'Father, Father, Chariot of Israel,'....He took hold of his clothes and rent them into two...." (Hilchot Eivel 9:5).[At present, it is very uncommon to see a student rend his garments at his teacher's passing. Among the rationalizations for the present custom is the opinion of the Hagahot Maimoniot and the Lechem Mishneh mentioned above, that at present we derive most of our knowledge from books. Accordingly, the concept of a rav hamuzhak does not apply.]When does the above apply?8As mentioned above, the commentaries interpret this to be a reference to all the tokens of reverence and respect mentioned in the previous halachot. To one's outstanding teacher from whom one has gained the majority of his wisdom.9To one's outstanding teacher from whom one has gained the majority of his wisdom.However, a person who has not gained the majority of his wisdom under a teacher's instruction is considered to be both a student and colleague.10of the latter.Rashi, Eruvin 63a, defines the term talmid chavair (a student and a colleague), as a sage of equivalent stature who has learned some concepts from the "teacher." He11the student is not obligated to honor him in all the above matters. Nevertheless,12he should show some signs of respect. Therefore... he should stand before him, rend his garments at his [death], as he does for all the deceased for whom he is obligated to mourn.13i.e., one's brother, sister, spouse, son, daughter, and parents.Many commentaries note the apparent contradiction between this halachah, which implies that it is sufficient to rend one's garments a handbreadth, and Hilchot Eivel 9:11, which states that one is obligated to rend one's garments over the passing of a sage (even if he is not one's outstanding teacher) until one reveals his heart.The Kessef Mishneh writes that the law in Hilchot Eivel applies only to a sage accepted as a city's halachic authority, while the present halachah refers even to a personage of lesser stature. The Lechem Mishneh writes that the law in Hilchot Eivel is incumbent on the common people, while a person who is himself a Torah sage is not obligated to make such a large gesture of mourning. Even if he learned only one thing from him, whether it be a small or great matter,14Pirkei Avot 6:3 states:A person who learns from a colleague a single chapter, a single law, a single verse...or a single letter must show him honor.So we find concerning David, King of Israel: He learned from Achitofel only two things, yet he called him his teacher, his guide, and his mentor.he should stand before him and rend his garments at his [death]. - Bava Metzia 33a relates that Shmuel rent his garments at the passing of a student from whom he learned only one concept. he should stand before him15when he comes within four cubits of him (Kessef Mishneh) and rend his garments at his [death].16Bava Metzia 33a praises the students of Babylon for showing these tokens of respect to each other.
Every student with a proper character1whose intellect and emotions are well trained (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 5:6) will not speak in front of anyone who is wiser than he is,2Avot (ibid.) states:There are seven traits that characterize an underdeveloped person and seven [that characterize] a wise man. A wise man does not speak in the presence of anyone who is wiser than he.even though he has not learned anything from him. - This is the Rambam's own addition. even though he has not learned anything from him.
An outstanding teacher may, if he desires, forgo his honor1Kiddushin 32a relates a difference of opinion between the Sages concerning this matter. Rav Chisda maintains that a teacher is not entitled to forgo his honor, because the honor is not due him personally, but to the Torah. Rav Yosef maintains that once he has mastered the subject matter he studies, it is considered as his own. Hence, he is entitled to forgo the honor due him because of it. with regard to any or all of the above matters2Kiddushin 32b relates that Ravva and Rav Pappa relaxed certain formalities and served their students at weddings. to any or all his students.3i.e., he may restrict these leniencies to only a small number of students or extend them to all, as he desires.Note Chapter 7, Halachah 13, which does not allow a sage to forgo his honor after a public display of disrespect towards him.Even though he forgoes [these honors], the student is obligated to respect him4i.e., he must stand in front of him, refrain from sitting in his place, and the like. The student's failure to do so would be considered an act of disrespect for the Torah. at the time he forgoes [respect].5Our translation is based on Avodat HaMelech. That text notes the apparent redundancy in the Rambam's statements and explains that even if the teacher is willing to forgo these minimal tokens of respect, the student is obligated to grant them to him, because it is improper that such respect not be shown to the Torah.
Just as students are obligated to honor their teacher, a teacher is obligated to honor his students and encourage them.1Though we should treat all men with respect and affection, a teacher should make a special effort to display these qualities to his students. Our Sages2Avot 4:15 declared: "The honor of your students should be as dear to you as your own."A3Avot D'Rabbi Natan, Chapter 27, quotes as an example of this behavior Moses' instructions to Joshua (Exodus 17:9 : "Choose men for us," where Moses equated Joshua with himself. teacher should take care of his students and love them, because they are like sons4See Chapter 1, Halachah 2. who bring him pleasure in this world5first, as described in the next halachah, students deepen a teacher's comprehension of the subject matter. Also, their success and progress generate great feelings of satisfaction. and in the world to come.6for a student's actions and study increase the merit of his teacher, who led him to these righteous paths.
Students increase their teacher's wisdom and broaden his horizons. Our Sages declared:1Ta'anit 7a and Makkot 10a quote two different sages who made the following statement. "I learned much wisdom from my teachers and even more from my colleagues. However, from my students2and their questions, as explained below [I learned] most of all."Just as a small branch is used to light a large bough,3Ta'anit, ibid., makes these statements within the context of the explanation of Deuteronomy 20:19: "Is man a tree of the fields?" so a small student sharpens his teacher's [thinking processes], until, through his questions, he brings forth brilliant wisdom.4In order to answer a student's questions, a teacher must probe to the essence of the subject. For himself, he might have been willing to be content with a more superficial understanding. However, when a student questions him, he must penetrate to a deeper comprehension of the matter.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
It is a mitzvah to respect1and stand up in deference to him as implied by the verse quoted every Torah sage,2In Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 209), the Rambam counts this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. (See also Sefer HaChinuch, Mitzvah 257.)In the Guide to the Perplexed (Vol. III, Chapter 36), the Rambam explains the motivating principle for this mitzvah: If respect is not shown to the Sages, their teachings will not be upheld and Torah study will be neglected. even if he is not one's teacher,3in which case more severe measures of honor are necessary, as mentioned in the previous chapter.The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 244:1) states that this obligation applies only to another sage who surpasses oneself in knowledge. as [Leviticus 19:32] states: "Stand up before a white-haired [man] and respect an elder." [The word] zakein, [translated as "elder," alludes to the Hebrew words4zeh shekanah chochmah, meaning] "one who has acquired5even if he is young.The definition of a Torah sage is a matter of question. Kiddushin 49b states:"On the condition that I am a student" - we do not say that he must be comparable to Shimon ben Azzai or Shimon ben Zoma. Rather, anyone who can be asked about any matter in the area where he is studying and can reply..."On the condition that I am a wise man" - we do not say that he has to be like the Sages of Yavneh....Rather, anyone who can be asked about any Torah subject and can reply...The Rambam quotes this statement in Hilchot Ishut. Nevertheless, since he does not specify such a definition here, in Hilchot Talmud Torah, one may therefore assume that in this context, he does not limit himself to that definition. The Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 244:2) addresses himself to this issue and explains that here we are referring to a Torah sage who possesses a prodigious amount of knowledge and is considered unique within his community. wisdom."When is one obligated to stand before him? When he approaches within four cubits of him6Kiddushin 33a states that once the sage comes this close, standing before him can easily be appreciated as a sign of respect. Note the contrast between this halachah and the measure of respect due one's own teacher, as mentioned in Chapter 5, Halachah 7. until he passes him.7However, once he passes, one may sit, in contrast to the requirement regarding one's teacher mentioned in the previous halachah.
One should not stand before [a sage] in a bathhouse1i.e., in the inner rooms where people stand undressed. The general principle followed is: in the places where it is permitted to recite words of Torah, one must honor a sage; where one may not recite words of Torah, one should not honor a sage (Kessef Mishneh). or toilet, for it is stated [ibid.]: "Stand up...and respect...," [implying] standing up that conveys respect.2This law is not mentioned with regard to one's own teacher, since, as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 6, one may not enter a bathhouse together with one's teacher (Rav Kapach).Craftsmen are not obligated to stand before the Torah Sages while they are involved in their work - The commentaries disagree whether a craftsman may interrupt his work to show a sage this token of respect or not. The Kessef Mishneh states that a craftsman is permitted to do so, and rules accordingly in the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 244:5). In contrast, Rabbenu Nissim (Chulin 54b) maintains that a craftsman is not permitted to stand, because the general impression that will be created - i.e., some craftsmen standing in honor of the sage and some not - will not be favorable.This difference of opinion exists only with regard to craftsmen working independently. All authorities agree that a craftsman hired by others may not stand. His time is not his own, and by standing, he steals time from his employer.for it is stated: "Stand up...and respect...." [It can be inferred that] just as showing respect does not involve a financial loss, standing need not involve a financial loss. - The Lechem Mishneh objects to these statements, noting that the Rambam's phraseology is not an exact quote from Kiddushin 33a, which is his source. Nevertheless, it can be explained that the Rambam is not quoting that Talmudic passage, but rather explaining a concept that can be inferred from it.Craftsmen are not obligated to stand before the Torah sages while they are involved in their work, for it is stated: "Stand up...and respect...." [It can be inferred that] just as showing respect does not involve a financial loss, standing need not involve a financial loss.What is the source [which teaches that] a person should not divert his eyes from the sage so that he will not see him, lest he be required to stand before him?3Kiddushin (ibid.) states that we would not suspect that a person would fail to honor a sage when the latter is actually in proximity to him. Rather, this implies that it is forbidden for one to turn away when he sees the sage approaching from afar, so that when the latter approaches, he will not be obligated to stand. It is written [ibid.], "and you shall fear your God." With regard to all matters dependent on one's conscience, the Torah states: "and you shall fear your God."4who probes man's heart and understands his inner feelings.
It is not proper for a sage to trouble the people and position himself before them so that they will have to stand for him.1Kiddushin 33b derives this concept through the exegesis of the verse from Leviticus quoted above. Rather, he should take shortcuts and have the intent that they should not see him, so that he will not trouble them to stand.2Kiddushin 33a promises a sage long life for following this practice. The Sages would take circular routes through the outskirts [of their cities], where people who recognize them would not be found, in order not to trouble them.3Kiddushin (ibid.) mentions that Abbaye and Rabbi Zeira would follow this practice.The Bnei Binyamin notes an apparent contradiction between the Rambam's statements and BaMidbar Rabbah 15:17. There, the Midrash relates that Rav Abba Cohen would always avoid crowds, lest he trouble them by causing them to rise. When he mentioned this to Rabbi Yosse, the son of Rabbi Zevida, the latter reprimanded him, explaining that he would be doing them a great favor by having them stand before him, because this would lead to the fear of God, as implied by Leviticus (ibid.): "Stand up before a white-haired [man]...and you shall fear your God."The Bnei Binyamin explains that everything depends on the sage's intention. A righteous man who is not at all motivated by self-interest may appear before crowds. However, a person who is concerned with his own pride should avoid them.
Riding is considered to be walking.1i.e., we do not say that since the sage is seated on his beast, it is not considered as if he is walking. However, in other contexts - see Hilchot Kri'at Shema 2:2-3 - the Rambam considers riding as comparable to sitting. Just as one stands before [a sage who is] walking, so one should stand before one who is riding.2Kiddushin 33a relates that Abbaye would stand as soon as he saw the donkey of Rav Yosef, his teacher, approach.
When three people are journeying [together], the master should walk in the center, the [student of] greater [stature]1should follow slightly behind him... on his right,2However, one who walks alongside his teacher is considered a boor (Yoma 37a; see Kessef Mishneh and also Chapter 5, Halachah 6 above). and the one of lesser [stature]3should follow the sage... on his left.4Yoma (ibid.) derives this formation from the pattern in which the angels who visited Abraham (Genesis, Chapter 18) walked. This formation was also employed by the High Priest and his subordinates when he would serve in the Temple.The Pri Chadash and other commentaries question the Kessef Mishneh's interpretation. One point of difficulty with the halachah in general is that it appears to refer to one's personal teacher, and thus it would more appropriately have been mentioned in the previous chapter.
One who sees a sage need not stand in deference to him until he reaches within four cubits of him; once he has passed, he may sit.1This halachah in its entirety is quoted from the Midrash Hagadol, Shemot 33:8. (With slight textual differences, it also appears in Kiddushin 33b.) Nevertheless, the question arises: Why does the Rambam mention this particular clause? It appears redundant in light of Halachah 1. Perhaps his intent was to emphasize the contrast between an ordinary Sage and others of greater stature.Should one see the av beit din,2The sage second in stature to the nasi, and who acts as the latter's assistant (Hilchot Sanhedrin 1:3).The laws regarding a nasi and an av beit din are also quoted in the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 244:13-15), which, in contrast to the Mishneh Torah, mentions only those halachot that are applicable in the present age. The Siftei Cohen (244:11) questions that inclusion, noting that today's rashei yeshivot and avot batei hadin are not paid the same tokens of respect as the nasi and av beit din mentioned here. one should stand in deference to him from the time he sees him3the av beit din - as far away as he can see.4i.e., as soon as the av beit din appears on the horizon He may not sit until he has passed four cubits beyond him.5at which point, he may sit.Should one see the nasi,6In Hilchot Sanhedrin (ibid.), the Rambam describes this position as follows:The wisest sage among them is appointed to be the head. He is the Rosh Yeshivah. He is the person whom the Sages referred to as nasi in all the sources, taking the place of Moses, our teacher. one should stand in deference to him from the time he sees him7as far away as he can see. - as explained with regard to the av beit din. - as far away as he can see. He may not sit until he has reached his place or passed [beyond his field of vision] and is hidden.8Kiddushin (ibid.) derives this from Exodus 33:8, which relates that:Whenever Moses went out to the tent, all the people would rise. Each person would stand near his tent, gazing at Moses until he came to the tent.Should a nasi [desire to] waive the honor due him, he may forgo it. - i.e., although people are obligated to honor the nasi, should he desire to forgo those honors, there is no objection. In contrast, a king may never forgo his honor and must constantly be treated with reverence. (See Hilchot Melachim 2:3.)Kiddushin 32b relates the following discussion of this law:An incident occurred when Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yehoshua, and Rabbi Tzadok were participating in the wedding feast of Rabban Gamliel's son, and Rabban Gamliel poured drinks for them. He offered a cup to Rabbi Eliezer, and he refused to accept it. He offered a cup to Rabbi Yehoshua and he accepted it.Rabbi Eliezer told him: "Yehoshua, what is this? We are sitting and Rabban Gamliel is pouring drinks for us!"He replied to him: "We find [a precedent when] a person of greater stature served others. Abraham surpassed all others in his generation, yet [Genesis 18:8] relates that 'he stood over them [to serve them']. Do not think that he thought they were angels; he thought they were Arabs. If so, why shouldn't we let Rabban Gamliel serve us?"The above laws refer to instances when a sage is sighted in the public thoroughfare. The following laws apply when he enters the house of study (Hagahot Maimoniot). (See Horayot 13b.)Should a nasi [desire to] waive the honor due him, he may forgo it.When the nasi enters,9the house of study all the people should stand.10as a sign of respect to him. They may not sit until he tells them to.11for he is the spiritual leader of the entire nation and deserves such honor. When the av beit din enters,12the house of study two rows are opened for him,13At present, when we are used to auditoriums with fixed seats, the setting for this law is difficult to picture. However, in Talmudic times, the people would sit on the floor. When the av beit din arrived, the people sitting between the entrance and his place would stand and create a path for him two rows wide. and the people stand on either side until he enters and sits in his place. The other people14in the house of study are not obligated to rise as a sign of respect and may... remain seated in their places.15On the surface, it is difficult to understand why the av beit din is given lesser honor in the house of study than in the marketplace. Perhaps the reason is to minimize the neglect of Torah study.Horayot 13b relates that, originally, the people would show the same token of respect to the av beit din and other sages as to the nasi. In order to preserve the authority of his office, Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel, the nasi, ordained that a lesser degree of respect be shown to all other sages.
When a sage1of lesser stature than those mentioned in the previous halachah... enters2the house of study, a path is not made for him. Rather, he should proceed toward his place... - when he approaches within four cubits3Avodat HaMelech notes that this figure is not found in Horayot 13b, the source for this law. Rather, it was added by the Rambam, based on the logic that no less respect should be paid to a sage when he enters the house of study than is paid to him in the marketplace. of anyone4sitting in the house of study,... - the latter should stand for him.5and allow him to pass. Thus, one6person sitting in the house of study stands7to allow the sage to pass and one sits8after he has passed until he9the Sage enters and sits in his place.10enters and sits in his place. The sons and the students of the sages may jump over the heads of the people to reach their place when their presence is required by the people at large.11i.e., there are many students whose presence is an invaluable asset to their teacher, for through their questions they enable their teacher to penetrate to the core of the subject matter. Therefore, they are allowed to proceed to their places at the front of the house of study, even if doing so is somewhat discourteous to the people who have already taken places.In this vein, Yevamot 105b states: Those who are required by the holy nation may step over the heads of the holy nation. However, how dare one who is not required by the holy nation step over the heads of the holy nation!It is not praiseworthy for a sage12Indeed, Berachot 43b lists this as one of six undesirable tendencies that a sage should guard himself against acquiring. to enter [the house of study] last.13doing so is considered an act of laziness, which causes unnecessary difficulty to the people sitting there. If one leaves to tend to his needs,14i.e., to use the toilet (Horayot ibid.). Alternatively, the term litzorech can be translated as "for a necessary purpose" - i.e., for a purpose that benefits the people at large (Tosafot, Yevamot 105b). he may return to his place.15Forcing the people to stand for him a second time, or the sage's stepping over them is not considered to be discourteous, since he was compelled to leave by forces beyond his control. However, if he leaves for other reasons, he should try not to return to his original place.The children of the sages who16are not mature enough to merit a distinguished position in the house of study in their own right are allowed to sit before their parents as a gesture of respect to the high communal position the latter have attained (Rashi, Horayot 13b). If they...have enough knowledge to listen turn their faces toward their father. If they lack the knowledge to listen, they turn their faces to the people. - Horayot (ibid.) states that the children are allowed this privilege only during their father's lifetime, but not afterwards. have enough knowledge to listen turn their faces toward their father. If they lack the knowledge to listen, they turn their faces to the people.
A student who is constantly sitting before his teacher is permitted1Tosafot (ibid.) notes that the expression eino rashei can be rendered "is not obligated," and suggests that meaning in this context. However, since rising more frequently can be construed to be an affront to God, it is questionable whether that interpretation can be accepted. to rise in his honor only [twice daily,] in the morning and in the evening, so that the honor paid to him2the teacher does not exceed the honor paid to God.3i.e., twice daily we accept the yoke of God's service by reciting the Shema (Kessef Mishneh).
We should stand before an old man of exceedingly advanced age,1The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 244:1) explains this as referring to a man of seventy. Others, emphasizing that the Rambam uses the term "exceedingly advanced age," see that as a reference to Gittin 28a, which describes a person ninety years old with such terminology. even if he is not a sage.2The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 244:1) emphasizes that there is no obligation to stand before a wicked man.The commentaries have raised questions concerning this law, noting that it reflects a difference of opinion between two Talmudic sages, and yet the Rambam's statements do not conform exactly to either position.Kiddushin 32b states:"Stand up before a white-haired [man]." Does this apply even with regard to a common person of advanced age? The Torah continues [mentioning] "an elder." [The term] "elder" refers only to a wise man, as implied by [Numbers 11:16]: "Assemble seventy of Israel's elders."Rabbi Yosse Hag'lili states: [The word] "elder" means "one who has acquired wisdom..."Issi ben Yehudah states: "Stand up before a white-haired [man]" - Every white-haired man is included therein.The Talmud explains that although the first opinion is similar to that of Rabbi Yosse Hag'lili, there are minor differences between them.From the Rambam's statements in Halachah 1, it would appear that he follows Rabbi Yosse Hag'lili's position. However, this halachah appears to echo Issi ben Yehudah's view. Even a sage who is young is obligated to stand before an old man of exceedingly advanced age. Nevertheless, he3i.e., the sage of youthful age need not rise to his full height, and need only show some token of respect.4However, anyone other than a sage is obligated to rise to his full height (Tur, Yoreh De'ah, 244).Even an old gentile5Kiddushin 33a relates that Rabbi Yochanan would stand in deference to an aged gentile, explaining: "How many experiences has he gone through!" should be addressed with words of respect,6Kiddushin (ibid.) notes that Rabbah would follow this practice. and a hand should be extended to support him,7Kiddushin (ibid.) notes that Abbaye would follow this practice. as [Leviticus 19:32] states: "Stand up before a white-haired [man]." Every white-haired man is included therein.8The commentaries question: If, in fact, the verse refers even to gentiles, and Rabbi Yochanan would follow such a practice, why doesn't the Rambam obligate standing in the presence of an aged gentile?
Torah sages should not personally take part1However, the sages must bear their share of the cost of such projects (Hilchot Sh'chenim 6:6). The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 243:1-2) adds that they are obligated to pay only the cost of the raw materials. They need not hire workers to take their place. This applies only when the work is performed by the members of the community. However, if workers are hired by the community to complete the task, the sages must also pay their share. in any communal work projects2e.g., building, digging, or the like - [to improve] the city - In Hilchot Sh'chenim (6:6-7), the Rambam gives some examples of such projects: fixing roads and thoroughfares and digging irrigation channels. - e.g., building, digging, or the like - [to improve] the city, lest they become disgraced in the eyes of the common people.3Bava Batra 8a explains that if the common people see the sages performing menial tasks, they might cease to respect them.Money should not be collected from them to pay for building the [city] wall, fixing its gates, its watchmen's wages, and the like.4In Hilchot Sh'chenim (ibid.), the Rambam explains the rationale for this law. Torah sages are freed from any obligation incurred to ensure the city's protection, because they are protected by the merit of their study. [The same applies regarding] a present to be offered to the king.5The order in which this law is taught is somewhat questionable. Bava Batra 8a, the source for these laws, mentions a sage's lack of obligation to contribute to a present for the king as part of his absolution from taxes, and not as a leniency granted to him because "his Torah protects him."Similarly, they are not obligated to pay taxes6neither [their share in] a tax levied on the city as a whole nor a head tax levied on each individual - Bava Batra (ibid.) also mentions that Artashta, the Persian king who sent Ezra to rebuild Jerusalem, freed all those involved in this holy work from all forms of taxes and tribute. (See Ezra 7:24.)The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 243:2) states that even if the gentile government levies taxes on a Torah sage, the community is obligated to pay the tax on his behalf.The commentaries question whether there are sages today who are worthy of these benefits. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 243:2) explains that these privileges should be extended only to those sages who devote the majority of their time to Torah study and limit their business involvement to the minimum necessary to earn a livelihood. Other authorities have voiced other opinions, some stricter and some more lenient. (See Siftei Cohen, Yoreh De'ah 243:7; Choshen Mishpat 163:14.) - neither [their share in] a tax levied on the city as a whole nor a head tax levied on each individual - as [Hoshea 8:10] states: "Although they will give among the nations,7an allusion to the payment of taxes now I will gather them; in a little while, they will be released8an allusion to the sages' exemption from the burden of the king and his officers."Similarly,9Rav Kapach notes that in the original, there is no vav before the word ????. However, the quotation of the verse in Bava Batra (ibid.) does include one.Similarly, if a Torah sage has merchandise to sell, he is allowed to sell it first, and no other person at the marketplace is allowed to sell until he does. - Although the Rambam harshly forbade a Torah sage from taking money from charity because of his knowledge (see Chapter 1, Halachah 7 and Chapter 3, Halachah 10), he allows a sage these privileges in earning his livelihood.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 243:4) states that this law applies only when the market is controlled by Jews. However, if there are gentiles who will sell their goods regardless, the other Jewish merchants are not obligated to risk suffering a loss. if a Torah sage has merchandise to sell, he is allowed to sell it first, and no other person at the marketplace is allowed to sell until he does. Similarly, if he has a legal matter10i.e., a case to be tried at court and stands among many other litigants, he is given priority.11Sh'vuot 30a relates:Rav Olah, the son of Rav Ellai, was involved in a judgment before Rav Nachman. Rav Yosef sent [Rav Nachman a message:] "Olah is our colleague in Torah and mitzvot."Rav Nachman said: "Why did he send this [notice] to me? To curry favor before me." Afterwards, he said: "[His purpose was] so that I try his case first."Tosafot questions this teaching, noting that there is a positive commandment to try every case in the order that it comes before the court. Two resolutions are offered:a) If both cases come to the court at the same time, the court should try the case of the sage first;b) The positive commandment to honor a sage overrides this positive commandment. Hence, the sage's case is tried first, even if it came before the court later.The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 15:1) accept the latter position. (See also Hilchot Sanhedrin 21:6.) [Also,] he is allowed to sit.12Sh'vuot (ibid.) states: 'And the two men shall stand' (Deuteronomy 19:17 : it is a mitzvah for the litigants to stand." Nevertheless, as a token of respect for the sage, he is invited to sit.The same privilege is also granted to the litigant opposing him, because otherwise, this gesture would be considered to be an unfair advantage granted to the sage. It is worthwhile to note that in Hilchot Sanhedrin 21:5, the Rambam writes that, at present, it is customary to seat all litigants, "for we do not have the potential to carry out the judgments of the Torah in the proper way." These laws are quoted in the Shulchan Aruch, Choshen Mishpat 17:2-3.
It is a great sin to disgrace Torah sages or to hate them.1Sanhedrin 99b equates such sinners with epikorsim - total unbelievers.Shabbat 119b relates:Jerusalem was not destroyed - This refers to the destruction of the city by the Babylonians. Jerusalem was not destroyed until [its inhabitants] disgraced its sages, as implied by [II Chronicles 36:16]: "And they would mock the messengers of God, despise His words, and scoff at His prophets"2i.e., they would scorn those who taught His words. - although the teaching is quoted from the Talmud, the Talmud does not itself define which of the verse's clauses refers to the disgrace heaped upon the sages. It is interesting to note that the Rambam's interpretation differs from that of Rashi - who equates the Sages with "His prophets" - and of the Maharsha, who interprets "the messengers of God" as the reference to the Sages. (See also Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. II, Chapter 42 and Lechem Mishneh.) - i.e., they would scorn those who taught His words.Similarly, the Torah's prophecy [Leviticus 26:16]: "If you despise My statutes"3which precedes the list of curses to befall the Jews [should be interpreted]: "If you despise the teachers of My statutes."4See Sifra, Bechukotai. Whoever disgraces the sages has no portion in the world to come and is included in the category: "Those who scorn the word of God" [Numbers5In Hilchot Teshuvah 3:14, the Rambam mentions the sin of disgracing the sages in a list of transgressions concerning which he writes: "a person who frequently commits these sins will not receive a portion in the world to come." 15:31].
Even though a person who disgraces a Torah sage will not receive a portion in the world to come,1i.e., even though, as stated in the previous halachah, a person who disgraces a sage will receive the ultimate punishment after his death, he is also subject to punishment in this world. if witnesses come [and testify2The Siftei Cohen, Yoreh De'ah 334:96, states that proper witnesses are not required, and even the testimony of women or slaves may be accepted. that] he disgraced him, even if only verbally, he is obligated to be placed under a ban of ostracism.3The details of this ban are discussed in the following chapter - in particular, in Halachah 4 there. An example of a sage placing individuals under such a ban for embarrasing a sage can be found in Mo'ed Katan 16a. This ban is publicly announced by the court.4The Beit Yosef, Yoreh De'ah 243, cites an example of the public announcement of such a ban from Kiddushin 70a. However, the section he quotes is not mentioned in our text of the Talmud. Also, wherever he is located, he is fined a litra5a Talmudic measure equal to approximately 168 grams... of gold, which is given to the sage.6Hilchot Chovel UMazik 3:5-6 relates: One who embarrasses a sage is obligated to pay him the full extent of the damages even though he embarrassed him only verbally. The decision has already been rendered that whoever embarrasses a sage - even with words alone - is fined...eight and three quarter sela'im of gold. It is an accepted tradition that this fine is collected everywhere, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in the Diaspora. Decisions of this nature were frequently rendered before us in Spain. Some sages would forgo payment, and that is commendable. Others would demand payment, but accept a compromise. However, the judges would tell the person who caused the embarrassment: "you are obligated to give him a litra of gold."The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 243:7) states that, at present, there are no sages whose stature is that great that they are to be awarded "a litra of gold," if they are publicly shamed. However, a person who embarrasses a sage is obligated to pay damages. This is the general opinion of most authorities at present. However, in the generations before the Ramah - and in certain communities, even after his decision - this fine was, in fact, imposed if someone publicly embarrassed a sage.Even7The use of this term implies that this is a lesser transgression than embarrassing a sage in his lifetime (Rivash, Responsum 120). one who disgraces a sage after his death is placed under a ban of ostracism by the court.8Eduyot 5:6 relates that the court imposed such a ban when someone made disparaging remarks about the sages Shemayah and Avtalion. (See also Berachot 19a.) They should release the ban when he repents. In contrast, if the sage is alive, they do not release the ban until he appeases the sage for whose [honor] he was ostracized.9The Kessef Mishneh notes that the Rambam's statements appears to imply that the ban is not lifted until the offender actually appeases the sage. He questions that decision, since it is possible that even though the offender genuinely asks for forgiveness, the sage will refuse to grant it.Note Hilchot De'ot 6:6 and Hilchot Teshuvah 2:10, which advise a person who has been wronged to be generous and forgive the offender for his actions.[To protect] his honor, a sage may10act on his own initiative, without bringing the matter to a court... issue a ban of ostracism against a common person11The Kessef Mishneh states that this expression implies that although a sage can be placed under ban for embarrassing a sage of greater stature, that ban may not be issued by the sage alone, and can be put into effect only by a Rabbinic court. Nevertheless, he postulates that if the sage who was embarrassed is of far greater stature than the sage who made the insult, the former is allowed to issue the ban himself, without a court. who acted outrageously12See Kiddushin 70a against him.13The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 243:8) mentions a difference of opinion whether, at present, there are sages of the stature that allows them to issue a ban of ostracism without taking the matter to court. See also Pitchei Teshuvah 243:7. He does not need witnesses, nor must [the offender] have been warned.14i.e., the ban may be imposed without following the standard judicial process. The ban is not lifted until he appeases the sage.15See note above. If the sage dies, three people16even individuals who are not sages worthy of sitting on a Rabbinic court (Chapter 7, Halachah 7) may come and lift [the ban].17The Rambam does not require him to ask forgiveness from the sage (see Hilchot Teshuvah 2:11) or repent. Perhaps this leniency is granted because the ban was imposed by the sage himself and not by an objective court. If the sage desires to forgive him18Note Chapter 7, Halachah 13, which explains that this is the general practice of Torah sages, who are willing to forgo insults to them. However, that halachah specifies that such leniency can be granted only when the insult was made in private. If the sage was publicly disgraced, disciplinary action must be taken, or else the honor of the Torah would suffer. and not place him under ban, he is permitted to do so.19The Mishneh LaMelech notes that this leniency is granted only regarding matters between man and man. If a person is obligated to be placed under a ban of ostracism for matters between man and God - e.g., uttering God's name in vain - the ban must be put into effect even though the individual repents. (See also Tosafot, Yevamot 22b.)
If a teacher placed a person under a ban of ostracism because of his honor,1i.e., the case was not tried in court, but the teacher issued the ban of ostracism on his own initiative, as mentioned in the previous halachah. all of his students2for they are obligated to protect his honor... are obligated to treat the person in the required fashion.3described in Chapter 7, Halachah 4. The Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 334) maintains that one can infer from the Rambam's words that the ban need not be observed by the other sages, even those of lesser stature than the teacher, who are not his students. However, if a student issued a ban of ostracism because of his honor, his teacher4is not obligated to honor his student to this extent. Hence, he... is not obligated to abide by the terms of the ban. Nevertheless, all other people5of a lesser Torah stature (Beit Yosef, Yoreh De'ah 334) are obligated to do so.6As mentioned in the following halachah, this applies only when the student imposed the ban to protect his honor. If he imposed the ban because the person violated a prohibition, his teacher would be obligated to observe it.Similarly, when a person is placed under a ban of ostracism because of7an affront to the honor of... the nasi, all Jews are obligated to abide by the terms of the ban.8for all Israel are required to honor him. However, if a person is placed under a ban of ostracism because of any Jew, the nasi9whom all Israel are obligated to honor. This law is also quoted by the Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 334:21. Note the commentary on Halachah 6, which questions the applicability of the term nasi within the context of our present-day experience. is not obligated to abide by it.10for he is not obligated to honor others to this degree. In this case as well, were the ban imposed for other reasons, the nasi would be bound by it.When a person is placed under a ban of ostracism because of - an affront to the honor of...When a person is placed under a ban of ostracism because of his city,11this also refers to a ban imposed only because of an affront to the person's honor other cities must also abide by this ban.12The Beit Yosef and the Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 334:20) maintain that even a city whose Torah stature exceeds that of the city which issued the ban is obligated to abide by it. However, if he is placed under ban by other cities,13because he treated them disrespectfully his own city need not abide by the ban.14but other cities of lesser Torah stature are required to observe it (Ramah, ibid.).
When does the above1leniency that frees certain people from abiding by the requirements of the ban of ostracism apply? When the ban was imposed because he acted disrespectfully2The Hagahot Maimoniot notes that a ban can be imposed only because of disrespectful behavior. However, this punishment may not be administered for failing to honor the sage. to a Torah sage.3Many commentaries have noted the difficulty in the Rambam's words. This statement implies that there is a certain leniency with regard to a ban imposed because of the embarrassment of a Torah sage. However, the first of the 24 reasons the Rambam lists for imposing a ban of ostracism that must be observed by every Jew is disgracing a Torah sage. (See Avodat Hamelech.)Among the resolutions of the difficulty offered is that there is a difference between a ban imposed by a court according to Torah law and a ban issued by a sage individually to protect his own honor. However, a person who was placed under a ban of ostracism for another reason for which such a ban may be declared4as are enumerated below - even if the ban was declared by a person of the lowest stature in Israel5the nasi and all Jews are obligated to abide by the terms of the ban - Mo'ed Katan 17a relates that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi's maidservant declared a ban of ostracism on a person, and the entire Jewish people observed that ban for three years. - the nasi and all Jews are obligated to abide by the terms of the ban until he repents for the matter for which the ban was imposed, and the ban is lifted.6See Chapter 7, Halachah 7.A ban of ostracism is imposed upon a person7either man or woman - Most of the instances where the Talmud mentions a ban of ostracism concern men. However, a number of cases (see Rosh HaShanah 31b, Mo'ed Katan 16b, and Nedarim 7b and 50b) also involve women. - either man or woman - for [the following] 24 reasons:a)8Berachot 19a mentions that this is the number of reasons for which a person can be placed under ban, but explains only several of these twenty-four reasons. A significant number of reasons are also mentioned in the Jerusalem Talmud (Mo'ed Katan 3:1); however, the majority of the reasons mentioned by the Rambam below were gathered by him from many different passages throughout the Talmud. a person who disgraces a sage,9as explained above even after his passing;b)10Berachot 19a relates that a ban was imposed on a person for disgracing the sages Shemayah and Avtalion, even after their passing. a person who embarrasses a messenger of a court;c)11Kiddushin 70b relates that Rav would impose a ban of ostracism for this reason. a person who calls a colleague a slave;d)12See Kiddushin 28a. a person who was ordered [to appear before] a court at a specific time and did not come;e)13See Bava Kama 112b and also Hilchot Sanhedrin 25:8. a person who treats even one point of Rabbinic law with disrespect;14Eduyot 5:6 relates that Eliezer ben Chanoch was placed under ban for raising difficulties regarding the practice of washing one's hands, a Rabbinic ordinance. needless to say, this applies regarding [matters of] Torah15The Kessef Mishneh notes that the Rambam uses the expression, "treats with disrespect." If a person transgresses a command, he is punished by other means. However, ostracism is imposed for causing others to view a Torah or Rabbinic law disparagingly. law;f) a person who refuses to comply with the decisions [rendered by a court] is placed under ban until he complies;g)16Bava Kama 113a serves as the source for this law. Note the slight difference between the Rambam's statements here and those in Hilchot Sanhedrin ibid.g) a person who possesses an entity that can cause damage - e.g., a dangerous dog or a faulty ladder - is placed under ban until he removes that entity - This concept, with these two examples, is quoted from Bava Kama 15b.h) a person who sells land to a gentile is placed under ban until he accepts responsibility for any damages which the gentile may cause his Jewish neighbor - Bava Kama 112a mentions this point.Tosafot postulates that this restriction applies only when a Jewish colleague is prepared to pay the same amount as the gentile. However, if the gentile offers more than the Jew, the owner is not liable to sustain the loss. However, in Hilchot Sh'chenim 12:7, where the Rambam quotes this law, he does not make such a provision. Furthermore, in several of his responsa, he forbids selling property that borders on the property of a fellow Jew to a gentile, even when substantial losses are involved (Rav Kapach).i) a person who testifies against a Jewish colleague in a secular court and causes money which Torah law would not [require him to pay] to be expropriated from him is placed under ban until he repays [that amount] - See Bava Kama 113b. In Hilchot Sanhedrin 26:7, the Rambam writes:Whoever has his case judged by gentile judges and courts...is wicked and is considered as if he cursed...the Torah of Moses....If gentiles rule his society and his fellow litigant is strong-willed, and it is thus impossible to collect [one's due] from him according to Jewish law, he should call him to a Jewish court first. If he refuses to come, he should receive the court's permission to preserve his property through secular law.j) a butcher who is a priest - but not a priest who slaughters for his personal use (Hilchot Bikkurim 9:8)and does not separate the priestly gifts - the foreleg, jaw, and the maw, which must be given to a priest from every animal slaughtered. (See Deuteronomy 18:3; Hilchot Bikkurim, Chapter 9.)and give them to another priest is placed under ban until he gives them - Chulin 132bk) a person who violates the sanctity of the second day of the festivals in the Diaspora - See Pesachim 52a.even though [their observance] is only a custom - The Or Sameach explains that the Rambam added this clause because he had already stated that a person who disgraces a Rabbinic ordinance is liable to be banned. Hence, he clarifies that, at present, since we use a fixed calendar, the observance of the second day of the festivals is no longer considered to be a Rabbinic decree and is only a custom. (See Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 6:14.)l) a person who performs work on Pesach eve after noon - Pesach eve is singled out because the Paschal sacrifice was offered at that time. (See Pesachim 50b; Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 8:17.)m) a person who takes God's name in vain or takes an oath casually - See Nedarim 7b; Hilchot Sh'vuot 12:9.n) a person who causes the many to desecrate God's name - This is derived from the Jerusalem Talmud (Mo'ed Katan 3:1), which quotes how, in a time of drought, Choni HaM'agel drew a circle on the ground and called out to God: "I will not move from here until You provide rain."Shimon ben Shetach told Choni that his act warranted ostracism, because if God had not answered his prayers, many of the people would have lost faith. Nevertheless, Shimon ben Shetach did not enforce that punishment after he saw how God answered Choni's prayers.o) a person who causes the many to eat sacrificial food outside [its proper place] - Berachot 19a relates how Todus of Rome instituted the custom of roasting lambs on Pesach eve in a manner similar to the Paschal sacrifice. The sages told him that, were it not for his other personal qualities, he would have been placed under ban, for it is possible that someone would actually consider his lamb as a Paschal sacrifice.p) a person who calculates the years [and declares a leap year] or fixes the day of the new month in the Diaspora - Berachot 63a relates that Isaiah 2:3: "Out of Zion will come forth the Torah..." implies that the above decisions must be made in Eretz Yisrael, and prescribes this punishment for someone who makes them in the Diaspora.q) a person who causes the blind [ - i.e., the morally unaware - ] - Note the commentaries to Leviticus 19:14 and also Sefer Hachinuch (Mitzvah 232).to stumble - Mo'ed Katan 17a relates that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi's maidservant issued a ban of ostracism on a father who physically beat his son after the latter had reached adulthood. By doing so, he was goading his son into rebelling against his father. This ban was respected by all the sages.r) a person who prevents the many from performing a mitzvah - See the Jerusalem Talmud, Mo'ed Katan 3:1. See also Hilchot Teshuvah 4:1.s) a butcher who sold non-kosher meat - The Kessef Mishneh quotes Sanhedrin 25a as teaching that Rav Nachman administered such a punishment. However, in our texts of the Talmud, that passage does not mention ostracism specifically.t) a butcher who does not inspect his knife in the presence of a sage - See Chullin 18a. In Hilchot Shechitah 1:26, the Rambam states that this halachah applies even if later the knife was inspected and found to be kosher. The Kessef Mishneh notes that leniency is taken in this matter, because it has become customary for ritual slaughter to be performed only by experts. (See Tur, Yoreh De'ah 18.)u) a person who intentionally causes himself to have an erection - Niddah 13b; for by doing so, he leads himself to immodest thoughts, at the very least. (See also Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:18.)v) a person who divorced his wife, and then entered into a partnership or business dealing with her which requires them to come into contact. When they come to court, they are placed under ban - After divorce, a couple should have as little contact together as possible, lest the familiarity they previously enjoyed lead them to sexual behavior outside the bounds of marriage. (See also Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:27.)w) a sage whose reputation is unsavory - Mo'ed Katan 17a relates how Rabbi Yehudah passed a ban of ostracism on a sage for this reason.x) a person who places a person under ban when the latter does not deserve [such punishment] - Mo'ed Katan 17a relates the following episode: Resh Lakish was employed as a watchman and noticed a thief. Although he shouted at him, the thief did not stop. Therefore, Resh Lakish proclaimed: "You are under a ban of ostracism."The thief replied: "Although I am obligated to repay him, I am not obligated to be ostracized. You should be ostracized."When the matter was related in the House of Study, the sages stated that Resh Lakish's ban was not justified, but the thief's was.The Ra'avad and other commentators mention other acts in which a ban of ostracism is in order. Indeed, in a number of cases (e.g., Hilchot Gerushin 13:20), the Rambam himself mentions this punishment. The commentaries explain that the Rambam limits himself to 24 instances, because that is the figure mentioned in the Talmud. However, these can be considered to be general categories including other instances as well. a person who possesses an entity that can cause damage - e.g., a dangerous dog or a faulty ladder - is placed under ban until he removes that entity;h) a person who sells land to a gentile is placed under ban until he accepts responsibility for any damages which the gentile may cause his Jewish neighbor;i) a person who testifies against a Jewish colleague in a secular court and causes money which Torah law would not [require him to pay] to be expropriated from him is placed under ban until he repays [that amount];j) a butcher who is a priest and does not separate the priestly gifts and give them to another priest is placed under ban until he gives them;k) a person who violates the sanctity of the second day of the festivals in the Diaspora, even though [their observance] is only a custom;l) a person who performs work on Pesach eve after noon;m) a person who takes God's name in vain or takes an oath casually;n) a person who causes the many to desecrate God's name;o) a person who causes the many to eat sacrificial food outside [its proper place];p) a person who calculates the years [and declares a leap year] or fixes the day of the new month in the Diaspora;q) a person who causes the blind [ - i.e., the morally unaware - ] to stumble;r) a person who prevents the many from performing a mitzvah;s) a butcher who sold non-kosher meat;t) a butcher who does not inspect his knife in the presence of a sage;u) a person who intentionally causes himself to have an erection;v) a person who divorced his wife, and then entered into a partnership or business dealing with her which requires them to come into contact. When they come to court, they are placed under ban;w) a sage whose reputation is unsavory;x) a person who places a person under ban when the latter does not deserve [such punishment];

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
Even though a sage who is distinguished for his wisdom, the nasi, or the av beit din acts shamefully, they should never be publically placed under a ban of ostracism unless their deeds resemble those of Jeroboam ben Nevat and his colleagues. However, if one [of these individuals] performs other sins, he should be lashed privately, as [implied by Hoshea 4:5]: “You shall stumble during the day and the prophet will stumble with you at night” - i.e., even though he stumbles, cover him like night. He is told: “Preserve your honor and stay at home.”Similarly, whenever a Torah sage is obligated to be ostracized, it is forbidden for a court to act rashly and pronounce a ban hastily. Instead, they should shun the matter and try to avoid it. The pious among the Sages would be proud of the fact that they never participated in the ostracism of a Torah sage. Nevertheless, they would participate in sentencing him to be lashed. They would even participate in sentencing him to receive “stripes for rebellion.”
How is the ban [issued]? The [court] pronounces: “So and so shall be ostracized. If the ban is issued in his presence, [the court] pronounces: “This [person], so and so, shall be ostracized.”A ban of excommunication [is issued as follows]: They tell him: “So and so is excommunicated.”The expression “He is cursed” implies a curse, an oath, and a ban of ostracism.
How is a ban of ostracism or excommunication lifted? They tell him: “You are released. You are forgiven.” If the ban is lifted outside his presence, they say: “So and so is released. So and so is forgiven.”
What are the practices that must be observed by the person who is ostracized and those who come into contact with him?a) he is forbidden to cut his hair or launder his clothes, like a mourner throughout his entire period of ostracism;b) he is not included in a zimmun, nor in a quorum of ten with regard to any matter that requires ten;c) no one should sit within four cubits of him.He may, however, teach others and others may teach him. He may be hired and may hire others. If he dies while under ban, the court sends [an emissary who] places a stone on his coffin, as if to say that they are stoning him because he was separated from the community. Needless to say, eulogies are not recited for him, nor is his bier accompanied.
A person who is excommunicated has even more [severe restrictions]. He may not teach others and others may not teach him. Nevertheless, he may study himself, so that he does not forget what he has learned.He may not be hired, nor is he allowed to hire others. We should not engage in trade with him. [Indeed,] we should not have any business dealings with him except the bare minimum necessary for his livelihood.
When a person was ostracized for thirty days and did not seek to be released from the ban, he is placed under a second ban. If he was ostracized for a second thirty days without seeking release, he is excommunicated.
How many [people] are necessary to release [a person from a] ban of ostracism or excommunication? Three. They may even be commoners. A single judge with unique expertise may release [a person from a] ban of ostracism or excommunication alone. A student may release [a person from a] ban of ostracism or excommunication even in the place of his teacher.
vazio
When three individuals issue a ban of ostracism, and then depart, if the person who was ostracized improves his behavior with regard to the matter for which he was ostracized, three others may come and release him [from that ban].
A person who does not know who placed him under a ban of ostracism should approach the nasi who may release him from that ban.
If a ban was issued conditionally, even if one imposed that [conditional ban] on himself, it must be nullified [before ordinary interaction with the person is permitted]. If a Torah sage issued a ban of ostracism against himself, even if he made that ban conditional on the consent of another person and even if he issued it because of a matter which requires ostracism, he may nullify the ban himself.
Whenever a person dreams that he was placed under a ban of ostracism, even if he knows who issued that ban, ten people who are proficient in Torah Law are required to release him from that ban. If he cannot find such people [in his immediate surroundings], he must journey a parsah in search of them.If he cannot find [these people within that distance], the ban can be released even by ten people who study Mishnah. If he cannot find [such people], the ban can be released even by ten people who know how to read the Torah. If he cannot find [such people], the ban can be released even by ten people who do not know how to read. If he cannot find ten people in his place, the ban can be released by three ordinary people.
Whenever a ban of ostracism is imposed in a person's presence, it should only be lifted in his presence. If it was issued outside his presence, it may be lifted in his presence or outside his presence. There is no [fixed amount of time] between the issuance of a ban and its release. Instead, one may issue a ban and lift it immediately if the person placed under ban improves his behavior.However, [if the court sees fit for this individual to remain under ban for a number of years, they may extend [the ban] according to his wickedness. Similarly, if it sees fit, the court is entitled to excommunicate a person at the outset or to excommunicate anyone who eats, drinks, or stands within four cubits of a person who has been ostracized. [This power is granted] to cause [the banned person] hardship and [thus,] create a fence around the Torah, so that it will not be violated by the sinners. Even though a Torah sage may place a person under a ban of ostracism [to preserve] his honor, it is not praiseworthy for a sage to accustom himself to this practice. Instead, he should turn his ears from the words of the common people and not pay attention to them, as Solomon said in his wisdom [Ecclesiastes 7:21]: “Also, do not pay heed to all the words that are spoken.”This was the practice of the pious of the early generations. They would hear their shame and not answer. Furthermore, they would pardon and forgive the person who insulted them. The great sages would take pride in their pleasant deeds, relating that they never issued a ban of ostracism or excommunication [to protect] their honor. This is the path of the sages which is worthy of being followed.When does the above apply? When [the person] spurned or embarrassed [the sage] in private. However, if one spurns or embarrasses a sage in public, it is forbidden for the sage to forgo his honor. Indeed, if he does so, he is punished, because the disrespect of the Torah is involved. Instead, he should seek vengeance and carry enmity over the matter like a snake until the offender requests to be pardoned. Then, he should forgive him.
