=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
After separating the great terumah,1This is the preferable course of behavior. If, however, one separates the tithes before terumah, the separation is binding. one should separate one tenth of the remaining produce2Thus it is not a tenth of the entire crop. and this is called the first tithe. Concerning it [Numbers 18:24] states: "For the tithes of the children of Israel that they will separate to God."3Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 127) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 395) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.These tithes are given to Levites, males and females, as [ibid.] states: "And I gave the Levites all of the tithes of the children of Israel as an inheritance."
An Israelite is permitted to partake of the first tithe, and it may be eaten in a state of ritual impurity, because it is not holy.4I.e., unlike terumah where these restrictions apply. Whenever the term "holy" or "redemption" is used with regard to the tithes, the intent is the second tithe.5Which must be eaten in Jerusalem in a state of ritual purity.What is the source from which we learn that the first tithe is ordinary produce? [Ibid.:27] states: "And your terumah will be considered for you as grain from your grainheap and the fullness of the vat." Just as a grainheap and a vat [contain] ordinary produce, so, too, once terumat ma'aser has been separated from the first tithe,6Until terumat ma'aser has been separated from it, however, we may not partake of it (Radbaz). it is ordinary produce in all regards. For this reason, when the daughter of a Levite has been taken captive7And we fear that she was raped by her captors. With regard to terumah, by contrast, once the daughter of a priest engages in forbidden relations, she is forbidden to partake of it (Hilchot Terumah 6:7). Our Sages did not decree that a Levite's daughter who engages in forbidden relationships should not be allowed to partake of terumah, for it is uncommon for a woman to engage in forbidden relationships (Yevamot 91a). or she engaged in forbidden relations, she can be given tithes and she may partake of it. When, however, there was a report that a woman's husband died or one witness testified that he died, she married8If, however, she did not marry, she is not forbidden, even if she was consecrated by another man. and then her husband appeared, our Sages penalized her and ruled that she is forbidden to partake of the tithes.9I.e., this is a Rabbinic decree, enacted to maintain the moral level of the Jewish people.
The Levites and the priests should separate the first tithe so that they can separate terumat ma'aser from it.10I.e., since the priests and the Levites are allowed to keep the tithes, one might ask: Why is it necessary for them to separate it at the outset? The Rambam answers that the separation is necessary, because until terumat ma'aser is separated from the tithes, it is forbidden to partake of them. Similarly, the priests must separate other types of terumah11With the expression "other types of terumah," the Rambam includes challah and bikkurim. See Hilchot Terumah 15:20. and tithes12The intent is only the first tithe. The second tithe and the tithe for the poor are not given to the priests. for themselves.13They may not, however, partake of the produce without making these separations as the Rambam proceeds to explain. Since the priests receive all types of agricultural gifts, is it possible for them to partake of the produce without these separations having been made? [Numbers 18:28] states: "And so shall you separate, also you...." "You" includes the Levites. "Also you" includes the priests.
We do not expropriate the tithes from the priests, as [ibid.:26] states: "When you take from the children of Israel...."14I.e., from an Israelite and not from a priest. Similarly, none of the presents given to the priests must be given from one priest to another priest.15A priest must separate the presents. He need not, however, give them to another priest, but instead may keep them for himself.Ezra penalized the Levites in his time16There are some who interpret the Rambam as implying that the penalty was applied only in Ezra's era, but not in subsequent generations. Indeed, we find that even Sages gave their tithes to Levites (Ma'aser Sheni 5:9). For this reason, it appears that Ezra's penalty was that if there was both a priest and a Levite present, the tithes should be given to a priest, but they could also be given to a Levite (Radbaz). Alternatively, in Ezra's generation, the tithes should be given only to the priests. Subsequently, however, when more Levites ascended and settled in Eretz Yisrael, the decree was rescinded and tithes could also be given to the Levites. Nevertheless, in order not to nullify Ezra's words entirely, it was still possible to give the tithes to the priests (Kessef Mishneh). [Note, however, the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 5:15) which indicates that the tithes were given to the priests in the generations after Ezra as well. See also Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 11:14.] All agree that the Levites themselves were never required to give the tithes to the priests.The Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 395) asks: How was it possible for Ezra to nullify the Torah's command? For the Scriptural obligation is to give the tithes to the priests. He answers that in Ezra's time, the mitzvah to tithe was only Rabbinic in origin (see Hilchot Terumot, ch. 1). Hence, it was possible for him to make the priests the recipients. because they did not ascend to Jerusalem with him17See Ezra 8:15 which states that the descendants of the Levites were not found among the people who returned to Israel from Babylon. There were many among the Jewish people who had achieved financial security and comfortable living circumstances in Babylon and did not want to give this up to live in the Holy Land. Nevertheless, aside from the Levites, there was no distinct group that did not return to Israel in significant numbers. and ordained that the first tithe should be given solely to the priests.
When a person partakes of his produce while it is tevel18I.e., before terumah and the tithes have been separated. or a Levite partakes of the tithes while they are tevel,19I.e., before terumat ma'aser has been separated. although they are liable for death at the hand of Heaven,20Se Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:19. they are not liable to make reimbursement to the owners.21I.e., the priests (or the Levites) who would be given the terumah or the tithes. With regard to terumah, by contrast, when a person partakes of terumah unknowingly, he is required to make restitution. See Hilchot Terumah 6:6. [This is derived from ibid.:24:] "...that they will separate to God." [Implied is that the recipients] do not have any share in them until they have been separated.In the Diaspora,22In the lands directly bordering on Eretz Yisrael where our Sages ordained that the agricultural laws be observed. See Hilchot Terumah 1:6. it is permitted for a person to continue eating and afterwards, separate terumah and the tithes.23Since the obligation to make these separations from the crops is Rabbinic in origin, our Sages granted this leniency. See Hilchot Terumah 1:21.
We can separate tithes from produce in one place for produce in another place. They need not be grouped together.24In contrast to terumah, in which instance, the initial preference is to separate the terumah from the same produce for which it is being taken (Hilchot Terumah 3:17). We do not, however, separate tithes from one species for another species,25This holds true for terumah as well, as stated in Hilchot Terumah 5:3. nor from produce for which we are obligated to separate tithes for produce from which we are exempt from separating, nor from produce for which we are exempt from separating tithes for produce from which such a separation is required.26This also applies with regard to terumah, see ibid.:2, 12. If one made a separation in any of the above instances, [the produce separated] is not considered as tithes.27It need not be given to a Levite and if necessary, new tithes must be separated.
Whenever we said with regard to terumah, that terumah may not be separated from one type of produce for another,28E.g., produce that has been reaped for produce that is attached to the ground (ibid.:9), produce reaped in one year for produce reaped in another year (ibid.:11), or produce from the Diaspora for produce from Eretz Yisrael (ibid.:12). tithes may not be separated from one such type of produce for another such type. And whenever we said that the separation of terumah from [one type of produce] is acceptable [after the fact],29I.e., instances where a separation of terumah is undesirable, nevertheless, after the fact, it is acceptable. For example, one separated produce for which all the work concerning it was not completed (ibid.:4); one separates lower grade produce as terumah for higher grade produce (ibid.:8); or one unknowingly separated impure produce as terumah for pure produce. if one separated tithes from such produce, it is acceptable. Whenever produce is exempt from the obligation to have terumah separated,30For example, produce not fit for human consumption (ibid. 2:1); produce that was leket, pe'ah, or the like (ibid.:9). it is also exempt from the obligation to have tithes separated. All those individuals who may separate terumah may separate the tithes. And all those concerning whom it was said that they should not separate terumah, but if they did separate it, the separation is effective,31A person who is deaf, but not mute, a mute who can hear, but not speak, a person who is naked, a person who is drunk and a blind person (ibid. 4:4). so too, if they separate the tithes, the separation is effective. And whenever a person's separation of terumah is not effective,32A deaf-mute, a mentally or emotionally unstable person, a minor, a gentile who separated terumah from produce belonging to a Jew, even with his permission, and a person who separate terumah from produce that does not belong to him without the owner's permission (ibid.:2). his separation of tithes is also not effective.
When a person tells a colleague: "I will tithe through your agency," he does not have to stand with him to see whether he tithed or did not tithe.33Since he willingly appointed him as an agent, we assume that he relies on him and can follow the accepted presumption that an agent will carry out the task assigned to him. [Our translation and commentary follow the gloss of the Radbaz. Others offer different interpretations.] If [the agent] tells a colleague: "Tithe using me as an agent," he must stand with him.34Since he did not appoint him voluntarily, we are not certain that he will carry out the agency in good faith.
The obligation to tithe carobs is only Rabbinic in origin,35The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that according to Scriptural Law, the only trees from which we are required to separate the tithes are grapes and olives. As explained in the notes to Hilchot Terumah 2:1, this is a difference of opinion involving many authorities. for they are not eaten by most people.36Based on Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:3, it appears that here the Rambam is speaking of carobs that grow in Tzalmona or other species that are usually not eaten. The carobs that grow commonly and are eaten by many must be tithes according to Scriptural Law.Those that grow in Tzalmona and the like are also eaten by some people. Hence the Rabbis ordained that they be tithed. Species of produce that are not usually consumed by people are exempt, as stated in the following clause. Bitter almonds, whether large or small,37When such almonds are small, they are not bitter. Nevertheless, they are still unfit to be eaten because they have not fully matured (see Rashi, Chullin 25b). are exempt, for they are not considered food.38Even though some may partake of them, the majority do not. Indeed, the minority is so insignificant that we do not require a separation of terumah even according to Rabbinic Law.
A tree that is planted inside a house is exempt from the obligations of the tithes, as [indicated by Deuteronomy 14:22]: "You shall certainly tithe all the produce of your crops that grow in the field."39It is produce of the field from which we must tithe (the Jerusalem Talmud, Orlah 1:2). It appears to me that tithes must be separated from this produce according to Rabbinic Law, for one is required to tithe the fruit of a fig tree that stands in a courtyard if it was harvested at one time.40If, however, the fruit is picked one by one, a person is not obligated to tithe it.This law is stated in the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:8). Now a courtyard is not considered a field. Hence in order that this law not contradict the law cited from the Jerusalem Talmud, we must assume that the Mishnah is speaking according to Rabbinic Law, while the Jerusalem Talmud is speaking according to Scriptural Law. The Ra'avad differs with this ruling and differentiates between produce growing in a courtyard and that which grows in a house. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's ruling.
When onions [stored in a home] grew roots next to each other, even if they grew roots in the earth of a loft, they are exempt from tithes.41I.e., they are exempt according to Scriptural Law, and even according to Rabbinic Law, there is no obligation to separate tithes, because the person would not desire to have the plants grow (Or Sameach). If a landslide covered them,42Destroying the roof of the loft. and they are thus open [to the skies], it is as if they have been planted in the field and one is obligated to tithe them.
[The following laws apply when someone is] protecting his field because of grapes43The Rambam is speaking about an instance where the figs and the other fruits growing in the field have for the most part been harvested. There were, however, a few figs left growing in scattered places around the field. The grapes, however, grow later than the other crops and hence, had not been harvested yet. The owner was protecting his field for the sake of his grapes. The question is: Are the other fruits considered as ownerless because the owner is no longer primarily concerned with them? Or do we say that since he is guarding his field because of the grapes, he is also guarding the other produce? and another person comes and collects the figs that remain in that field or he was guarding his field because of the zucchini and squash44Which grow even later than grapes. and another person came and gathered the grapes which were scattered in the field. When [it is known] that the owner of the field is concerned with the leftover produce, it is forbidden to take it; [doing so] is stealing.45Even though it has little value. We are forbidden to take even the slightest amount of a colleague's property against his will. Hence, tithes and terumah must be separated from the crops. If the owner of the field is not concerned with it, it is permitted [to take it;46It is as if he has declared them ownerless (Radbaz). See a parallel ruling in Hilchot Ishut 5:8. it is not] theft. Hence, they are exempt from the tithes.47For ownerless produce need not be tithed. Similarly, terumah need not be separated from it (Radbaz, based on Hilchot Terumah 2:11).
Only the most choice produce should be separated as tithes,48The same concept applies with regard to terumah, as stated in Hilchot Terumah 2:4,6. as [Numbers 18:30] states: "When you separate the choice portion from it, and it will be considered for the Levites49This is both the correct wording of the verse and the manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text is in error. as the produce of the grainheap and the produce of the vat." Just as the Levites must separate the choicest portions of the tithes, the Israelites who separate from the grainheap and the vat separate the choicest portions.
We may not separate tithes by estimation.50See Avot 1:16. In contrast terumah should be separated in this manner (Hilchot Terumah 3:4). Instead, one must do so through measuring,51The volume of the produce. weight, or number.52The order of preference is number, volume, weight. See Terumot 4:6. One who is precise in the measurement is praiseworthy. When one gives an extra amount as the tithes, his tithes are flawed, because untithed produce is mixed with them.53For the extra amount of produce is not tithes, because the tithes represent an exact sum. Nor is it considered ordinary produce from which tithes were separated, because it was placed with the tithes. Instead, it is considered as ordinary produce from which tithes were not separated. [The remainder of] his produce has, however, been made fit for use.
When a person separates a portion of the tithes, they are not considered as tithes. Instead, it is as if someone divided the grainheap. He must, however, separate from the portion set aside the tithes that are appropriate for it.What is implied? A person had 100 se'ah. He set aside five se'ah as the tithes. [These five se'ah] are not considered as tithes.54For giving them does not fulfill the requirement. He cannot separate tithes for [these five se'ah] from another source.55Although usually, one may set aside tithes from one collection of produce for another (Halachah 6), an exception is made in this instance, because he originally separated this produce with the intent that it be tithes [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 4:1)]. it would appear that one is separating tithes from produce for which one is required to separate tithes for produce for which one is not obligated to make such a separation (see notes to Halachah 7). The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this ruling, advancing a different interpretation of Terumot 4:1. Instead, he should separate half a se'ah from them. It is their tithes.
When a person separates the [first] tithe, he should recite a blessing first, as one recites a blessing [before observing] any of the mitzvot.56See Hilchot Berachot 11:6, 12; Hilchot Terumah 2:16. Similarly, he should recite a blessing [before separating] the second tithe, the tithe given to the poor, and the tithe of a tithe.57I.e., terumat ma'aser. He should recite a blessing for each one individually. If he made all the separations one directly after the other without speaking in between, he should include them all in one blessing, [praising God who commanded us] "to separate the terumot and the tithes."58This applies if one sets aside terumah and tithes for his own produce. If he sets it aside for others, he should conclude the blessing "concerning the separation of tithes" (Hilchot Berachot 11:12-13).

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
A person is not obligated to tithe his produce by Scriptural Law unless he completes [the work associated with its preparation1At which point the obligation to tithe takes effect (Chapter 3, Halachah 1). with the intent of] partaking of it himself.2Rabbi Akiva Eiger and the Minchat Chinuch (mitzvah 395) explain that even if the person changes his mind and desires to sell the produce afterwards, he remains obligated to tithe. If, however, he completes those tasks with the intent of selling it, he is exempt according to Scriptural Law.3If the person changes his mind and desires to partake of the produce himself afterwards, he is not obligated according to Scriptural Law. Since he was not obligated at the time of the initial requirement, he does not become obligated afterwards (ibid.). He is, however, obligated by Rabbinic decree.4Our Sages adopted this measure as a safeguard. Ignoring it can have serious repercussions as Bava Metzia 88a states the shopping area of Beit Hino was destroyed three years before Jerusalem because they did not tithe produce that was sold in the marketplace. [This is derived from Deuteronomy 14:22:] "And you shall certainly tithe... and you shall partake...." One is obligated only when he completes the tasks with the intent of partaking.
Similarly, one who purchases such produce is exempt according to Scriptural Law, [for ibid. states]: "the produce of your crops."5I.e., crops that you made ready for use. He is, however, obligated according to Rabbinic Law.When does the above apply? When he purchased it after the work necessary to prepare it was completed while it was in the possession of the seller. If, however, these tasks were completed while it was in the possession of the purchaser, he is obligated to tithe according to Scriptural Law.6The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam, maintaining that the purchaser of the produce is never liable to tithe according to Scriptural Law. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh cite interpretations of Talmudic passages that support the Rambam's position, but explain that there are other Rishonim who follow the Ra'avad's position.
Produce which is not fit to be eaten because it is too small, e.g., unripened produce7Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 4:8). and the like, is not required to be tithed8Even according to Rabbinic decree. until it grows and becomes food, as [implied by Leviticus 27:30 which states that we must tithe:] "From the crops of the earth, from the fruit of the trees," i.e., [there is no requirement to tithe the crops] until they grow and become fruit. Similar concepts apply with regard to grain and legumes, as [implied by Deuteronomy 14:22:] "the produce of your crops," i.e., [there is no obligation] until it becomes produce.This refers to the "phase of tithing."9See the following halachot and Chapter 3 which discusses this subject in detail. Before grain and fruit reach this phase, one is permitted to eat as much as one wants from them,10For this is not considered as the ordinary way of eating. in any manner he desires.11I.e., he may even salt them and roast them, even though these actions bring about the obligation to tithe when fruit has matured (Chapter 3, Halachah 3).
Produce that is fit to be eaten when it is small, e.g., zucchini or cucumbers, but is left [to grow] only in order to increase its bulk, is required to be tithed while it is small, [for] they are fit to be eaten at the outset. As soon as they emerge, they are considered to have reached the "phase of tithing."
When is "the phase of tithing"? When the produce will reach a stage that it produces seed [that could] grow, each species according to its nature.12Our Rabbis interpreted this as meaning reaching a third of its natural growth. All the examples mentioned in the continuation of the halachah refer to this stage of growth as it applies to each individual species.What is implied? For figs, it is when they become soft enough to be fit to be eaten within 24 hours after they have been harvested.13Thus if one partakes of them within 24 hours from their harvest without tithing them, he is not liable, for they are not ready to be eaten yet (Ma'aseh Rokeach). For grapes and biushim, i.e., thin wild grapes, it is when their seeds can be seen from the outside.14That indicates that their shell has softened and the fluid has been generated within the fruit. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:2). For pomegranates, it is when their seed15Our translation is based on authentic manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah and is reinforced by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). The standard printed text reads slightly differently. will be crushed easily between one's fingers and produce liquid. For dates, it is when they swell like yeast.For peaches, it is when red strands appear within them.16This is a sign that they have begun to ripen (ibid.). For nuts, it is when the fruit becomes distinct from its outer shell. For sweet almonds, it is when their external shell becomes distinct. Bitter [almonds] are always exempt.17See Chapter 1, Halachah 9, and notes. For other fruits with shells, e.g., acorns, chestnuts, and pistachios, it is when the lower shell that is next to the fruit forms.For olives, when they produce one ninth of the amount of oil that they will produce when they are entirely ripe;18The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling based on a different version of Sh'vi'it 4:7. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's ruling. this is one third of their growth. For apples and esrogim, it is when they become round,19Although Ma'aserot 1:4 states that we are required to separate tithes from apples when they are small, it does not mention a stage of development. The Kessef Mishneh questions the source for the Rambam's statements. for they are fit to be eaten when they are small. For berries and sumac, it is when they become red. Similarly, for every fruit that becomes red, it is when it becomes red.For carobs, it is when black spots begin to appear. Similarly, for any fruit that becomes black, it is when spots begin to appear. For pears, small pears,20This is the common translation of these terms. In his notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 1:4), however, Rav Kapach suggests that the two terms may refer to apricots and peaches. quince, and thorn apples,21Our translation is based on Rav Kapach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:1). it is when their hairs begin to fall off.22When these fruits are unripened, they are covered by a fuzz of hair. As they ripen, the hairs fall off. Similarly, for any fruit that becomes light-colored, it is when white lines appear.For grain, it is when it reaches a third of its growth. For chilba, it is when its seed is fit to grow if it would be planted. With regard to vegetables, we are required [to tithe] zucchini, squash, watermelon, cucumbers and the like when they are small, as we explained.23I.e., based on Halachah 4, which states that produce that is fit to be eaten while small must be tithed. Other vegetables which are not fit to be eaten until they grow large and are not required [to be tithed] until they are fit to be eaten.When even one grape on a cluster has reached the stage when it must be tithed, because of their connection, the entire [cluster is required to be] tithed.24The Radbaz explains the rationale for this ruling. Since one grape has already ripened sufficiently, the others will ripen shortly thereafter. It is as if the entire cluster reached that stage of development. [Indeed,] not only that cluster, but the entire side of the vine on which that cluster grew [is considered to have reached the stage when the tithes must be separated]. Similarly, when even one seed of a pomegranate reaches the appropriate stage, the entire [side of the tree]25This addition is made on the basis of the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh. is considered as connected to it.
After produce has reached the "phase of tithing," a person should not sell it to someone who is not trusted with regard to tithes.26Lest that person fail to tithe it and the seller thus be liable for "placing a stumbling block in the path of the blind." If [a portion of] the produce ripened,27I.e., reached a stage when it was required to separate the tithes. he should remove that [portion] which ripened. It is then permitted to sell the remainder that has not reached the "phase of tithing."28The Radbaz notes that this clause appears to be in contradiction with the final clause of the previous halachah, for seemingly if part of the crop has become obligated in the tithes, the entire crop has. He explains that if the grapes are growing on different vines, the stringency mentioned in the previous halachah does not apply.Similarly, a person should not sell olive dregs and grape dregs to someone who is not trusted with regard to tithes to extract [oil or wine] from them,29I.e., the purchaser stated that he was purchasing them for this purpose. If, however, such a statement of intent is not made, these may be sold, for it is most likely they will be used as fuel for a fire. for the liquids extracted from these dregs must be tithed. Nor should he sell straw so that grain can be picked from it to someone who is not trusted, for the grain picked from the straw must be tithed.
[The following laws apply when a person] mixed water with wine dregs and filtered the mixture. If he mixed in three measures of water and received four measures, [the mixture is considered wine] and he must separate tithes for this extra measure from another source.30The bracketed addition is made on the basis of the gloss of Rabbi Ovadiah of Bartenura to Ma'aserot 5:6. For there is no reason why that produce itself cannot be used for the tithes. He does not have to separate terumah, for when one separates terumah, he has the intent to separate terumah for the entire amount, as stated above with regard to terumah.31Hilchot Terumah 4:21. The Radbaz explains that this proviso is made with regard to terumah and not with regard to the tithes, because terumah is given by estimation, while the tithes must be measured exactly. If he received less than four measures, he is exempt, even if he received more than he mixed in and even if the mixture has the flavor of wine.32As long as the wine is not one fourth of the new mixture, it is not considered as significant.
When a person consecrated his produce when it was attached to the ground, before they reached the "phase of tithing," and then redeemed them, and after he redeemed them, it reached that stage of development, he is obligated to tithe them.33Because at the time the obligation to tithe them took effect, the crops were ordinary produce. If the produce reached the "phase of tithing" while it was in the domain of the Temple treasurer and he redeemed it afterwards, he is exempt.34Because at the time the obligation to tithe them took effect, the crops were consecrated property and there is no obligation to tithe consecrated property.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
When produce has reached the "phase of tithing,"1See Chapter 2, Halachot 3-5, which also dwell on this subject. it was detached [from the earth], but the work preparing it was not completed, e.g., grain that he harvested and threshed, but [the reaper] did not winnow it or straighten the grain pile, he may partake of it as a snack2According to Scriptural Law, there are no restrictions at all on partaking of this produce. Nevertheless, our Sages only allowed one to partake of it as a snack. They, however, did not allow him to partake of it as part of a significant meal (Rashi, Berachot 31a). [without tithing] until those tasks are completed. Once those tasks are completed, it is forbidden to partake of it as a snack [without tithing].
When does the above apply? When one is completing the work [necessary to prepare] the produce to be sold in the market place. If, however, his intent was to bring it to his home,3The difference between the two instances can be explained as follows: If he intends to sell it, then he will sell it when he meets a purchaser even before taking it to the marketplace. And the produce must be tithed before it is sold. Hence, as soon as the work associated with it is completed, he must tithe it. In contrast, when he intends to bring the produce home, everything is dependent on his own intent. Hence, he is given this leniency [the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 1:5)].The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that since the Torah mentions grain from the grainheap and wine from the vat, the obligation to tithe these types of produces takes effect when they are in the grainheap and the vat. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's ruling and it is cited as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:82). he may partake of it as a snack [even] after the work involving it is completed until a situation occurs which obligates the separation of tithes.4The definition of such acts is the subject of the following halachot.
Six situations5The Ra'avad asks why the Rambam does not mention pickling, for that is also cited by the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 4:1). According to the Rambam, that act is including in salting, because he interprets the mishnah as meaning pickling in brine (see his Commentary to the Mishnah). It is, nevertheless, difficult why the mishnah mentions salting and pickling as separate activities. Note, however, Chapter 5, Halachah 14, which could also be interpreted as referring to pickling in vinegar. obligate the separation of tithes from produce:6Accoridng to Rabbinic Law. With regard to Scriptural Law, see the following chapter. [bringing it into] a courtyard,7A courtyard that is protected (Chapter 4, Halachah 8). Here the intent of mentioning a courtyard is to refer to any dwelling as explained in Chapter 4. a transaction,8See Chapter 5, Halachah 1ff. [subjecting it to] fire,9See Chapter 5, Halachah 14. salting it,10Ibid.:18. separating terumah,11Ibid.:19. and [the commencement of] the Sabbath.12Ibid.:20. These situations require the separation of tithes only when the work necessary to prepare the produce has been completed.
What is implied? One may eat a snack from produce which he intends to bring home [without tithing], even though the work necessary to prepare it has been completed until he enters his home. Once he enters his home,13Or even, as indicated in the previous halachah, it is brought into a courtyard that serves the home. the obligation to separate tithes takes effect and he is forbidden to partake of it14Even partaking from it as a snack is forbidden. until he tithes it.Similarly, if he sold it, cooked it by fire, pickled it in salt, separated terumah from it, or the Sabbath commenced, he may not partake of it until he separates the tithes even though it has not reached the house.If he brought the produce into his home before he completed the work associated with it, he may continue to snack from it.15See Halachah 6. If he began to complete the work associated with its completion, he is obligated to tithe the entire amount.16Not only the portion for which he completed the work.What is implied? A person brought zucchini and squash home before he rubbed them [to remove the hairs on their surface]. Once he begins rubbing one of them, he is obligated to tithe all of them. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.Similarly, when one separates terumah from produce for which all the tasks necessary to prepare it have not been completed, it is permitted to snack from them with the exception of a basket of figs.17Neither here, nor in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 2:4), does the Rambam explain why figs are singled out from other fruit. The Radbaz quotes the gloss of Rabbenu Shimshon as stating that the intent is not only figs, but all fruit that is set aside for drying. Even though one's original intent is that the fruit be dried, since it is home and it is in a basket, it may be served at any time. Therefore, it is necessary to tithe it. If one separates terumah from them before the work associated with preparing them is finished, the obligation to tithe takes effect.
[The following laws apply if] fig-branches to which figs were still attached or date fronds to which dates were still attached18Since the fruit was not removed from the branches, it is considered as if the tasks preparing this fruit are not completed. were brought home. If children or workers brought them [to a person's home], the obligation to tithe does not yet take effect.19Since the produce is not their own, their intent in bringing the branches in is not significant. If the owner of the home brought them, he is obligated to tithe them.20For the fact that he brings them home indicates that from his perspective, all work has been completed.If he brought in stalks of grain to make dough, the obligation to tithe does not take effect.21For he will be performing further work to prepare the grain for produce. If he intended to eat them as kernels, it does take effect.22In such an instance, the kernels are basically ready to be eaten and bringing them home is considered as collecting them in a grainheap. When does the above apply? With regard to grain. With regard to legumes, the obligation to tithe does not take effect [in that instance].23For the kernels of legumes are generally not collected to be eaten at this stage of preparation and hence, there is no obligation to tithe.
It is permitted to be crafty and bring [grain that has been harvested] into one's home while it still has its outer shell24I.e., without having threshed it or winnowed it. so that one's livestock can partake of it25Feeding one's livestock is considered equivalent to eating a snack. Note, however, Halachah 20 which could qualify this statement (Kessef Mishneh). and thus it is exempt from tithes.26Since the work to prepare it for human consumption has not been completed.The reason for this leniency is that according to Scriptural Law, there is no obligation to tithe until all the tasks associated with the produce are completed and it is brought within a home. Hence since only a Rabbinic prohibition is involved, there is room for leniency. One may then winnow a small portion of it after it has been brought into one's home.27I.e., he need not feed it to his livestock with its chaff. Moreover, he can perform this activity several times. Different laws apply with regard to humans. They may snack from such produce, but may not partake of a significant amount of it (Siftei Cohen 331:114). He is thus exempt from [the obligation to separate] terumah and tithes forever, since he has not begun to complete [the tasks necessary to prepare] the entire [harvest].
When a person completes the task necessary to process a colleague's produce without his knowledge or he brings the produce to one of the six situations28I.e., those described in Halachah 3. In particular, the Radbaz asks questions concerning two of those situations: selling the produce and the commencement of the Sabbath. Seemingly, a sale cannot be made without the owner's consent and the Sabbath is not dependent on the other person's activity. The Radbaz explains that with regard to a sale, we are speaking about an instance where afterwards the owner consented to the sale. And with regard to the Sabbath, we are speaking about a situation where the other person completed the work associated with the produce before the Sabbath commenced. Thus when the Sabbath commenced, the produce was fit to be ready to be obligated in the tithes. that establish an obligation to tithe without [the owner's] knowledge, [this produce] incurs the obligation to be tithed.29For the produce has reached the stage when it is necessary to tithe it. This is not dependent on the owner's intent.
What is meant by completing the work associated with produce? For zucchini, squash, and watermelon, it is when one rubs them with his hands and removes the golden hairs upon them. If he does not rub them,30For there are those who do not make these preparatory steps, but rather sell the fruit as is. it is when he makes a pile. For a watermelon,31For it is not common to make a pile of watermelons. it is when he arranges them in a designated place, one watermelon next to another. If one rubs the fruit one by one, when he completed [rubbing] all that he needed, that [specific produce] is considered as if the tasks necessary to prepare it were completed.32And it alone must be tithed (Radbaz).The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that in Halachah 4, the Rambam states that as soon as he rubs the hair off one fruit or vegetable, the entire quantity is required to be tithed, while in this halachah, he states that only those he seeks to use immediately must be tithed. Among the resolutions they offer are:a) in Halachah 4, the person's intent is to prepare the entire quantity of produce. Therefore, as soon as he begins, that entire quantity must be tithed. Here, he only desires to prepare a limited quantity. Hence, it is only the quantity that he actually prepares that must be tithed.b) Halachah 4 speaks about an instance when he prepares them in his home, while this halachah speaks about preparing them in the field to bring home. We may separate terumah from zucchini and squash even though the hairs have not been removed from it.33I.e., this is allowed as an initial preference. The Radbaz explains that although the Rambam mentions only the separation of terumah, he also means the separation of the tithes, because it is unfeasible to think that terumah should be separated but not the tithes.
For vegetables that are [sold while] bound together,34E.g., like garlic or onions that are woven together. it is when they are bound together. If the vegetables are not bound together, it is when the container is full. If he does not fill the container, he may snack from the produce until he gathers all that he needs.
For a basket [of produce], it is when the produce will be covered by leaves, straw, and the like.35From the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:5), it appears that after reapers would gather fruit, they would cover it with leaves or straw to protect it from the sun. If he does not cover it, it is when the container is full. If he does not fill the container, it is when he gathers all that he needs.
[When a person is gathering produce] in a large container, but he desires to fill only a portion of it, once he fills that portion, [the produce] must be tithed. If he intends to fill the entire container, [the produce is] not required to be tithed until he fills the entire container. If he has two containers and desires to fill both of them, [the produce is] not required to be tithed until he fills both of them.
When a person made a large weave of vegetables in the field, the obligation to tithe takes effect36For the work in the field associated with their preparation has been completed. even though he intended to [undo the larger weave and] make a smaller weave for the marketplace.Dried pomegranate seeds, raisins, and carobs, [become obligated to be tithed] when a person sets up a pile on top of his roof. Onions [become obligated] when one removes the leaves and shells that he would generally discard. If he does not remove them, [there is no obligation to tithe the onions], until one stores them in a pile.
Grain [becomes obligated] when one is mimareach it. What is meant by mimareach? When one straightens the surface of the grainheap with a pitchfork at the conclusion of the entire process, as one would do when he concludes all his work.37I.e., it is obvious that the person's intent is not to add other sheathes to the grain heap. Significantly, the Rambam's definition here is slightly different than the definition he gives in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 1:6). If a person is not mimareach, [the obligation takes effect], when he makes a pile.Legumes [become obligated] when one sifts them38For it is common for pebbles to become mixed together with legumes and the legumes are sifted to remove them. and takes them from under the sifter and partakes of them. If he does not sift them, [the obligation takes effect when] he is mimareach.Even though he is mimareach, it is permitted to take from the scattered stalks,39Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:6). those on the side, and the kernels that are in the straw, and partake of them.40This is considered as a snack and hence, tithes are not required.
Wine [becomes obligated] when it is stored in a barrel and the peels and seeds are removed from the top of the barrel. When, however, it is in the vat and one takes out some to put it in a barrel, one may drink from it casually.41I.e., drink the equivalent of a snack. The Kessef Mishneh states that when one takes the wine before it reaches the storage vat, one may drink from it without tithing even though he removes the peels and seeds. Similarly, he may collect [wine] from the upper vat,42I.e., the place where the grapes were crushed to produce wine (ibid.:7). from a conduit, or from any place and drink it [without tithing].
Oil [becomes obligated] when it descends to the vat.43The storage pit (ibid.). Even though it has descended, one may take from the rope basket,44In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam explains that a basket was made of ropes and olives were placed within. Afterwards, they would press the olives in that basket. The translation of the two terms that follow are also from the same source. the stone [used to grind the olives], the boards or stones of the olive press. One may place [untithed] oil into cooked food in a small dish or a large pot even though [the food] is hot, because it will not cook in a secondary vessel.45The term "secondary vessel" refers to a utensil in which hot food was placed after it was removed from a fire. The Rambam is referring to the following difficulty. As stated in Halachah 3, subjecting produce to fire establishes an obligation to tithe. Thus as the Rambam states in Chapter 5, Halachah 16, if a person places oil into a pot that is on the fire or just removed from the fire, the obligation to tithe is established. In the instance described in our halachah, that is not the case, because food will not cook in a secondary vessel. If [the food] was very hot, so much so that one's hand would burn, he should not put [untithed oil] into it, because it will be cooked.46And an obligation to tithe will have been established. The Radbaz explains that this clause is not speaking about a secondary vessel, because a secondary vessel never cooks (Shabbat 40b). Alternatively, the laws of cooking are different with regard to the establishment of an obligation to tithe than with regard to the Sabbath laws or the laws of Kashrut. In this instance, when a secondary vessel is very hot, it can be considered as having cooked.
A cake of dried figs [becomes obligated] when it is smoothed. Dried figs [become obligated] when they become crushed [into the container in which they will be stored].47Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:8). If they were placed in a storage container, [they become obligated] when one smoothes out the surface of the storage container by hand. If one was crushing dried figs into a jug or into a cake at the opening of a storage container and the jug becomes broken or the storage container is opened, he should not partake of [the figs] until they are tithed.
When figs and grapes have been set aside [to dry], it is permitted to snack from them in the place where they were set aside.48Since they have not been dried out, it is considered as if the tasks necessary to prepare them have not been completed. If, however, he took some from the place where they were set aside, he should not snack from them, because the tasks involved [in their preparation] have been completed, even though they have not dried out totally.49I.e., moving them causes it to be considered as if the tasks have been completed.
Carobs [become obligated] when he collects them on top of the roof to dry.50Since he will ultimately do so, until he does so, the tasks associated with their preparation have not been completed. He may take some down [from the roof] for fodder for his livestock. He is exempt [from tithing],51Even though he has brought the produce into his courtyard. because he will put back what is left over. He is thus using it as fodder as a temporary measure.
When a person separated the first tithe while the produce was still in stalks,52Before it was threshed. it is forbidden to partake of it until terumat ma'aser is separated from it.53There is, however, no necessity to separate the great terumah. See Hilchot Terumot 3:13. If he partook of it, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.54The punishment given for the violation of Rabbinical commandments or other transgressions that are not punishable by lashes according to Scriptural Law.What is meant by partaking of food as a snack? If a person was peeling barley kernels and eating them, he may peel them one by one.55Without having to tithe them. If he peeled several and held them in his hand, he is required to tithe them.56For this is considered as if he was partaking of the meal in a significant manner, not merely snacking. Alternatively, because this represents the conclusion of the tasks associated with preparing the grain. If he was crushing the shells of wheat kernels, he may sift the chaff from hand to hand and partake of them.57Even though he has brought the produce into his courtyard. If he sifted them into his bosom, he is required to tithe them.58Before it was threshed. Needless to say, if he sifted them with a utensil, [he is required to tithe them], for this is not a temporary measure.Similarly, one may take wine and put it into a cold cooked dish in a bowl and partake of it. One may not, by contrast, put it into a pot59Which had been cooked on a fire. even if it was cold, because it is considered like a small cistern.60I.e., just as when wine is placed in a cistern, the work involved in its preparation is considered to have been completed, so too, when it is placed in a cooked dish, the work involved in its preparation is considered to be finished. Similarly, one may squeeze olives onto his skin [without tithing],61Applying oil is considered equivalent to eating (Chapter 13, Halachah 16). Nevertheless, such an application is considered as equivalent to merely partaking of a snack. but not into his hand. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
Just as it is permitted to partake of produce as a snack when the work [involved in its preparation] has not been completed,62See Halachah 1. so too, it is permitted to feed such produce to animals, livestock, and fowl as one desires. Similarly, one may declare as much of this produce ownerless as he desires.63I.e., giving them a large amount, not merely a snack.If he completed those tasks, even when the obligation to tithe was not established,64E.g., he intended to bring the produce home and hence, the obligation to tithe is not established until he does so. he may not declare the produce ownerless, nor may he feed it to livestock, animals, and fowl in a significant manner until he tithes it. It is permitted to feed an animal tevel in an insignificant manner, even in one's home.65The Ra'avad questions this ruling based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 1:6) which quotes Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar as stating that once produce is brought into a person's courtyard (i.e., his residence), it cannot be fed to an animal without tithing. The Radbaz explains that according to the Rambam, our Sages differ with Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar on this point and do not require tithing. The rationale is that since the entire obligation to tithe animal fodder is Rabbinic in origin, this obligation was instituted only when the animal was fed a significant amount. One can feed [an animal] rolls of chilba66Our translation is based on the Rambam LeAm. Generally, amir is translated as "straw." In this instance, we have facored this translation, because straw is not found for humans. until one bundles them as packages.67For this represents the completion of the tasks associated with the preparation of this produce. Although chilba is occasionally used as food for humans, it is primarily considered as animal fodder.
When a person discovers fruits68Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:4). There he explains that the term ketzitzot refers to "individual fruits that have been detached from any species of fruit." Often, the term is used to refer to fresh figs. on the road - even if he finds them next to an orchard of that fruit - they are exempt from the tithes.69For we assume that the owners despaired of their return when the fruit fell outside their property. This is considered equivalent to declaring them ownerless. When produce was declared ownerless before the work involved in its preparation was concluded, there is no obligation to tithe. When one found dried figs, if most people already crushed their dried figs [into larger masses], he is obligated to tithe [what he found], for we assume that it came from produce for which the work involved in its preparation was completed. Similarly, if he found broken pieces of cakes of dried figs, it should be considered as if they came from produce for which the work involved in its preparation was completed.
When a person finds sheaves of wheat in a private domain, he is obligated to tithe them.70Taking those sheaves is considered as theft and forbidden (see Hilchot Gezeilah ViAvedah 15:8-10), because the owners will not despair of their recovery. Hence, they are not considered as ownerless and must be tithed. See also Hilchot Terumot 4:11. [If he finds them] in the public domain, they are exempt.71Since the owner will have no way of retrieving them, he relinquishes his ownership. And since they were ownerless, there is no obligation to tithe them. Larger sheaves are required to be tithed wherever they are found.72Because of their size, they are not considered ownerless even in the public domain.If one finds [bundles of] grain that have been straightened,73Straightening the surface of the bundle causes the obligation to tithe to be established with regard to it, as stated in Halachah 13. Hence, even if the owner despairs of the recovery of the grain, since the obligation to tithe was established before the produce became ownerless, it is not rescinded. one may separate them as terumah74Based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 3:3), we must assume the intent is terumat ma'aser, for once grain has been moved from its original grainheap, we assume that terumah was separated. and tithes for other produce.75Although it is forbidden to use produce to separate tithes and terumat ma'aser if these separations have already been made from it, we are not concerned that perhaps that has happened as the Rambam continues to explain. One need not be concerned [that the owners separated tithes for this produce already].76Even though tithes are required to be separated from it, we assume that the owner would not tithe produce until he brought it to his home.[If one finds a] basket [of fruit] that is covered, 77See Halachah 9. As stated there, covering the fruit establishes the obligation to tithe. he is required to tithe it.78Here also, once the obligation to tithe has been established, it is not rescinded if the fruit becomes ownerless. If he finds a basket [of fruit] in a place where most people take it to the marketplace, he is forbidden to snack from it79See Halachah 2. and he should make the appropriate separations as if it were demai.80We are uncertain whether or not the owner separated the tithes from it, but we are certain that he separated terumah, as explained in Chapter 9. [In a place where] most people bring it home, he may snack from it and he must certainly make the appropriate separations.81Since there is no obligation to separate terumah and the tithes until the produce is brought home, we assume that none of the separations were made. If half [bring home] and half [bring to the marketplace], it is considered as demai.82In this instance, however, he must also separate terumah lest it not have been separated beforehand. If he brings it home, he must certainly make the appropriate separations.When does the above apply? With regard to a type of produce that does not have a specific phase at which the tasks associated with its preparation are completed. If, however, the produce does have a phase when the tasks associated with its preparation are completed, even though he must certainly separate tithes, he does not have to separate terumah. For we can assume that terumah was separated when those tasks were completed.
When there are ant holes that existed overnight next to a pile of grain that is required to be tithed, the kernels found there are required to be tithed. For it is obvious that the ants have been taking from produce that was completely prepared throughout the night.
When a person finds olives under an olive tree or carobs under a carob tree,83The Radbaz states that this applies not only to olives and carobs, but to any fruit that is recognizable as coming from the tree under which it is found. he is required to tithe them, for we assume that they fell from this tree.84Based on Bava Metzia 21b, it appears that we are speaking about olives and carobs that resemble the olives and carobs on the trees. Hence, we assume that they fell from the tree and have not yet been tithed. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:4). Since the fruit has fallen under the tree and can be recognized as coming from the tree, the owner does not consider them ownerless and taking them is considered as theft. If he found figs under a fig tree, there is a doubt whether they fell from this tree or from figs that are already tithed, because their appearance changes and they become soiled with the dust.85Thus unlike the olives and carobs mentioned above, it cannot be determined whether they fell from the tree under which they were found. Hence, the owner despairs of their recovery. It is not forbidden to take the fruit and there is no obligation to tithe it. It is, however, necessary to tithe it as one tithes demai (ibid.).
When a person consecrates produce that has been detached86After it reached the stage that the tithes were required to be separated (see Chapter 2, Halachah 8). This is indicated by the expression "detached produce" (Radbaz). and redeems it before the tasks associated with its preparation are completed, one is obligated to tithe it.87For at the time the obligation to tithe took effect, the produce was privately owned and not in the possession of the Temple treasury. If [these tasks] were completed while [the crops ] were in the domain of the Temple treasury and then he redeemed them, they are exempt from tithes.88For there is no obligation to tithe produce owned by the Temple treasury. The Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 1:1) teaches that Deuteronomy 12:17 speaks of tithing "your grain." This can be understood as an exclusion, "your grain," i.e., that owned by a private person, and not that owned by the Temple treasury. When a person consecrated standing grain for meal offerings, it is exempt from the tithes.89The intent is that not only the grain that is used for the meal offerings is not obligated to be tithed, but also the remainder that is not used for that purpose, but is instead, redeemed and used for private purposes. Even so, the person who redeems it is not obligated to tithe it, as explained in the conclusion of ch. 2.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
The obligation to tithe is not established for tevel1Produce from which the tithes (and/or terumah) have not been separated. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Berachot 7:1), the Rambam interprets this as a composite of the words tav lo, meaning "it is not good." according to Scriptural Law until one2From Chapter 3, Halachah 7, and Halachah 5, of this chapter, one might surmise that this applies whether the owner of the produce or another person brought it into the owner's home. brings it3From Chapter 3, Halachah 4, it appears that this refers to produce for which all the tasks necessary to prepare it were completed. into his home,4Although according to Rabbinic Law, it is sufficient to bring the produce into one's courtyard as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 3, according to Scriptural Law, it must be brought into one's home. as [implied by Deuteronomy 26:13]: "I removed the sacred produce from the home." [This applies] provided he brings the produce in through the gate, as [ibid.:12] states: "And you shall eat in your gates." If, however, he brought produce in from the roof or from the yard,5More particularly, the term karfef used by the Rambam, refers to an unprotected yard. he is exempt [from the obligation] to separate terumah and tithes.6He is, however, liable according to Rabbinic Law, in these instances. In his notes to Berachot 35b, the Meiri writes that even according to Scriptural Law, it is forbidden to do this as an initial preference; the leniency is granted only after the fact.
It appears to me7This expression introduces a deduction for which the Rambam has no definite prior source in the Rabbinic literature. The Kessef Mishneh questions why the Rambam uses this expression when the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 3:1) explicitly states that the obligation established by three of the six situations is Rabbinic in origin. He explains that there is no explicit source for the other three. Hence, this expression is appropriate. that lashes are not administered as required by Scriptural Law for eating tevel unless [the obligation to tithe] was established by bringing it into one's home as we explained according to the Oral Tradition.8In the previous halachah. If, however, the obligation was established through one of the six ways that we mentioned,9In Chapter 3, Halachah 3. he is given only stripes for rebellious conduct as mandated by Rabbinic Law.Similarly, a person who partakes of produce which he desires to bring to the market place after the tasks necessary to prepare it have been completed receives only stripes for rebellious conduct, as we explained.10See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. For a person who completes [the tasks necessary to prepare his produce] for sale is obligated to tithe only according to Rabbinic Law.
When a house is less than four cubits by four cubits in area, [bringing produce into it] does not establish an obligation.11Since it is so small, it is not fit to serve as a dwelling. Based on Hilchot Mezuzah 6:2, one might assume that tithes are required if the home comprises this area even though it is not square in shape. Similarly, [bringing produce onto] a roof does not establish an obligation12For roofs are not considered as dwellings. even though [bringing it into] the house below would. If, however, the roof was not four cubits by four cubits in area, e.g., the house ascended on a slant, bringing [the produce] there does not absolve it from the obligation to tithe it.13I.e., since the roof is small, it is not considered as an independent entity, but instead, is considered as part of the home (Kessef Mishneh). Instead, [the roof] is considered as part of the domain of the home.
Leantos,14Shelters made of branches and wood [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:7]. guardhouses,15Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). summer shelters - i.e., four pillars with a roof on top of them without walls,16Structures constructed to provide shade from the summer sun. and sukkot17Booths that do not have permanent roofs. built by workers who dwell in the vineyard and the gardens in the summer,18This is the meaning of the term sukkot Ginosar in the mishnah (loc. cit.). Ginosar (the area around Lake Kinneret) was known for the quality and abundance of its produce. Workers would be hired to pick this produce during the harvest and they would construct semi-permanent structures in which they would dwell over the summer. even though they dwell in them throughout the summer and [the sukkot] contain mills and chickens do not establish an obligation to tithe. Similarly, the outer sukkot built by potters19Potters would construct sukkot with two rooms. The inner room would be their dwelling, while the outer room would serve as a workshop and storefront. If produce was brought into the inner sukkah, the obligation to tithe is established. See the notes to Halachah 9 with regard to this ruling. and the sukkot for the holiday [of Sukkot] during that festival do not establish an obligation.20Note the clarification in the following halachah. For none of these are permanent dwellings.
Leantos and guardhouses establish an obligation to tithe for their owners,21I.e., if the owners of these structures bring produce into them, they are obligated to tithe it before partaking of it. even though they do not create such an obligation for all people.22I.e., if a person brings produce into a house belonging to a colleague, he is not obligated to tithe it. On the surface, the question may be raised: Even if a person brings produce into a colleague's home, he is not obligated to tithe it, as stated in Halachah 1. Why then are a leanto and a guardhouse singled out here?It is possible to explain, however, that if a person makes it a practice of bringing produce into a colleague's home, he becomes obligated to tithe it when he does so. In contrast, even if he makes a practice of bringing produce into his colleague's leanto, an obligation to tithe is not established, because a leanto is not a permanent dwelling. Similarly, [bringing produce into] a school or a house of study23From the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 3:7), it appears that the term "school" refers to a school where young children are taught Scripture, while the term "house of study" refers to a study center where older students are taught the Oral Law. creates an obligation to tithe for a person who abides there and teaches, because they are comparable to his home.24Even if he does not have an apartment there, since he is continually there, it is considered as his established abode (Radbaz, gloss to Halachah 6). They do not create an obligation for others.
When a synagogue or a house of study25In contrast to the house of study mentioned in the previous halachah, this is a house of study for adults where they meet and share ideas (Radbaz). have a dwelling,26For the sexton, as was common in certain situations. [bringing produce there] establishes [an obligation to tithe].27Since it contains a dwelling for the sexton, even the portion of the structure that serves as a synagogue or a house of study is considered as part of a dwelling (Radbaz). See also parallel rulings in Hilchot Mezuzah 6:6 and Hilchot Shabbat 28:4. If not, no [such obligation] is established.[Bringing produce to] stables28Our translation is based on the gloss of Rabbi Yosef Korcus who cites II Chronicles 9:25. and storehouses in the fields that are built to store produce does not establish an obligation to tithe.29For until the produce has been brought to a dwelling or the marketplace, it is still considered as being in an intermediate phase of preparation. If [these structures] were also intended as dwellings, an obligation is established.30In this instance as well, if the structure contains an apartment, e.g., for a guard or the like, bringing produce into any part of the structure establishes an obligation to tithe.
Just as [bringing produce into] a home establishes an obligation to tithe, so too, [bringing produce into] a courtyard establishes such an obligation.31A distinction must, however, be made. The obligation to tithe produce brought into a home is Scriptural in origin and the obligation to tithe produce brought into a courtyard is of Rabbinic origin. When produce is brought into a courtyard through the gate,32In Halachah 1, the Rambam makes such statements with regard to bringing produce into a home. He deduces that similar concepts apply with regard to bringing it into a courtyard. an obligation is established even though it was not brought into the home.
[Into] which type of courtyard must [produce be brought] for an obligation [to tithe] to be established? Any one in which utensils are protected within, one in which a person will not be embarrassed to eat there, or one in which were a person to enter, he would be asked: "What are you looking for?"33All of these signs are indications that the courtyard is regarded as private property and not the public domain. The above also applies to a courtyard which has two inhabitants or is owned by two partners when one opens it and enters and then the other comes and enters or leaves and locks it. Since they open it and lock it, [bringing produce into] it establishes an obligation to tithe.34I.e., although two people share it, and one may carelessly leave it open, since the other locks it, it is regarded as private property. Hence bringing produce into it establishes the obligation to tithe.
A gatehouse to a courtyard, an excedra,35A structure common in Greek and Roman times with two or three walls and a roof. (Occasionally, there would be an opening in the roof.) and a porch are governed by the same laws as a courtyard.36In and of themselves, these structures are not considered dwellings and bringing produce into them would not create an obligation. Nevertheless, since they lead to and/or are auxiliaries to an area that is considered part of a permanent dwelling, they are considered as part of that dwelling.The Radbaz notes that in Halachah 4 and in the following halachah, the Rambam states that bringing produce into a potter's outer sukkah does not create an obligation, while bringing it into the inner sukkah does. Why don't we, he asks, apply the same principle? Let us say that the outer sukkah is an entrance and/or auxiliary to the inner one. He explains that for the inner sukkah to create an obligation is itself a new development and the obligation is not strong enough to be extended to the outer sukkah. If [bringing produce into] a courtyard would establish an obligation to tithe, [bringing produce into these] establishes an obligation. If not, an obligation is not established in these instances as well.37For as above, in and of themselves, these structures are not considered significant dwellings.
When there are two courtyards, one inside the other, [bringing produce into] either of them establishes an obligation to tithe.38For they are both considered as permanent structures, leading to and auxiliary to the home. When a potter has [two] sukkot one leading to the other, [bringing produce into] the inner sukkah establishes an obligation to tithe. [Bringing it into] the outer one does not.39See the notes to Halachah 4 and those to the previous halachah. The commentaries question why the Rambam repeats the same law in such close proximity. [Bringing produce into] a store establishes an obligation like a home does.40Since a person spends much time in his store, it is considered as equivalent to a home for him.
When a person transports his produce from one place to another, an obligation to tithe is not established even though he brings it into homes and courtyards while on his journey.41The Radbaz emphasizes that if the person spends a Sabbath on his journey, the commencement of the Sabbath establishes an obligation to tithe as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 3. He may snack from it until he reaches his ultimate destination. [These laws] also [apply] when he returns.42I.e., if he does not transport the produce to his intended destination, but instead, changes his mind in the middle, and returns with it (Kessef Mishneh).
Traveling salesmen43Who sell perfumes to women [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 2:3)]. who journey through villages and pass from one courtyard to another may snack from their produce44This is speaking about their own produce or produce which was given to them to partake of (ibid.). If they were intending to sell the produce, there is an immediate obligation to tithe it. It is like bringing it to the marketplace (see Chapter 3, Halachah 2). until they reach the home where they will spend the night.45Rav Yosef Korcus explains that in this instance - in contrast to the previous halachah - the obligation falls before they reach their ultimate destination. The rationale for the distinction is that since these traveling salesmen do not have an ultimate goal, wherever they spend the night is significant for them.
When a person brings figs from a field to partake of them in a courtyard which is exempt from the obligation to tithe,46I.e., one which is not guarded (Halachah 8). but then he forgot and brought them into his home, he is permitted to take them out from the home and snack from them.47For bringing produce into his home does not establish an obligation to tithe unless the person brings them there intentionally (see Chapter 3, Halachah 5). The person must, however, remove them from the home. He may not partake of them in the home without tithing them. Similarly, if he forget [and after taking them into his home], took them up to the roof,48For bringing produce to a roof does not establish an obligation to tithe (Halachah 3). he may snack from them on the roof.If he brought them to partake of them49This is the version in the standard printed texts of the Mishneh Torah and is also found in authoritative manuscripts and early printings. The version of the Mishneh Torah which the Radbaz and Rav Yosef Korcus followed states: "brought them to dry them on the roof." on his roof and brought them into a friend's courtyard, an obligation to tithe is established and he should not partake of them until he tithes them.50The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, explaining that bringing produce into a friend's courtyard does not establish an obligation to tithe unless one does so intentionally, but not when one does so out of forgetfulness. He also cites a version of the Tosefta (Ma'aserot 2:10) which supports his understanding.Rav Yosef Korcus offers two justifications for the Rambam's ruling. First of all, he states that the phrase "he should not partake of them" could be interpreted as referring to the owner of the courtyard and not to the owner of the produce. Alternatively, he explains that even if it refers to the owner of the produce, since the courtyard he brings it into is part of a permanent dwelling, he should not partake of it until he tithes it. Leniency was given to traveling salesmen (Halachah 13), because they brought the produce into the courtyard with the intent of removing it immediately. In this instance, however, the owner does not necessarily intend to remove it immediately. Why then should he not be obligated to tithe?In his gloss to Chapter 5, Halachah 8, the Ra'avad notes a seeming contradiction to the Rambam's ruling here. In his gloss to that halachah, the Radbaz explains that the stringency here is to correct a misimpression that might result in the eyes of an observer. The Kessef Mishneh, however, finds the Rambam's rulings difficult to reconcile and suggests that there is a printing error here.Nevertheless, Rav Yosef Korcus continues, the Rambam's statements appear to be self-contradictory, because in the previous clause it appears that if one brings produce into a home after forgetting, he is not obligated to tithe it, but this clause states that if he brings it into his colleague's courtyard, he is. Seemingly, bringing it into one's own home would be a stronger factor than bringing it into a colleague's courtyard. Among the resolutions he offers is that when a person forgets and brings the produce into his own home, he is certainly acting inadvertently, without intent. If, however, he brings it into his colleague's courtyard, that could be considered as a conscious change of mind.
When a courtyard has been plowed, it is considered like a garden51I.e., it is no longer considered as an extension of the home, but as a separate entity like a field. and one may snack in it. [This applies] provided he plowed the majority [of the courtyard].52For once he has plowed the majority, he will certainly plow the remainder. If he sowed the majority of it,53But not the entirety of the courtyard. he may not snack in it.54The rationale is that since he did not sow the entire courtyard, we assume that his sowing is only temporary and soon, he will revert to considering the courtyard as that and not as a field. The same law applies if he planted trees in it.55The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam on this point, maintaining that planting trees does not remove land from the category of a courtyard. He explains that the Rambam used an incorrect version of the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 3:10). For the Rambam's version of that passage conflicts with the rulings of Eruvin 23a regarding eruvin. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the obligations of eruvin and tithes are governed by different principles and deductions cannot necessarily be made from one situation to the other. If he planted trees in the courtyard to make it attractive,56This indicates that he is not intending to uproot them and return the area to the function of an ordinary courtyard. Hence, it is considered as an orchard and he may snack from the produce before tithing. since the field has been plowed, he may snack from those trees [without tithing].
When a fig tree is growing in a courtyard, one may eat57In this and in the following halachot, the intent is to snack, not to eat a significant meal. figs from it one by one while exempt [from tithing]. If he gathers them together, he is obligated to tithe.58For he is then considered to have completed the work associated with harvesting figs and they are in a courtyard. Compare to Chapter 5, Halachah 3.When does the above apply? When he is standing on the ground. If, however, he climbs to the top59I.e., any place above three handbreadts off the ground (Radbaz). of the fig tree, he may fill his bosom with them and eat them there. For the open space of a courtyard does not create an obligation to tithe.
[If a fruit tree] was standing in a courtyard and leaning into a garden, one may partake of the tree while standing in the garden in his ordinary manner,60I.e., he can collect them instead of eating from them one by one. as if the tree was planted in the garden.61In other instances (see Ma'aserot 3:10), the foliage of the tree is considered as being in the same domain as its trunk. In this instance, however, the ruling depends on the domain in which the produce is collected. If [the tree] was planted in a garden and leaning into a courtyard, it is considered as if it was planted in the courtyard and one may only partake of them one at a time.
When a vine is planted in a courtyard, one should not pick an entire cluster and partake of it. Instead, one should pick the grapes one by one.62Following the same logic stated in Halachah 15. Similarly, with regard to pomegranates, one should not take the entire pomegranate, but instead should divide the pomegranate while it is on the tree and partake of the seeds from it. Similarly, with regard to a watermelon, one should bend it over to the ground and partake of it there.If one was eating a cluster [of grapes] in a garden and brought it into a courtyard,63This applies to an instance where one intentionally brought the produce into the courtyard. If one did so unintentionally, there is no obligation to tithe as stated in Halachah 13. one should not continue eating until he tithes even if he departs from the courtyard.64I.e., once the produce has entered the courtyard, the obligation to tithe is irrevocably established.
When coriander65Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:10). is planted in a courtyard,66One in which the majority was sown as stated in Halachah 14. one may pick it leaf by leaf and partake of it. If one gathers them together, he is obligated to tithe. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
When a person purchases detached produce to partake of it, he is obligated to tithe it according to Rabbinic decree as we explained.1See Chapter 2, Halachot 1-2 which explain that according to Scriptural Law, one is obligated to tithe produce only when he harvests it for his own personal use. Similarly, one who purchases produce is not liable to tithe it according to Scriptural Law.As indicated by the following halachah, this applies when the purchaser bought the produce to partake of it. If he purchased it as merchandise, the obligation to tithe does not take effect until one purchases it with the intent of partaking of it.When is the obligation [to tithe] established? When [the purchaser] pays [for the produce], even if he has not drawn it [into his domain].2With regard to the laws of acquisition, according to Scriptural Law, the payment of money brings about a kinyan, the transfer of an object from one person's domain to another. Nevertheless, our Sages decreed that such a transfer should be brought about by drawing the object to be acquired out of the seller's domain (meshichah; see Hilchot Mechirah 3:5). Nevertheless, with regard to the obligation to tithe, they did not alter the Scriptural Law. If [a potential purchaser] was selecting and setting aside, selecting and setting aside, even if he did so the entire day and even if he made up his mind to purchase the produce,3For making up his mind does not establish a binding obligation. he is not obligated to tithe it. If he is a God-fearing person, from the time he made up his mind, he should tithe it.4For a Torah sage should go beyond the letter of the law and accept financial responsibilities that are not mandated by Torah Law. See Hilchot De'ot, the conclusion of ch. 5. Afterwards, if he desires to return it to the seller, he may return it.5The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh emphasize that he should not return the produce unless the seller agrees. Nevertheless, even if the seller agrees to accept the produce, the purchaser must make restitution from his own produce or funds for the produce that he tithed.
When a person purchases produce that is attached to the ground or purchases detached produce6This applies even if the work necessary to prepare it has been completed. to send to a colleague, [an obligation to tithe] is not established and he may snack from them.7Although our Sages required one who purchases produce to tithe it, they instituted this obligation only when one intended to partake of it himself, just as the Scriptural obligation to tithe applies only for a person who harvests produce to partake of it himself (Siftei Cohen 331:119).
When a person tells a colleague: "Here is an isar8A coin used in the Talmudic era of moderate value. and give me five figs for it," he may eat them one by one and he is exempt [from the obligation to tithe]. If [the seller] gathers them together, he is obligated to tithe them.[If he says:] "Here is an isar for 20 figs that I will select,"9His wording implies that he acquires them after he selects them and picks them from the tree, for the terms of purchase state that he would "select it," i.e., detach it. he may select them one by one and eat them.10Without tithing. "...For a cluster of grapes that I will select," he may pick them individually from the tree and partake of them. "...For a pomegranate that I will select," he may remove the seeds while on the tree and partake of them. "...For a watermelon that I will select," he may bend it over to the ground and partake of it.If he cut off the figs and gathered them together or cut off the cluster of grapes or the watermelon, he is obligated to tithe, because he purchased the produce in its detached state.11I.e., though it was attached when he negotiated the deal, the purchase takes effect after he detaches it. Hence, he is obligated to tithe the produce, because a sale is one of the factors that establish such an obligation [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 2:6)]. If, however, he told him: "Here is an isar for these 20 figs," "...for these two12The Radbaz questions why the Rambam mentions two clusters of figs. The same laws would apply if only one cluster was involved. He explains that since it is not common for people to purchase a large amount of produce while it is still attached to the ground, it is important to emphasize that this law applies even when he purchases a large amount. clusters of grapes," "...for these two pomegranates," or "...for these two watermelons," he may harvest the produce in an ordinary manner and snack on it," for the obligation to tithe was not established, for he purchased the produce while it was attached.13And a sale of attached produce does not convey an obligation to tithe.
When a person exchanges [produce]14As stated in Hilchot Mechirah 5:1, an exchange is considered as equivalent to a sale. with a colleague and each have the intent of eating, an obligation has been established to tithe both lots of produce, for they have been purchased while detached.15Hence it is forbidden even to snack from them. [If they are exchanged while attached, with] each one having to reap the other's crops, an obligation has not been established for either of them, for a sale does not establish an obligation [to tithe] unless the work associated with its preparation is completed as we explained.16Chapter 3, Halachah 3.If one purchased produce to eat17I.e., detached produce. in an exchange and the other purchased produce to reap in the same exchange, the one who purchased produce to eat is obligated to tithe, while the obligation to tithe has not been established for the one who purchased produce to reap.
When a person tells a colleague: "Go out and gather 20 figs of mine for yourself18I.e., the produce is on the trees and it does not become the other person's until he picks it. and I will fill my gut with your produce," both are exempt.19The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the person who partakes of a particular number of figs is obligated to tithe them. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's ruling. This is not considered as an exchange that is comparable to a sale.20Instead, it is considered as if each person gave the other a present. If he gathers [the produce] together and partakes of it, he is liable.21For partaking of untithed produce.
[Giving produce as] a present does not establish an obligation to tithe as a sale does.22There are certain dimensions of Jewish business law in which a present is considered as a sale and others in which it is not (see Hilchot Gezeilah 9:13; Hilchot Mechirah 29:14). The Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 2:1) states that even those authorities who maintain that giving a present should be considered as a sale (see Hilchot Shemitah VeYoval 11:19) agree that this stringency should not be enforced in the present age, because in the present age, the obligation to tithe is of Rabbinic origin. The Rambam mentions this leniency without differentiating between the era when the obligation to tithe was Scriptural and the present age, because he maintains that the entire obligation to tithe produce obtained through purchase is of Rabbinic origin. When a common person23Who is not necessarily relied upon with regard to tithes. is passing through the marketplace and saying: "Take figs,"24As presents [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 2:1)]. one may partake of them25As a snack. and one is exempt [from the obligation to tithe], for a present does not establish such an obligation.26For we assume that the produce has not been taken home and thus has not incurred the obligation to be tithed. Hence, one is permitted to snack from it without tithing (ibid.).[Different rules apply when the recipients] brings the produce home. If the majority of the people [who harvest] bring their produce home [before taking it to the marketplace], one must certainly separate the tithes.27Since the common person passed through the marketplace and did not stand there to sell his produce, we assume that he is one of those who brings his produce home. Furthermore, we proceed on the assumption that he has not taken the produce home yet and thus it never incurred the obligation to be tithed. Therefore when the recipients take it home, it incurs that obligation for the first time. Indeed, they must separate not only the tithes, but also terumah. If most of the people take the produce directly to the market place, he should only make the separations28These separations must be made, for in such a situation, the produce incurs the obligation to be tithed after the work associated with its preparation was completed (see Chapter 3, Halachah 1). as one does for demai,29As will be explained in Chapter 9, in the Second Temple period, the common people became somewhat lax with regard to the mitzvah of separating tithes. When they became aware of this situation, the Sages ordained that one should not partake of produce from a common person without tithing it, for perhaps he did not do so. One should not, however, recite a blessing, for it is possible that it was tithed. Similarly in this instance, it is possible that the common person tithed his produce, but it is possible that he did not. for perhaps he tithed it and then brought it to the marketplace.If [the common person] said: "Take them and bring them to your homes,"30I.e., he is assuring the recipients that they may take the produce home without qualms because it has already been tithed [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. when one takes them home, he must tithe them as one tithes demai.31For we do not accept the common person's word (ibid.). If [the common person] gave him a large amount of produce - even if he told him: "Take it and eat it,"32Which could be interpreted as assurance that the produce had not been taken home by the common person and thus it has not yet been tithed. - it is as if he told him, "Take it and bring it home."33Because a large amount of produce will certainly not be eaten in the marketplace. We do not rely on the common person's assurance that he tithed it or that he will tithe it in the future. He may not partake of it until he makes the separations as one does for demai.34For we are unsure of whether or not it was tithed or not. The same concepts apply with regard to the instances mentioned in the later clauses. Similarly, if he gave him produce that is not usually eaten uncooked or the recipient was a person of stature who would not ordinarily eat in the marketplace, he should make the separations as one does for demai.
If there were two [prospective recipients] and [the common person] said to one: "Take it and partake of it [here in the marketplace]," and he told the other: "Take it and bring it home," the first may partake of it and be exempt [from the obligation to tithe],35As in the first clause of the previous halachah. while the second is obligated if he eats.36As in the later clause. The fact that his statements are self-contradictory is not a matter of concern, for the obligation to tithe is Rabbinic in origin and our Sages established their rules as general guidelines to be applied even if some ramifications are difficult to understand (Aruch HaShulchan).
Similarly,37I.e., here to, the above principles produce seemingly contradictory rulings. if there were people sitting at the gate [of a courtyard] or in a store and [the common person] told them: "Take [this produce] and partake of it," they may partake of it38As a snack. They may not eat a significant meal. and are exempt [from the obligation to tithe].39Even if it is brought within the gate or the store. The owner of the gate or the owner of the store may not partake of it until he makes the separations as one does for demai. For it is as if [the common person] told these people: "Take it and bring it home," for [these places] are considered like their homes.40For they are located there on a consistent basis [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 2:2)]. As we already explained,41Chapter 4, Halachah 11. As the Ra'avad notes, the Rambam's decision here appears somewhat contradictory to his ruling there. See the notes to that halachah. having produce pass through a house that is not one's own does not establish [an obligation to tithe].42And thus, the other people in the store or gate are not obligated to tithe.
[The following rules apply when one] hires workers to perform work with him concerning produce, whether produce that has been detached or that which is attached. Since [the workers] have the right to partake of the produce with which they are working according to Scriptural Law,43See Hilchot Sechirut, ch. 12, based on Deuteronomy 23:25-26, which describes a worker's right to partake of the produce with which he is working. they may partake of it and are exempt from tithing.44Because the worker does not acquire the produce that he eats. Instead, he is eating because of the Torah's license. Hence, he is not required to separate tithes (Siftei Cohen 331:123).[Different rules apply if the employer] agreed to a condition that allowed them to partake of produce to which the Torah did not entitle them, e.g., the worker stipulated that his son could partake of the produce with him, his son could partake of the produce as payment of his wages, or that he would be able to [continue] partaking of the produce which was harvested after the work [involved in its preparation] was completed, he is forbidden to partake of the produce until he tithes it. [The rationale is that] since he is partaking of the produce because of the condition, he is like a purchaser.45Who must tithe his produce as stated above.
If [an employer] hired [a worker] to hoe around olive trees46To remove weeds so that the tree will grow better. In such an instance, he is not entitled to partake of the olives according to Scriptural Law, because his work does not involve the produce itself. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:3). and the worker stipulated that he could partake of the olives, he may eat them one by one from the tree and he is exempt [from the obligation to tithe].47As In Chapter 4, Halachah 15, et al. For in this manner, the work associated with the olives is not completed. If he gathers them together, he is obligated.48Because collecting even a small number of them would be considered as the completion of a task. He is obligated to tithe, because since he is eating due to the stipulation, it is considered as a purchase.
If one hired [a worker] to hoe around onions49I.e., to remove small onions and/or weeds from an onion patch so that the large onions would have the opportunity to grow. and he stipulated that he could partake of the green onions,50I.e., the leaves of the onions. According to Scriptural Law, the worker is not allowed to partake of the onions, because his efforts to do not complete the preparation of this produce (Hilchot Sechirut 12:4). Nevertheless, this owner agreed to allow the worker to partake of the onion leaves. he can cut off leaf by leaf and partake of them [without tithing], if he gathered them together, he is obligated.51As explained in the previous halachah.If a worker52Who was performing work with the olives that would entitle him to partake of them according to Scriptural Law, e.g., he was harvesting them. stipulated that he could eat a litra53A Talmudic measure equivalent to half a log, 171 cc according to Shiurei Torah, 300 cc according to Chazon Ish. of olives, he may eat them one by one [without having to tithe them]. If he gathered them together, he is obligated to tithe. [The rationale is that] since he is eating a fixed measure, he is considered as a purchaser and [in such an instance,] if the produce is gathered together, his obligation to tithe is established. If he did not make a stipulation and instead, was eating as authorized by Torah Law, he may gather together and eat as much as he desires,54As stated in Halachah 9. provided he does not dip them in salt. If he dips them in salt,55It must be emphasized that we are speaking about an instance where the employer gives the worker special license to dip the olives in salt. Otherwise, he is forbidden to do so, as apparent from Hilchot Sechirut 12:10 (Rambam LeAm). he is permitted [to eat them] one by one [without tithing].56See Halachah 18. [To eat them] two by two is forbidden, for the obligation to tithe is established by dipping them in salt.57As stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 3.
When a worker was performing work with lower quality figs,58Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 2:8). he should not partake59Without separating tithes. of higher quality figs.60Because that is not the species of produce with which he is working. If he was performing work with higher quality figs, he should not partake of lower quality figs unless he tithes them. He is permitted, however, to refrain from eating until he reaches the higher quality figs.
When a person takes workers out to his field to perform work for him there,61In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:2), the Rambam states that we are not speaking about workers employed to harvest the produce of the field, for they would have a right to partake of this produce according to Scriptural Law. Instead, we are speaking of workers who are plowing or performing other similar tasks. if he is not required to provide them with food, they may partake of the produce of the field62They may partake of the produce freely, not merely one at a time. [when granted permission by the owner],63This addition is made on the basis of the gloss of the Radbaz. and they are exempt from the tithes,64For a present is not considered like a sale and does not obligate the separation of tithes, as stated in Halachah 5. provided the tasks associated with [the preparation of the produce] are not completed.65As stated at the beginning of Chapter 3. If the tasks were completed, it would be forbidden to partake of a significant meal from this produce. If, however, he is required to provide them with food, they should not eat [of the produce of the field] even though they have not completed their tasks.66See Chapter 6, Halachah 9. The Radbaz mentions that the produce must have matured to the extent that it could be obligated to tithed. Otherwise, there would be no prohibition in paying one's debt with it. [The rationale is that] we do not pay a debt from tevel.67And since the owner is required to provide them with food, allowing them to partake of this produce would be equivalent to paying a debt. [Even in such a situation, the workers] should partake of the figs one by one. They may not, however, [partake of those] in a basket or in a container or those set aside.68For the work associated with this produce is completed and it is forbidden to partake of it unless it is tithed.
When one cooks produce, boils it,69I.e., cook without spices. or pickles it,70In brine, the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 4:1). one establishes an obligation to tithe.71This obligation is, however, merely Rabbinic in origin. If, however, one smokes produce until it is prepared [to be eaten], there is a doubt [whether there is an obligation to tithe].72Our Sages [the Jerusalem Talmud (Nedarim 6:1)] raise this question and leave it unresolved. See the Radbaz who mentions instances where smoking is considered as cooking and others when it is not.
When a person buries his produce in the ground, in straw, or in fertilizer before preparing them to be eaten,73In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam explains that when produce was picked before it was ripened, it would be buried in this manner to hasten its ripening and softening process. the obligation to tithe them is not established.74Although this activity helps prepare them to be eaten, it is not considered as cooking or pickling (Radbaz; see also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, loc. cit.).
When a person places wine into a cooked dish that is hot75Apparently, this ruling applies even if the cooked food has been removed from the fire and placed in another utensil (a kli sheni). See Radbaz and Chapter 3, Halachah 15. or he places oil in a pot or a baking dish when they are boiling, he establishes an obligation to tithe. If he mixes wine with hot water, he establishes an obligation to tithe. Needless to say, that if he cooks wine, even in the wine press, it is forbidden to drink from it unless he tithes it.
When garlic, cress, or mustard seed were crushed in the field and mixed with oil,76The Radbaz states that this applies whether the spices were untithed and the oil had been tithed previously or the oil was untithed and the spices had been tithed previously. an obligation to tithe was established.77If they were not brought home. Crushing these pungent herbs and mixing them with oil is equivalent to cooking them. Similarly, if one squeezes a cluster [of grapes] into a cup, an obligation to tithe was established.78Creating a liquid (wine) from the grapes is equivalent to cooking. [If he squeezes it] into a pot,79Containing other food. an obligation was not established.80Because the wine was absorbed immediately by the food in the pot and never became a distinct entity. We are speaking about food that is cold. Otherwise, exposing the wine to heat would establish the obligation as stated in the previous halachah (Kessef Mishneh).
When a person salts produce in the field, an obligation to tithe is established.81As stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 3. If, however, he dips olives into salt one by one and eats them, he is exempt. A person who opens olives so their fluid82A white fluid that resembles milk in its appearance [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 4:1)]. will flow out, is exempt. A person who removes olives from the storage vat,83Where the olives are kept until they become soft and fit to be squeezed for their oil (ibid. 4:3). may dip them in salt one by one and eat them. If, however, he salted [several] and served them, he is obligated [to tithe]. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
[Even though] a person separates terumah from his produce in a manner that requires him to make a second separation,84See Hilchot Terumah 5:14,15 which give examples of instances where a person made an improper separation of terumah and hence, was required to separate terumah a second time. the obligation to tithe is established.85Chapter 3, Halachah 3, states that separating terumah creates an obligation to tithe the remaining produce. In this halachah, the Rambam emphasizes that even if the separation of terumah was defective and terumah had to be separated a second time, the obligation to tithe has still taken effect (Radbaz). He should not [even] snack from it until he separates terumah a second time and tithes.
When the work associated with the preparation of produce has been completed86As stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 3, the onset of the Sabbath establishes an obligation to tithe. Nevertheless, this applies only when the tasks associated with the preparation of the produce was completed beforehand (Beitzah 35a). and nightfall arrives on Friday, the obligation to tithe takes effect.87The rationale is that since the work associated with them has been completed, it is possible to partake of them on the Sabbath. Now eating any food on the Sabbath is significant for it is a dimension of the mitzvah of oneg Shabbat, taking pleasure in the Sabbath. Hence, the obligation to tithe is established (Siftei Cohen 331:127). One may not partake of them88Even a snack. even after the Sabbath until they are tithed.
When children hid figs for the Sabbath and forgot to tithe them, one should not partake of them Saturday night until they are tithed.89For the onset of the Sabbath establishes an obligation to tithe as above.The Rambam is quoting the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 4:2). The Jerusalem Talmud raises the question: Why is it necessary to state that the children were intending to partake of them on the Sabbath? Even if that was not their intent, the commencement of the Sabbath would have established the obligation to tithe. The Jerusalem Talmud answers that the new insight is that since it was children who hid the produce, it would be permitted to be eaten as a snack on Friday. If, however, adults set aside the produce for use on the Sabbath, it is not permitted to snack from it on Friday. See also Siftei Cohen 331:129.
If there was a fig tree that was designated for one to partake of its produce on the Sabbath90Its figs were of a high quality and hence, set aside to be used on the Sabbath when one must use produce of the highest quality. and one gathered a basket [of these figs], one may not partake of them91Even during the week (Radbaz). until he tithes them. [This stringency was established,] because these figs are designated for the Sabbath and the Sabbath establishes an obligation to tithe.
If a person was eating92I.e., snacking. Eating a significant amount establishes an obligation to tithe. a cluster of grapes and nightfall arrived on Friday, he should not finish eating them on the Sabbath unless he tithes them.93The tithing should be done before the Sabbath, because it is forbidden to tithe on the Sabbath itself (Hilchot Shabbat 23:9). If he sets them aside until after the Sabbath, he may finish them.94Since he began partaking of them before the commencement of the Sabbath and places them aside so that he would not partake of them on the Sabbath, their status does not change. He need not tithe them if he partakes of them after the Sabbath (Siftei Cohen 331:130).

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
One may rub the surface of figs and grapes [of tevel];1Produce from which terumah and tithes were not separated. It was common to rub the surface of grapes and figs to smooth them (Kessef Mishneh). The Radbaz states that oil was applied to their surface. this does not cause a [significant] loss.2Although this activity causes the produce to spoil slightly faster, this is not significant over the long run. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:8). Whatever is forbidden for non-priests to partake of with regard to terumah, e.g., the seeds or the like,3The Rambam is speaking about aspects of produce, e.g., leaves, peels, seeds, some of which are considered waste products (and hence, permitted to be eaten by non-priests) and some of which are considered as food (and forbidden to them). See Hilchot Terumah 11:10-13 where the Rambam gives many different examples of these categories. Any substance that is considered as food with regard to terumah is also considered as food with regard to the other prohibitions mentioned by the Rambam. Conversely, any substance that is not considered as food with regard to terumah is also not considered as food in the other contexts. may not be eaten from tevel, from the tithes from which terumat ma'aser has not been separated, or from the second tithe and consecrated property that were not redeemed. Whatever non-priests may partake of with regard to terumah is also permitted to be eaten from tevel, from the tithes from which terumat ma'aser has not been separated, and from the second tithe and consecrated property that were not redeemed.
We4Even priests who are permitted to use impure terumah (Radbaz). may not kindle impure tevel,5Impure terumah, e.g., oil, may be used as fuel for kindling. The priest might think: "Since I want to use all of this oil as fuel, why should I separate the terumah? Let me kindle it all as tevel." This is not permitted as the Rambam proceeds to explain.Our translation follows the interpretation of the Radbaz. Others interpret the term mechapin as "cover." even during the week. Needless to say, this applies on Sabbath.6I.e., kindling the Sabbath lights with oil that is tevel. This is certainly forbidden, because terumah and the tithes may not be separated on the Sabbath. [This is implied by Numbers 18:8]: "the watch of My terumah."7In the verse, the noun terumah uses a plural form alluding to two types of terumah: pure terumah and impure terumah. See also Hilchot Terumah 2:14. Just as pure terumah may not be used until after it has been separated, so too, we may not benefit from impure terumah until after it was separated.
We may not cover tevel with earth,8To cover seeds that were strewn over the field with earth (Radbaz). It was forbidden to do this until after terumah and the tithes were separated because this resembles sowing tevel. nor may we sow it. It is forbidden to sow even produce for which the work associated with their preparation has not been completed9The obligation to separate terumah and the tithes does not take effect until the work associated with the preparation of the produce has been completed (see Chapter 3, Halachot 8-13). Since the produce has not reached this stage, one might think that there is no prohibition against sowing it. until it has been tithed.10According to Scriptural Law, there is no prohibition against sowing tevel. The obligation to tithe applies only when one eats. Nevertheless, our Sages (Pe'ah 1:16) imposed this stringency.When does the above apply? With regard to grains, legumes, and the like.11For gathering them together to sow them completes the work associated with their preparation [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:8)]. If, however, one uproots saplings that contain fruit and replants them in another place in his field,12The Radbaz states that if he gives the trees to a colleague for the colleague to plant in his field, the fruit must be tithed. it is permitted. It is not considered as sowing tevel, for he did not gather the fruit.13Thus the fruit was never considered as an independent entity from the tree so that the obligation to tithe it could be considered.Similarly, when one uproots turnips and radishes and replants them elsewhere, if he intends to add to their bulk, it is permitted.14For they were not gathered with the intent of reaping produce and thus the obligation to tithe did not fall upon them. If one plants them so that they will produce stalks so that he can take their seed, it is forbidden [to plant them without tithing],15For the obligation to tithe was incurred when the produce was harvested originally. because it is like sowing wheat or barley that is tevel.
[The following laws apply when a person] sows a litra of produce16The Ra'avad states that this applies only to crops like onions or the like where a bulb is planted and it increases as it grows. If, however, seeds which do not grow until they decompose are planted, this law does not apply. The Radbaz states that the Rambam would not necessarily accept this limitation. that was separated as tithes, but terumat ma'aser had not been separated from it. If it increased and it is now 10 litra, [the entire new crop] is required to be tithed.17I.e., not only the new crop but also the old crop which was tithed and then sown, as explained in the subsequent notes. A tenth18The percentage to be separated as terumat ma'aser. should be separated for the [original] litra from other produce19Which was reaped in the same year as that produce was reaped, for it is forbidden to separate the terumah [or terumat ma'aser] for produce from one year from produce from a different year (Hilchot Terumot 5:11). according to the appropriate reckoning.20For although it is now considered as part of the new crop, since it still physically exists, there is an obligation to separate terumat ma'aser for it.If one separated [terumah and tithes] from a litra of onions and sowed them, one should not separate the tithes according to the reckoning of the increase, but according to the entire sum of the crop.21Since one sowed the onions themselves and tithes had already been separated from them, there is reason to think that there would be no need to tithe them again. Indeed, it would be undesirable to do so, for it is improper to tithe produce that has already been tithed. Nevertheless, in this instance, there is an obligation to tithe. The rationale is that the new growth of the onions outweighs their initial mass and that initial mass is considered as betal, insignificant and subsumed in the greater whole. This concept is illustrated in other contexts; see Hilchot Terumot 11:22; Hilchot Shemitah 4:21, et al.
There is an unresolved doubt regarding the ruling when stalks of produce whose seed does not decompose that reached a third of their growth,22At which point the obligation to tithe applies. were [gathered,] their stack was straightened, and he tithed them,23I.e., this completes the tasks associated with the preparation of the produce and causes the obligation to tithe to be incurred. he subsequently sowed them, and they increased in size. [One might say that] there is a Rabbinic obligation to tithe them, because they increased in size.24And the produce which existed previously is considered as betal to the new produce, as above. [But one might say] that there is no obligation25To tithe the original produce. Even this opinion agrees that the new produce which grows must be tithed. since the seed which continues to exist and did not decompose was tithed. [The laws governing these species] do not resemble [those that apply to] onions, because it is not common practice to sow onions.26Hence, the laws governing onions cannot provide guidance in this instance (Kessef Mishneh).
[The following laws apply when one] sows tevel, whether a crop whose seed decomposes27E.g., wheat or barley. or a crop whose seed does not decompose.28Like onions or garlic. If it is possible for him to gather it [before it takes root in the ground], we penalize him29For violating our Sages' decree not to sow tevel. and [require him to] gather it. [If the seed decomposes], should it grow, we do not require him to uproot [the plants].30For the prohibited entity no longer exists. [The growths] are considered as ordinary produce.31I.e., it is permitted to partake of them and the required separations must be made.If the produce is of a type whose seed does not decompose, even the produce that grows from the growths - indeed, even until the third generation - is forbidden. The fourth generation is permitted. Why are the growths forbidden? Because of the terumat ma'aser and the terumah within them.32Compare to Hilchot Terumah 11:21 and notes. These same laws apply when one sows produce separated as the tithes from which terumat ma'aser was not separated.It is forbidden to sell tevel except when there is a necessity to do so and [then,] only to a Torah scholar.33We are translating the term chaver according to the Rambam's wording in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:8). More specifically, it refers to a person who adheres to the laws of tithing. Torah scholars are mentioned, because we assume that they adhere to those laws (Chapter 9, Halachah 1, Chapter 10, Halachot 1-2). It is forbidden to send [presents] of tevel, even from one Torah scholar to another, perhaps one will rely on the other34I.e., since both are known to tithe their produce, it is possible that both will think that the other one tithed, when in fact neither of them did so. and thus cause tevel to be eaten.
[The following rules apply when a person] sells produce35Which both the seller and the purchaser thought had been tithed. to a colleague, but then remembers that it is tevel and although he afterwards runs to pursue him to make the appropriate separations,36I.e., this is the first step such a person should take. he cannot find him. If he knows that the produce no longer exists - it was already lost or consumed - he does not have to separate tithes for it.37Once the produce has ceased to exist, there is no way a person can correct his past lapses. If there is a doubt whether it exists or do not exists, he should separate tithes for it from other produce.38The Ra'avad states that the produce separated must itself be tithed, for it is possible that in fact the original produce had been lost. The Radbaz states that the Rambam would also accept this point.
[The following rule applies when there is a dispute when] a person sells produce to a purchaser.] The seller says: "I sold them with the stipulation that they were tevel."39He says this after the sale, so that the purchaser knows that the produce must be tithed. He must bring witnesses who testify that he is telling the truth, i.e., that the produce is tevel. Otherwise, the seller's word would not be accepted. See also Chapter 12, Halachah 18, and notes. The purchaser said: "I purchased tithed produce from you."40And thus the seller is required to reimburse him for the tithed produce. We compel the seller to make the appropriate separations.41I.e., separating the tithes for the produce that was sold from other produce. [This is a] penalty imposed upon him for selling tevel.42I.e., ordinarily, the ruling would favor the seller, based on the principle: "When a person seeks to expropriate property from a coleague, the burden of proof is upon him." In this instance, however, the seller is penalized, because he violated a Rabbinic prohibition by selling tevel (Radbaz).
One may not pay a debt from tevel, for this resembles a sale.43For one is receiving a monetary advantage for the tevel.
[The following laws apply when a person's] crops were seized by the king's authorities while they were tevel. If [they were taken] because he owed this amount,44I.e., the king had levied a tax on all his countrymen equally. Such a tax must be paid, because "the law of the land is your law" (Hilchot Gezeilah 5:12). he must separate the tithes for this produce.45Otherwise, he would be paying a debt with tevel. If they were taken from him by force, he does not have to separate tithes for them.
When a person purchases tevel from two sources,46I.e., both sellers inform the purchaser that they are selling him tevel (Radbaz). he may separate the tithes from one for the other.47We do not suspect that the two batches of produce are from different years and thus the tithes for one should not be separated from the other (ibid.). When a person receives a field from a Jew or from a gentile as part of a sharecropping agreement,48See Halachah 13 for a definition of the Hebrew terms chokar and mekabel used in the Hebrew text of this halachah. he should make the division [of the produce] in the presence of the owner of the field and give him his share then, so that he knows that he received tevel.49The sharecropper does not have to tithe the crop before he gives the owner his share. This is not considered as selling tevel, for the owner's share of the produce never belonged to the sharecropper. Nevertheless, if the division is not made in the presence of the owner, the sharecropper should separate the tithes, lest the owner think the produce he receives has been tithed and transgress by partaking of it without tithing (ibid.). Even if the owner is a gentile, this applies for another Jew may see the Jewish sharecropper bringing produce to the gentile and purchase it from him under the impression that it was tithed (ibid.).[Different rules apply, however, when a person] rents a field from a Jew on the condition that he pay the owner a specific amount of produce. If he pays him with produce from the field he rented, [the renter] must separate terumah.50For it is forbidden to take produce from the grainheap in which it is gathered without separating terumah (ibid.). Afterwards, he gives him the measure he stipulated he would give him and the owner of the field must separate the tithe himself.51The renter does not have to separate the tithes, because - as above - this portion of the crop never belonged to him. From the outset, it was designated for the owner. If, however, [the renter] pays the owner from the produce of another field or with another type of produce, [the renter] must first separate the tithes and then pay [the owner].52For in that instance, he is paying the owner with the untithed produce and that is forbidden.
When a person rents a field from a gentile on the condition that he pay him a specific amount of produce, he must tithe the produce before giving it to him. This is a penalty imposed upon him so that he will not rent the field from the gentile.53The Radbaz notes that - as indicated by the previous halachah - a penalty was not imposed on a person who enters into a sharecropping agreement with a gentile unless it was his ancestral field. The Radbaz explains the difference between the two situations: When a person rents a field for a specific amount of produce, he usually does so as a last resort and receives only a minimal amount. Therefore, if there are restrictions made against him doing so, he may sell the land. When, by contrast, a person seeks a sharecropper, he is reserving the option to sow it himself. Hence, he is less likely to sell it. In this way, the field will lie fallow [before the gentile]54For no one will seek to hire it from him. and, of necessity, he will sell it to a Jew.55This and the measure mentioned in the following clause were part of the safeguards the Sages employed to uphold the Jews' possession of our Holy Land. For in the Roman era, gentiles would frequently seize Jewish property without cause. Rather than have it remain in the gentile's possession, our Sages desired that he be compelled to sell it back to a Jew.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 6:2), the Rambam states that this ruling applies only in Eretz Yisrael, for it is only there that we are careful about land not being sold to a gentile. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:121), however, quotes this law without making that restriction. It is possible to explain that even in the Diaspora, there is a concept of maintaining the stability of the Jewish community by not giving up Jewish land to gentiles.Similarly, when a person accepts his ancestral field from a gentile as a sharecropper,56I.e., the gentile seized a field which a Jew had inherited from his ancestors. Because of his connection to the field, the Jew desired to till it and promised to give the gentile a share under a sharecropping agreement. he was penalized and required to tithe the produce before giving the gentile his share of produce after it was tithed. [This measure was instituted] so that a person should not jump at the opportunity to receive it because it was his ancestral field. In this manner, it will remain fallow before the gentile so that he will sell it to a Jew.
What is meant by a chokar and what is meant by a mekabel?57These terms refer to sharecroppers operating under different types of agreements. A chokar hires the field for a specific amount of produce - these-and-these many se'ah - whether the field produced a lot or a little. A mekabel hires the field for a percentage of its yield, half, a third, or whichever amount they agree on. A sochar is one who rents the land for [a sum of] money.58See Hilchot Sechirut 8:1-2 which also discusses these distinctions.
When two people receive a field as sharecroppers together, they inherit the field, or join as partners with regard to it, one may tell the other: "Take the wheat in this-and-this place and I will take the wheat from that-and-that place. You [take] the wine in this-and-this place and I will take the wine from that-and-that place."59I.e., making a division for the sake of convenience [see the standard printed text of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 6:8); Rav Kappach's version differs)]. He should not say: "You take the wheat and I will take the barley. You take the wine and I will take the oil," for that constitutes selling tevel.
When a priest or a Levite purchased produce from an Israelite after the tasks [associated with their preparation] were completed,60But before terumah and the tithes were separated. Since the priests or Levites are entitled to the tithes and/or the terumah, they wished to purchase the produce and separate them for themselves. See Chapter 1, Halachah 3. we expropriate the terumah and tithes from their possession and give them to other priests and Levites. This is a penalty imposed on them so that they will not hurry to the grainheaps and winepresses and purchase tevel to grab the presents of their priestly brethren.61The Ra'avad accepts the Rambam's ruling, but differs with regard to its motivating rationale. He explains that since the Israelite completed the tasks associated with the preparation of the grain, he has the right to give away the terumah and the tithes and the priest or Levite is not entitled to take that from him. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that the rationale given by the Rambam is mentioned in the Jerusalem Talmud (Pe'ah 1:6) and thus question the Ra'avad's position. If, however, they purchase [the produce] before [these] tasks are completed, we do not expropriate [the presents] from their possession.62Since there is a certain amount of difficulty involved in the completion of these tasks, we do not penalize them.
When a priest or Levite sold produce that was detached to an Israelite63But not to a fellow priest or Levite. before the tasks [associated with their preparation] were completed - and certainly, if they sold the produce while it was attached - the terumah or the tithes belong to [the priest or Levite].64The rationale is that we operate under the presumption that when the priest or Levite sold the produce, he included a stipulation that the terumah and/or the tithes were his. Even though this stipulation was not explicitly made, we assume that it was understood (Rav Yosef Korcus).Although they sold tevel - and thus it would be appropriate to penalize them - since they made it known that the produce was tevel, no penalty is imposed. If they sold it after these tasks were completed, the terumah and the tithes belong to the purchaser.65Since the tasks associated with the produce were completed, the obligation to tithe is immediate. Hence, if the priest or Levite desired to retain possession of the terumah and tithes, they would have to make an explicit stipulation. He must separate them and may give them to the priest or Levite of his choice.
When a priest or Levite receive a field from an Israelite under a sharecropping agreement, they should divide the terumah and the tithes, as they divide up the ordinary produce. The Israelite should take his portion and give it to the priest or Levite of his choice. When, however, an Israelite receives a field from a priest or a Levite under a sharecropping agreement, the terumah and/or the tithes belong to the owner of the field.66In this instance as well, since the field belongs to the priest or Levite, it is as if he made a stipulation that the terumah and/or tithes should be given to him. The remainder of the presents67The second tithe or the tithe given to the poor. should be divided.
When a person - whether an Israelite from a priest or Levite or a priest or Levite from an Israelite - receive olives68I.e., olives that have already been harvested from the tree (Radbaz). to produce oil, they should divide the terumah and the tithes, as they divide up the ordinary produce. [The rationale is that] oil is an important [commodity].69Hence if the priest or Levite desired that the terumah and/or tithes be left for him, he would have to make an explicit stipulation to that effect. Thus if the olives - or any other produce - have not been harvested, if the land is owned by a priest or Levite, he retains the right to the terumah and/or tithes as above.
When a priest sells a field to an Israelite and tells him: "[I am selling it] on the condition that the tithes from it belong to me forever," they belong to him.70Even if the purchaser later sells that field to another person, he cannot override the stipulation that was part of the original sale. [The rationale is that] saying "on the condition that" is tantamount to setting aside for himself [the portion of the field] where the tithes [grow].71Were his stipulation not to be powerful enough to retain a portion of the land itself, it would not be effective, because it would be tantamount to purchasing an entity that has not come into existence. Such a purchase is not effective (Bava Batra 63a).The commentaries note an apparent contradiction between the Rambam's ruling here and his ruling in Hilchot Bikkurim 9:11. Although there are explicit Talmudic sources for both rulings, their logic appears contradictory. Among the resolutions offered is that here, the Rambam is speaking about landed property, while in Hilchot Bikkurim, he is speaking about an animal and the principles of ownership are different in these two instances.If the priest [who sold the land] dies, his son is like all other priests.72I.e., he no longer has any special rights to the terumah or tithes. If [the priest] told [the purchaser]: "[I am selling it] on the condition that the tithes from it belong to me and my son," [when] he dies, his son73His grandson, however, does not have a right to them (Aruch HaShulchan). should take [the tithes]. If he sold it "...on the condition throughout the time it is in your possession," should the purchaser sell it to another person - even if he later buys it back, the priest is no longer entitled to those tithes.
When an Israelite received a field under a sharecropping agreement from a priest or Levite and stipulated that [the agreement is being made] "on the condition that the tithes are mine74I.e., the Israelite's. for four or five years," this is permitted.75The Israelite is stipulating that he retains the right to separate the terumah and the tithes for all of the produce and give them to any priest or Levite he desires. Although as stated above, when the owner of the field is a priest, he can retain the rights to the terumah and the tithes. Nevertheless, as part of his contractual arrangement with the renter, he may give him the right to distribute them (Radbaz). "...On the condition that they are mine forever," this is forbidden. [The rationale is that] one priest cannot make another priest.76I.e., a priest cannot give his right to collect terumah to a person who is not a priest. Similarly, a Levite may not make another Levite. Since the renter desires to make the arrangement permanent, it is forbidden, for a person who does not have a right to take the terumah and tithes is taking them.Similarly, if a Levite owed money to an Israelite, the Israelite may not collect produce from others and set aside the tithes for himself until he repays his debt.77I.e., the creditor will continue to deduct the value of the tithes from the debt until the debt is paid. For a Levite cannot make his creditor a Levite so that he can collect the tithes from others.78Even though the creditor is taking them for the Levite, since he does not have an inherent right to them, he may not collect them.
When an Israelite inherits tevel that was found in a grainheap whose edges had been straightened79I.e., at this stage, the tasks associated with the preparation of the produce were completed and tithes are required to be separated from it. from his maternal grandfather who was a priest who in turn inherited it from his maternal grandfather who was an Israelite, [the Israelite who was the heir] may separate the tithes and keep them as his own. [The rationale is that] presents which are fit to be separated are considered as if they have already been separated although in actual fact they were not separated.80To summarize the situation: The first testator, the Israelite, had completed the tasks involved with the preparation of his produce, but died before he had the opportunity to separate the terumah and the tithes. The first heir and second testator, the priest, also died before he had the opportunity to make these separations. Nevertheless, since had he in fact separated them, he would have been allowed to keep them as his own, we consider it as if he actually did so. Therefore when the final heir, the Israelite, takes possession of the produce, he must separate the terumah and the tithes to fulfill the mitzvah. He may then, however, keep them as his own property. (He may not, however, partake of the terumah, he must sell it to a priest.)
When a person gives his field81This halachah is speaking about an instance where the person worded the arrangement with the gentile in such a manner that the gentile does not receive possession of the produce until after it reaches the "phase of tithing." Otherwise, there would be no obligation to separate tithes. See Hilchot Terumah 1:13. to a gentile or to someone upon whom we cannot rely with regard to the tithes82In contrast to the following clause, this phrase does not refer to an ordinary common person, but one who has a reputation for being lax in the observance of this mitzvah (see Ra'avad). For with regard to a common person, we apply certain safeguards lest he not have tithed, but nevertheless, we are not certain that he has not tithed. On the contrary, our presumption is that he did tithe. in a sharecropping arrangement, he must separate the tithes in lieu of them even though [the produce] had not reached the "phase of tithing" [when the arrangement was made].83This is a penalty, imposed so that a person will not give his field to a person who does not observe the mitzvah of tithing.If he entered into such an arrangement with a common person [different rules apply]. If [the arrangement began] before the crops reached the "phase of tithing," he does not have to tithe in lieu of him.84Since the majority of the common people tithe (Shabbat 23a), since he has not incurred the responsibility to tithe at all, he was not penalized. [If it began] after they reached the "phase of tithing," he must tithe in lieu of him.85Since the produce reached the "phase of tithing," and there are some common people who do not tithe, our Sages required that this measure be taken.What must he do? He should stand over the grainheap86Before a division of produce is made. and take [the produce that must be separated]. He need not be concerned with what they ate,87I.e., if they partook of some of the produce while it was forbidden for them to do so. for we are not responsible for their actions.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
[The following laws apply when a person has a 100 log of wine that are tevel according to Scriptural Law.1One might argue that this law does not apply at present. And indeed, did not apply throughout the entire Second Temple period. As explained in Hilchot Terumah 1:26 and notes, from the time of the exile of the tribes of Reuven and Gad towards the end of the First Temple period, the mitzvah to separate tithes was no longer required by Scriptural Law. On the other hand, since the source of the mitzvot are Scriptural, even though their observance now is Rabbinic, we follow stringencies as if the Scriptural mitzvah still applies. If he says: "The two lugim that I will separate are terumah;2I.e., he is giving one fiftieth which is the ordinary measure separated as terumah (ibid. 3:2). the ten are the first tithe, and the nine are the second tithe,"3For the second tithe is given as a tenth of the new total once the first tithe has been separated. he should not begin drinking and leave over the quantity designated as terumah and the tithes at the end. Instead, he should make the separations and then drink. We do not say that the wine he left over at the end is retroactively considered as if it was set aside in the beginning.4See Chapter 9, Halachah 10. [The rationale for this stringency is that] the obligation [to separate] terumah and the tithes is Scriptural in origin, and with regard to [matters of] Scriptural Law, we do not say that we will consider it as if a separation has been made unless it actually has been made.5There is a difference of opinion among the Sages of the Talmud if this principle, referred to as bereirah should be applied or not (see Beitzah 37b). Because the matter is not resolved, with regard to questions of Scriptural Law, we are stringent, but with regard to matters of Rabbinic Law, we rule leniently.
When a person specifies that his tithes were located at the opening of a jug [of wine], he should not drink from the bottom of the barrel. If he specifies that they are at the bottom, he should not drink from the top. [The rationale is that] the liquids intermingle.6And there is no way one can drink from the top without drinking from the bottom or drink from the bottom without drinking from the top. If, by contrast, one specified [that the tithes for produce] were at the opening of a storage container, one may eat from the bottom.7This does not represent a contradiction to the previous halachah. In that instance, the person had not separated the terumah and the tithes. He had merely stated that he would. In this instance, he has made a separation even though he did not physically remove it. If one specified that they were located at the bottom, one may eat from the top.8For the produce will not become intermingled.
A person can designate certain produce as the second tithe and then redeem it.9See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni, ch. 4, which describes how the second tithe can be redeemed for silver coinage. [Afterwards,] he may designate that same produce as the first tithe10I.e., this is referring to a situation where the person did not make the separations in the desired sequence. This is undesirable, as stated in Hilchot Terumah 3:23. for this batch of produce or terumat ma'aser for other produce.11He may not, however, separate it as terumat m'aser for this batch of produce, for it is not proper to separate terumat ma'aser before one separates the tithes themselves. See Chapter 9, Halachah 5.The Ra'avad states that one may use it as terumat ma'aser for other produce, but not as ordinary terumah.
When a person sets aside produce to use them for the separation of tithes,12I.e., he puts aside this batch of produce. Whenever he has new produce, he measures it and calculates a tenth. Afterwards, he considers that quantity of the produce set aside as tithes. When that entire batch of produce has been designated as tithes, he gives it to a Levite. See also (Hilchot Terumah 5:26). he may continue to separate tithes relying on this produce on the assumption that it is intact, eating and drinking [from the produce from which he intended to separate tithes] until the entire quantity that was set aside has become tithes. He then gives that to a Levite. [If later] he discovers that the produce that he set aside [for tithes] has been lost, he must show concern for all the tithes that he set aside.13I.e., he must separate tithes again, lest he had made the original separation after the produce which he designated for his tithes was lost. The Mishnah (Gittin 3:8) mentions the opinion of Rabbi Elazar who maintains that one shows concern only for the separations made within the last 24 hours. Other Sages differ, however, and maintain that one must show concern for all produce separated (Kessef Mishneh; see Rav Kapach's edition of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah).Tosafot Yom Tov (Gittin, loc. cit.) states that the Rambam's wording implies that one should separate tithes for one's produce even if that produce has already been eaten. Other authorities, however, do not accept this deduction. He should not, however, tithe [the second time] with certainty.14For perhaps, the produce that he had set aside was intact at the time he made the separation.
When a person lends money to a priest,15Who is entitled to receive both terumah and the tithes. a Levite,16Who is entitled to receive the tithes. or a poor person,17Who is entitled to receive the tithe for the poor. so that he can separate [produce] for the money [they owe] from the portions due them,18I.e., the lender lent a Levite 100 zuz, but did not require him to pay it. Instead, he said that he would continually deduct the money in exchange for the produce he would set aside as tithes until the debt was paid, as described in the following halachah. he may continue to separate tithes on their behalf on the assumption that they are alive. He need not show concern that the priest or Levite died or the poor man became wealthy.19In which instance, they - and therefore, the lender - would not be entitled to the crops separated for these purposes.
How should he make these separations on their behalf? He should separate terumah, the first tithe, or the tithe for the poor20There is obviously a printing error in the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah. and give it to another person for the sake of the priest, Levite, or poor person to whom he lent money.21In this way, the produce separated formally becomes the property of the debtor. Even though ultimately the lender will be receiving the produce, he must make the separations so that the main batch of produce will not be tevel. If [the debtors] would frequently take these separations from him or if he was accustomed to give these separations to them alone, he need not give them to another person on their behalf.22He must, however, make these separations. He need not give them to another person, because since these individuals are accustomed to receiving this produce, it is considered as if he already received them (Rashi, Gittin 30a).After [the lender] makes these separations, he calculates the worth of the produce he separated and deducts it from the loan. [He continues doing this] until he repays the entire debt. He may sell the terumah to any priest of his choice and may partake of the tithes [himself].
When he calculates the worth of the produce that he set aside, he has the right to consider their value according to the lower market price.23I.e., whenever produce is sold, there is a buyer's bid and a seller's bid. The buyer's bid is always lower than the seller's. The lender may price the produce according to the buyer's bid. This is not considered as interest.24Despite the fact that he is receiving an advantage - considering the produce's worth at a lower price - for having made the loan. The Sabbatical year does not remit such a debt.25Although the Sabbatical year remits debts (Hilchot Shemitah, ch. 9), it remits only those debts for which a person must demand payment. In this instance, it is as if the payment has already been arranged (Meiri, Gittin 30a).If the lender desires to nullify this arrangement, he may not.26Our Sages ordained this measure for the sake of the recipients (Gittin, loc. cit.). But if [the borrowers] seek to do so, they may. If the owner despaired of receiving payment from them, he can no longer make these separations on their behalf. For we may not make separations because of [a debt that] was lost.27Rashi (Gittin, loc. cit.) explains that we are speaking about a situation where the lender stipulated that he would receive payment for the loan from the terumah or tithes from a particular year. That year was a year of drought and his harvest appeared lost entirely. He made a public statement of despair, acknowledging that he no longer expected to be able to collect the debt, because his fields would not grow enough crops. If, despite this condition, his fields produced crops, he is not entitled to keep the terumah and/or tithes for himself. The rationale is that he has already given up hope of their recovery.If the priest, Levite, or poor person who borrowed money dies, he cannot continue to separate on their behalf unless he receives permission from the heirs.28I.e., the arrangement to pay the debt is not automatically transferred to the heirs of the estate. They must agree to it. [Moreover, even if permission is granted,] it is effective only when [the deceased] left the heirs [a tract of] land at least the size of a needle.29As long as the testator possesses land, his estate is responsible for the debt, because the land is on lien to it. Hence, his heirs can continue the arrangement if they so choose. If, however, he left them only money, permission from the heir is not effective.30If the deceased left only movable property, the debt does not create a lien on the estate. There is a mitzvah for them to pay the debt, but no binding obligation. Hence, they cannot have terumah or tithes separated for the sake of paying the debt. If he made the loan in court on the condition that he will make the separations on their behalf for this money, it is not necessary for him to receive permission from the heirs.31For it is as if the court agreed that all the priests and/or Levites would accept responsibility for the debt in the event of the debtor's death.If the poor person became wealthy, he may no longer separate [the tithe for the poor] on his behalf.32For a wealthy person cannot be a recipient of the tithes for the poor. Even though he made the loan in court, [the recipient] may retain the funds in his possession.33For it is as if the lender specified that he would accept this method as payment for the debt. If that method is no longer viable, he must suffer the loss.
When an Israelite tells a Levite: "I am in possession of a kor34A measure of volume. of tithes for you," the Levite has the right to designate that produce as terumat ma'aser for other produce even if he did not draw it into his possession.35I.e., and thus, he has not formally acquired it as his own. Nevertheless, he can rely on the assumption that a Jew will not act unfaithfully and will keep his word (Bava Metzia 49a). If the Israelite gives it to another Levite, the first individual has nothing more than complaints against him.36The fact that by changing his mind and failing to keep his word, the Israelite caused a spiritual difficulty for the first Levite - for he caused him to violate a transgression by partaking of tithes for which terumat ma'aser was not separated - does not create a financial liability.
When a person has produce in a silo and gives a se'ah to a Levite37As the tithes.and a se'ah to a poor person,38As the tithe for the poor. As the Rambam writes in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 4:2), he does not have to separate a full se'ah as the tithes for the poor, for once the first tithe has been separated, all that is necessary is to separate a tenth from the new total and this will be slightly less than a se'ah. he should not set aside eight se'ah from the silo and partake of it39I.e., he is thinking that the tithes will have been separated for these eight se'ah.  unless he knows with certainty that the two se'ah of the tithes are still intact. If, however, the Levite and/or the poor person partook of them, he may set aside only an amount of grain proportionate to what remains from the two se'ah.40I.e., the produce possessed by each of the recipients should be one tenth of the amount of produce that he uses. We do not say that the produce that he originally separated can serve as the tithes for the produce he will set aside afterwards unless it is intact. See Halachah 4.
[The following laws apply when] poor people exchange the presents given them with the owner of the field, i.e., they gave him a se'ah of leket, shichachah, peah or the tithes for the poor and they took a se'ah of grain from the grain pile.41I.e., the owner acted generously with the poor people, taking a se'ah of their presents - which is usually produce of inferior quality - and exchanging it for a se'ah of quality produce from the grain pile. [The grain] he takes from them is exempt from the tithes,42For there is no obligation to separate tithes from the presents of the poor (Hilchot Terumah 2:9). even though it was prepared in the domain of the owner. [Tithes] must be separated from [the grain] they take from him even though it was given in exchange for their presents that are exempt.
[The following laws apply when] there are two baskets of tevel from which terumah was separated in front of a person and he says: "Let the tithes from this one be in the other one." The tithing of the first basket is effective. If he says, "Let the tithes from this one be in the other one and [the tithes for] the second one be in this one," the tithing of the first basket is effective, for he has established its tithes within the second basket. The tithing of the second basket is not effective because tithes cannot be set aside from the first basket because the obligation to tithe has already been discharged for the second basket from which the tithes from both must be separated.43As stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 6, one may not separate tithes from produce that is exempt from the mitzvah of tithing or for which the obligation to tithe has already been discharged.
If one says: "With regard to the tithes for these two baskets. The tithes for each one are established in the other," he has designated the tithes by name and has established the tithes within them. He therefore separates the tithes from them. He may not separate the tithes from another source.44For he has designated the tithes as coming from those baskets.
How are the tithes separated [in the above situation]? One may separate the tithes for both of them from one of them or he should separate the tithes from each one of them from itself if they were of equal [size].45From the Tosefta (Demai 8:12), it appears that if the piles of produce are equal, it makes no difference to the person from which pile he makes the separations. Thus he can separate them as he desires (Radbaz). If one of them was larger than the other, one should separate the tithes for the larger one from the smaller one and the tithes for the smaller one from the larger one.46For his statements indicate that he desired to separate the tithes for one pile from the other.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
Produce from which the great terumah and terumat ma'aser have been separated are referred to as "ordinary produce."1I.e., because the elements of the produce that are sacred have been removed from it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 7:7)]. Terumat ma'aser should not be separated before the tithes themselves. Nevertheless, if one made such a separation, it is acceptable (Chapter 9, Halachah 5). When the other tithes have been separated from it, it is universally called "ordinary produce that has been made acceptable."
[The following laws apply when] tevel2In this instance, the term tevel refers to produce from which the tithes and terumat ma'aser have not been separated. Although the term has a more inclusive meaning, from the continuation of the Rambam's words, this appears to be the intent here. becomes mixed together with the same species of ordinary produce that has been made acceptable in which instance, [the tevel cannot be considered insignificant] because its flavor [cannot be detected].3I.e., were the tevel to be of another type of produce than the ordinary produce, the question of whether or not it is considered insignificant would depend on whether its flavor is detectable. In this situation, however, the two collections of produce are of the same species, so taste is not a factor and the tevel cannot be considered as insignificant.When tevel is mixed with its own species, it is never nullified even if it is mixed with far more than its own size. The rationale is that it is a devar sheyeish lo matirin, i.e., the prohibition can be corrected by making the appropriate separations (Hilchot Issurei Ma'achalot 15:6). If he has other produce, he should separate the terumat [ma'aser] and the tithes for the tevel according to the appropriate reckoning.4I.e., if he knows how much produce was mixed in, he can make the appropriate separations even if the produce itself is not distinct. If he does not have other produce from which to make the separations for that tevel, the entire mixture is forbidden until he makes separations from it. When he makes these separations, he forfeits a portion from the ordinary produce that has been made acceptable that is equivalent to the terumat ma'aser that must be separated from the tevel.5I.e., one hundredth of the tevel. The Rambam explains what he means by forfeiting this amount and why one must do so in the following halachah.
What is implied? If 100 se'ah of tevel is mixed with 100 se'ah of ordinary produce that has been made acceptable, he should separate 101 [se'ah] from the entire mixture. Everything that he sets aside is considered as tevel. Thus 99 se'ah of ordinary produce that has been made acceptable remain. He has thus lost a se'ah [of the ordinary produce].6I.e., it is considered as if the se'ah of terumat ma'aser fell into the ordinary produce in which instance, it would be necessary to remove one se'ah from the mixture [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 7:7)]. Similarly, if terumah had also not been separated from the tevel, he must forfeit an amount from the ordinary produce that has been made acceptable that is equivalent to the terumah and terumat ma'aser [to be separated from the tevel].7I.e., three se'ah, two se'ah for the great terumah and one se'ah for the terumat ma'aser.Why must he forfeit this se'ah?8For the se'ah that will ultimately be separated from the tevel can be considered as the se'ah that must be removed from the ordinary produce (ibid.). So that he will not say: "The 100 se'ah that I set aside are ordinary produce and the 100 that remain are tevel."9For the opposite is true, the produce that remains is the ordinary produce (ibid.). Similarly, if the amount of the tevel exceeded or was less than ordinary produce, one should separate [an amount equivalent] to the tevel and [an amount] from the ordinary produce [equivalent] to the terumat ma'aser [to be separated from the tevel] or equivalent to the terumah and terumat ma'aser [to be separated] if it was tevel from which terumah was not separated.
Similarly, if tithes10I.e., produce that had been separated as the tithes. Beforehand, terumah had been separated. that were tevel11I.e., a person separated tithes and gave them to a Levite who did not separate terumat ma'aser from them as of yet. became mixed with ordinary produce that has been made acceptable, even the slightest amount causes the mixture to be prohibited. If the person has other tithes, he should make a separation for the terumat ma'aser for the tithes that require this according to the appropriate proportion.12Setting aside one tenth of the quantity of the tithes. This is the desired approach, because then the necessary separations are being made without losing anything. If he does not have other tithes,13And thus cannot exercise the above option. he should remove the tithes and forfeit from the ordinary produce that has been made acceptable an amount equal to the terumat ma'aser in the tithes.14I.e., one tenth of the tithes.
What is implied? 100 [se'ah of] tithes become mixed with 100 [se'ah of] ordinary produce that has been made acceptable. He should separate 110 se'ah from the entire mixture. Everything that he separates is considered as the tithes. The 90 [se'ah] that remain are ordinary produce as before. Similarly, if the amount of the ordinary produce exceeds or is less than that of these tithes, he should separate the tithes and from the ordinary produce, an amount equivalent to the terumat ma'aser in the tithes.15In his Commentary to the Mishnah (op. cit.), the Rambam explains that this ruling is given because the situation at hand is an intermediate level between an instance where terumat ma'aser becomes mixed with ordinary produce (in which instance 101 times the amount of terumat ma'aser would be necessary) and a situation where the terumat ma'aser need not be considered at all. There is a basis for such leniency, since ultimately, no separation had been made and terumat ma'aser was never mixed with the produce. On the other hand, since a tenth of the tithes is fit to be separated as terumat ma'aser, some recognition should be made. Hence our Sages arrived at the above compromise.
[The following laws apply when] tevel becomes mixed together with tithes16I.e., produce that had been separated as the tithes. Beforehand, terumah had been separated. that were tevel.17I.e., a person separated tithes and gave them to a Levite who did not separate terumat ma'aser from them as of yet. If the amount of tevel was equivalent to the amount of the tithes, he must forfeit from the tevel an amount equivalent to the terumat ma'aser it contains.18I.e., 1/100th of the tevel.What is implied? There were 100 se'ah of tevel that became mixed with 100 se'ah of tithes. He should separate 101 [se'ah]; they are considered as tithes.19The se'ah of terumat ma'aser from the tevel that is added is considered as mixed in with the tithes (ordinary) produce and therefore betal, subsumed, in it. Hence the person can make use of the produce in the ordinary manner. The 99 remaining are considered as tevel.20The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam. The commentaries justify the Rambam's view.If there was more tevel than tithes, he should separate the tithes alone and he does not forfeit anything from the tevel. For if he would designate the terumat ma'aser of the tevel,21And thus separate an additional amount. the tithes would be meduma,22A mixture of terumah and ordinary produce. An ordinary person cannot benefit from such a mixture. Instead, it must be sold to a priest at the price of terumah with the exception of the price of the portion that is terumat ma'aser, as the Rambam continues to explain. The tithes would be meduma, because there would not be enough ordinary produce for the terumat ma'aser to be subsumed within them. a mixture of [the tithes]23Which are ordinary produce. and the terumat ma'aser from the tithes which are separated together.If there were more tithes than tevel, he should designate the terumat ma'aser in the tevel, setting aside the tevel and an amount equivalent to the terumat ma'aser for the tevel, i.e., one one-hundredth of the tithe. The tevel should be considered as if it is all meduma and sold to a priest with the exception of the worth of the two [portions of] terumah in it. Thus he will forfeit one hundredth of the tithes which is equivalent to the terumat ma'aser in the tevel.What is implied? If there were 100 [se'ah] tevel with 200 [se'ah] of the tithes, he should set aside 103. The three [se'ah] are the terumat ma'aser of the 100 [se'ah] of tevel and the measure of terumat ma'aser for the 200 [se'ah of the tithes]. [This separation is necessary] so that people will not come to err if [the tithes] became mixed with an equivalent amount [of tevel]. Therefore he should leave 197 [se'ah] which will remain tithes as they were.24In this way, he is forfeiting from the tithes the amount of terumat ma'aser in the tithes and the amount of terumat ma'aser in the tevel. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and the commentaries support the Rambam's decision.
[The following laws apply when a person] has [a stack with] ten lines, each containing ten barrels of wine and [the owner] allocated25The commentaries explain that we are not speaking about an instance where he actually set aside the barrel as tithes, for the Rambam concludes the halachah by saying that he should set aside the tithes. Instead, he merely pledged to separate a barrel from that surface for ten barrels of other wine. one barrel of the outer line26I.e., one of the external surfaces of the cube that is the pile [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 7:8)]. as tithes for other wine,27The Rambam mentions this point, because otherwise, one could rightly ask: Why does the Mishnah (ibid.) speak about only one barrel of wine as tithes for 100 barrels (Radbaz)? but he does not know which outer line [he intended]. He should take two barrels from [the corners] on a diagonal,28Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). The intent is that each of the barrels on the corners is part of two surfaces. Since he is taking a barrel from opposite corners, he will have certainly taken a barrel from the surface he intended. Nevertheless, since he does not know which one of the two is appropriate, he should mix them together. mix them, and separate [the tithes] from them.29Preferably, he should also use the remaining amount as tithes for other produce. Thus the barrel separated will be used entirely as tithes (Kin'at Eliyahu).
If he allocated [one barrel from] the half30These and the following bracketed additions are made on the basis of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). of an outer row [as tithes], but does not know from which [outer] half a row, he should take four barrels, [one] from each of the corners.31Each of the barrels is part of two outer half rows, so that the barrel he intended to allocate is certainly among these four barrels. If he allocated [a barrel from] one row, but does not know which row, he should take [a barrel] from a diagonal row.32By doing so, he will have taken a barrel from every row. If he allocated [a barrel from] half a row, but does not know which half a row, he should take [a barrel] from two diagonal rows.33In a criss-cross as depicted in the accompanying diagram. Thus he will be taking a barrel from each half row. He should then mix them together and separate [the tithes].
If he allocated one barrel as tithes but does not know which barrel it is, he should take [some wine] from each of the 100 barrels, mix it together, and separate enough for one barrel as tithes.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
In the age of Yochanan the High Priest who served after Shimon the Just,1I.e., not the Hasmonean High Priest of that name who became a Sadducee (Kessef Mishneh). the High Court sent emissaries who searched throughout the entire territory of Israel. They discovered that everyone was careful with regard to the great terumah2Since it is punishable by death at the hand of heaven, people were meticulous in separating it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:1). and would separate it. But with regard to the first tithe, the second tithe, and the tithe for the poor, the common people among Israel would be lax and would not separate it.3The majority of the common people would separate the tithes as well. Nevertheless, because there was a significant minority who did not, our Sages imposed this stringency. Therefore [the Sages] decreed that only the word of trustworthy people4See Chapter 10, Halachot 1-2. would be relied upon with regard to tithes.5I.e., if such people say that their produce was tithed, we accept their word. [The status of the produce of] the common people, by contrast is doubtful. We do not rely on them if they say that they separated the tithes. This is called demai.6The name demai is a composite of the Aramaic words da mai, meaning "This, what is its status?" (Radbaz).See also Hilchot Berachot 1:20 which states that it is necessary to recite a blessing before partaking of demai. That indicates that although our Sages ordained that one should separate the tithes before partaking of it, they did not consider partaking of it an outright prohibition. For if so, reciting a blessing would not be in place.
They ordained that a person should separate only terumat ma'aser from the demai, for it is a transgression punishable by death and the second tithe, for there is no loss in doing so since the owner partakes of it. One need not, however, separate the first tithe or the tithe for the poor from demai because [the obligation] is doubtful and [whenever one desires] to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him. Therefore he tells the Levite or the poor person:7I.e., to whom these tithes would be given. "Bring proof that it is not tithed," and then take the tithes.
Even though one does not separate the tithe for the poor from demai, it is necessary to designate it without separating it. One says: "A tenth of what is here is the tithe for the poor. [This is done] to firmly establish [the obligation of] the second tithe.8I.e., the Sages ordained this stringency with regard to the tithe for the poor, so that the people will be careful in their observance of the second tithe. For the tithe for the poor is given in the third and sixth years instead of the second tithe given in the other years of the Sabbatical cycle.
When terumat ma'aser and the second tithe are separated from demai, a blessing is not recited, because [the obligation was instituted because] of a doubt.9Although one's observance fulfills a decree of our Sages and blessings are recited for the observance of Rabbinic commandments, e.g., the recitation of Hallel, lighting Shabbat and Chanukah candles, washing hands, and the like, a blessing is not recited in this instance, because this obligation was instituted only because of doubt, not as a practice with inherent positive virtue. Therefore it is permitted to separate it when one is naked.10I.e., were a blessing required, one would be forbidden to separate it in such a state, because a blessing could not be recited [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:4)].
How should tithes be separated from demai? One should set aside an amount equivalent to the measure of terumat ma'aser, i.e., one hundredth of the entire amount, and place it next to the produce and say: "This is the tithe as is the remainder of the tithes that are adjacent to it." He then says: "This [portion] which I [first] set aside as the tithes, is terumat ma'aser for the remainder of the tithes that are adjacent to it."11The Radbaz emphasizes that he need not set the remainder of the tithes aside. Indeed, he continues, doing so would be an indication that he should give this produce to the Levite. He then takes it and gives it to a priest.12As a present. There is reason to say that since the matter is one of doubt, one is not required to give it to the priest, but instead, could sell it to him, our Sages ordained that it be given away. See the commentaries to Sotah 48a. This order is required, because idealy, it is forbidden to separate terumat ma'aser before the tithes themselves.13See Hilchot Terumot 3:23. Afterwards, he should separate the second tithe.
It is permissible to set aside the second tithe before the first tithe [when tithing] demai.14Generally, the tithes must be separated in the appropriate order (ibid.). An exception is made with regard to demai, for the obligation to separate it is only a Rabbinic stringency (the Jerusalem Talmud, Demai 1:4). See also Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 11:13. If one desires,15i.e., if rather than partaking of the produce in Jerusalem as is required with regard to the second tithe, he chooses to redeem it, transferring its holiness to money. That money should be taken to Jerusalem and used to purchase food there. See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni, chs. 4-5. he should say: "The second tithe of this produce is located in the northern portion - or the southern portion - of the produce and its [holiness] is transferred to this money."16I.e., it is not necessary to actually take this produce to Jerusalem and partake of it as the second tithe. Instead, its holiness could be transferred to money and used to purchase food there.Similarly, a person who purchases a loaf of bread from a baker17I.e., a baker who is a common person in whose instance the precautions concerning demai must be taken. should separate18In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:1), the Rambam states that one should separate this portion from the loaf. Instead, one should slice a piece from the loaf, without cutting the slice away entirely. The commentaries question whether this is the intent here or that here, the Rambam changed his mind and is speaking of a complete separation. from it the amount to be separated as terumat ma'aser and as challah,19As stated in Hilchot Bikkurim 5:1-2, before one is permitted to partake of bread, one must separate a portion as challah. According to Scriptural Law, there is no minimum amount required for this separation. According to the Rabbis, a private person must separate one twenty-fourth of the loaf and a baker one forty-eighth. In this instance, the latter amount should be separated together with one hundredth for terumat ma'aser. and say: "The one hundredth of [the total] that is here is [part of] the tithes as well as the remainder of the tithes that are next to it.20As in Halachah 5. May this portion that I set aside as tithes, serve as terumat ma'aser for the remainder of the tithes that are next to it. The remainder of what I set aside that exceeds one hundredth of the total is challah and the second tithe in its northern - or southern - portion, and its [holiness] is transferred to this money." He may then partake [of the bread].
Similarly, if a person invites a colleague to dine with him [on the Sabbath]21When it is forbidden to separate tithes (Hilchot Shabbat 23:14). and [the guest] does not trust [the host] with regard to the separation of the tithes,22Although a person who is meticulous in his observance of the tithes should not eat in a common person's home (Chapter 10, Halachah 1), it can be explained that this is speaking about an instance where the person accepted the invitation without knowing that the host was not meticulous in his observance of the mitzvah. We are, however, speaking about a situation where the guest merely suspects that his host is not meticulous in his observance. If he is certain that he is not meticulous, different rules apply, as the Rambam states in the final clause of the halachah. The leniencies to follow were granted only for the sake of the Sabbath, but not during the week. [the guest should do the following]: On Friday, he should say: "[The produce] that I will separate tomorrow is [part of] the tithes, as is the remainder of the tithes which are adjacent to it. That portion which I [first] designated as the tithes is terumat ma'aser for the remainder which is adjacent to it. The second tithe in its northern - or southern - portion, and its [holiness] is transferred to [this] money."[This is permitted,] because a person may make such stipulations with regard to demai even though it is not in his possession.23This leniency is granted because the obligation to make these separations is Rabbinic in origin. When, however, we are certain [that the tithes have not been separated,] he may make stipulations only concerning produce that is in his possession.
What is implied?24I.e., how can a stipulation be made before the Sabbath for produce that we know is tevel to be tithed on the Sabbath? If, [on Friday,] he had 100 figs that were tevel in his home and he is in the house of study or in the field25And thus he cannot physically separate them before the onset of the Sabbath. and he is afraid that night will fall and he will not be able to tithe the produce on the Sabbath, he should say: "The two figs that I will separate are terumah. The ten that I will separate after them are the first tithe. And the nine that I will separate after them are the second tithe." On the morrow, he makes these separations and may then partake [of the figs].26He may not, however, partake of the figs and then leave the tithes. The rationale is that in questions of Scriptural Law, the principle of bereirah is not applied and we do not consider it as if the separation that he will ultimately make was made from the outset [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 7:5)]. See also Chapter 1, Halachah 9.
He must whisper inaudibly [the appropriate statements]27Stating that he had made a stipulation on the previous day. when he is making these separations one after the other. He is not considered as making an article fit for use on the Sabbath,28The reason it is forbidden to separate tithes on the Sabbath. because he made the stipulation previously.When such a stipulation has been made concerning tevel, it is permitted to move it on the Sabbath,29If, however, such a stipulation was not made before the onset of the Sabbath, it is forbidden to move the tevel. Since it is forbidden to partake of it on the Sabbath, it is comparable to a stone (Hilchot Shabbat 25:19). [even] before the separations were made.30Since after the separations will be made, it will be permitted to partake of it, one never diverted his attention from using it on the Sabbath. He should focus his attention on [a portion of the produce, designating it as terumah and tithes] and partake of the remainder.31Even if the tithes have not been taken away from the produce, since they have already been separated and their place is distinct, it is as if they have been separated already. We do not have to rely on the principle of bereirah (Radbaz).
If a common person gave him a cup [of wine] to drink [on the Sabbath], he should say:32This is an extension of the principles stated in Halachah 7. In this instance as well, the common person had invited him to dine with him on the Sabbath and thus he was unable to make the separations before the Sabbath. "What I will leave in the bottom of the cup is [part of] the tithes,33Since demai is a Rabbinic decree, we may rely on the principle of bereirah, that a separation made afterwards is retroactively considered as if was made beforehand. Thus the wine in the cup is not considered as tevel even though the tithes were not actually separated until later [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 72:2)]. as is the remainder of the tithes which are adjacent to it. That portion which I [first] designated as the tithes is terumat ma'aser for the remainder which is adjacent to it. The second tithe is located at the brim of the cup and its [holiness] is transferred to the money."34I.e., the money he has set aside at home for the redemption of the second tithe. He may then [drink] the cup, leaving a portion equivalent to [the amount to be separated as] terumat ma'aser351/100th of the cup. in the bottom of the cup.
Similarly, if a colleague invites him to drink on the Sabbath,36The Radbaz questions why the Rambam deviates from the wording used by the Mishnah (Demai 7:1) which speaks of a person inviting a colleague to dine. he should make such a stipulation on Friday with regard to everything that he will desire to partake of at his [home].Similarly, when a worker does not trust his employer [with regard to the tithing of the food that he is given],37We are speaking about a situation in which the worker is entitled to partake of the produce as a result of a contractual stipulation and not because the Torah gives him the right to do so. See Chapter 5, Halachah 9. he should take one fig and say:38In contrast to the previous halachot, this is not speaking about a situation where the person partakes of the food on the Sabbath. Instead, it is speaking about a situation during the week and the separation is made at the time the tithes are designated. "This and the nine which follow are considered as tithes for the 100 that I will eat. This one is considered as terumat ma'aser for the ten39Actually, the nine. that follow. The ten40Here also, the intent is nine. See Chapter 7, Halachah 1. that follow after that are considered as the second tithe and their [holiness] is transferred to [this] money." He then takes the fig that he set aside and gives it to the priest.The worker should separate the money for the second tithe from his own [funds].41Since he will use this money for food in Jerusalem, he will not suffer a loss by separating it from his own. For it is a condition of the court that the terumat ma'aser should come from the employer42I.e., the worker is entitled to take an extra fig from the employer as reimbursement for the produce he gives the priest as terumat ma'aser. and the second tithe from the worker.
[Our Sages] did not obligate bakers to separate the second tithe [from grain] that is demai,43In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 2:4, based on Yoma 9a), the Rambam writes that this leniency was instituted because the local officials would keep steady watch over the bakers and regulate their sales, preventing them from charging higher prices. In consideration of their position, our Sages did not require them to separate the second tithe. only terumat ma'aser. It is separated in a state of ritual purity together with the challah. The purchaser must separate the second tithe.44For he will not be suffering a loss, for he will use the money from the second tithe to purchase food in Jerusalem. For the baker, however, making this separation would be a severe loss, for he would never spend all the money for the grain he uses on his own provisions in Jerusalem.When does the above apply? To one who sells in his store or at the entrance to his store. If, however, he sells it to a wholesale baker or to a store adjacent to a wholesale baker,45In which instance, the initial baker is not pressured to lower his price to the same degree. he is obligated to separate the second tithe as well.
[The following rules apply when] two people harvested their vineyards into a common vat, and one of them is not trusted with regard to the tithes. Even though the one who is trusted [with regard to the tithes] already tithed his own produce,46I.e., they divided the grapes originally and he tithed his grapes before they were crushed and made into wine. when he takes his portion of the wine, he is obligated to separate tithes as one does for demai for the portion of the common person.47I.e., he must separate tithes for the share of his partner.What is implied? If they were equal partners and one takes 200 log as his portion, he should separate one log as terumat ma'aserand ten48Actually, the nine. log as the second tithe for the 100 log [of the common person]. [This is all that is required,] for he already separated the tithes for the produce that was definitely not tithed for half of the entire quantity in the vat.49We assume that each drop of wine is equally blended between the tithed portion and the portion that is demai. Thus the share to be tithed is no more than half the amount the person is taking, for he already separated the tithes for his own share.In his gloss to this halachah, the Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, noting that the restrictions regarding demai are Rabbinic in origin and that the principle of bereirah can be applied in questions of Rabbinic Law. Hence, based on this principle, we could say that retroactively, it could be considered that when the person separated the tithes for his portion, he was separating the tithes for the portion that he would ultimately receive.The Ra'avad explains that it is possible to say that this principle is not applied as a penalty to the person. He is penalized, because he should not have mixed his produce with that of a common person. The Radbaz amplifies this explanation, stating that by mixing his produce together with that of a common person he caused the terumat ma'aser that will be separated to become impure. The Kessef Mishneh explains that initially when the separation was first made, the two batches of produce were not mixed together. Hence, it is not appropriate to say that the separation he is making now will affect the entire quantity.If, however, they were full partners and did not make a division until the wine was produce, the person who is conscientious in his observance need not separate more than the tithes for his own portion. There is no need for him to be concerned about the share of the common person. For within this context, we apply the principle of bereirah and assume that retroactively, each one is receiving his own share and hence has no responsibility for the share of his colleague. Similarly, if his share was a third or a fourth, he must separate [the tithes from the produce he takes] proportionately.50If his share of the produce was one-third, he would have separated that amount of the total yield. Thus he would have to tithe two-thirds of the produce he receives.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
When a person makes a commitment to be considered trustworthy1Such a person is called a chavair. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 2:3), the Rambam explains that this term is used because, as indicated by the following halachah, the term refers to Torah scholars. Chavair means "friend." This term is appropriate to be used with regard to Torah scholars, because since their friendship is based on the Torah, it is true friendship, for its motivation is for the sake of heaven. with regard to the tithes [so that] his produce will not be considered as demai, he must tithe [the produce] he eats,2Whether his own produce or produce he is given by others. that which he sells, and that which he purchases,3Both produce that he purchases for his own consumption and that which he purchases for commercial purposes. and he must not accept the hospitality of a common person. He must make these commitments in public.4From Hilchot Tumat Mishkav UMoshav 10:5, it appears that he must make these statements in the presence of three people who are themselves considered as trustworthy in this regard. When trustworthy witnesses5I.e., witnesses who meet the criteria for acceptable witnesses spelled out in Hilchot Edut. [testify] that he made these commitments in public and that he continually observe these practices, he is considered trustworthy [and his word is accepted if] he says that his produce has been tithed.
Every Torah scholar is always considered trustworthy. There is no necessity to investigate his [conduct]. His children, the members of his household, his servants, and his wife, are given the same status. When a Torah scholar dies and leaves produce, even if it was gathered on the day of his death, we assume that [the appropriate separations were made].6I.e., we assume that he separated the tithes from the produce before he died, for "We can presume that a chavair will not release anything from under his hand unless the appropriate separations have been made" (Pesachim 9a).
When the daughter of a common person or his wife7I.e., after she is divorced or widowed from the common person. marries a chavair or the servant8I.e., a Canaanite servant, for a Jewish servant is not sold to another master (Hilchot Avadim 4:10). [of a common person] was sold to a chavair, they must accept the [above] requirements as at the outset.9I.e., if a woman or servant does not have a history of non-observance, it is assumed that when they become part of a chavair's home, they will accept the standards of the home. In this instance, however, because they have a history of non-observance, they must formally accept the chavair's standards. When the daughter of a chavair or his wife marries a common person or the servant [of a chavair] was sold to a common person, we assume that they maintain their observance10This applies even when they are in the common person's domain. until they act in a manner that arouses suspicion. A son or a servant of a chavair who would frequently visit a common person must formally accept [the above requirements].11I.e., since he freely associates with the common people, we suspect that he has accepted certain dimensions of their lifestyle. When a son or a servant of a common person would frequently visit a chavair, as long as he is in his domain, he is considered like a chavair. When he departs, he is considered as a common person.12Rambam LeAm compares the final two clauses of this halachah and draws an ethical lesson. It is more likely that a person with proper habits will become lax due to the bad habits of a friend than a person with improper habits will change to the better due a friend's positive influence.
When a person himself is not considered as trustworthy, but one of his sons or servants or another member of his family is, food may be taken from him based on their statements.13I.e., if they state that the appropriate separations have been made from the produce, we accept their word. We do not harbor suspicions concerning the matter.
If a person was considered trustworthy, but his wife was not considered trustworthy,14The Jerusalem Talmud (Demai 2:2) compares this to dwelling with a snake in its den. we may purchase produce from him,15For the sale of produce will be under his direct supervision. but we do not accept his hospitality. If his wife is trustworthy and he is not, we may accept his hospitality, but we do not purchase produce from him. May a curse be visited on one whose wife is trustworthy, but he is not.
A chavair should not serve as a waiter at a drinking party or a feast of a common person unless all [the food and drink] have been tithed and the appropriate separations made under his supervision.16I.e., he cannot rely on the common person's word that the separations have been made. He must supervise the separations himself. Therefore if one sees a chavair serving at a drinking party or a feast of a common person, he can operate under the presumption that the tithes and other separations have been made.17To cite a contemporary application of this concept: If one sees a mashgiach, kashrut supervisor, in a restaurant, one may assume that the food is kosher.If we see such a person eating together with a common person, we cannot assume that the food served at the feast has been tithed. Perhaps the chavair is relying on the stipulations made in his heart.18As explained in Chapter 9, Halachot 7-11, a chavair may eat at a common person's home and separate the tithes by leaving over portions of food. He separates the tithes for his portion alone and not for all the food served. If he is serving the meal, the responsibility for the kashrut of the food is his. If he is merely dining, he has no general responsibility as stated in the following halachah.
Just as a person may eat with a common person and rely on the conditions in his heart, so too, he must make a stipulation with regard to what his son eats.19I.e., just as the previous halachah explains how the chavair must make stipulations for himself, so too, he must make stipulations for his son. [This applies] even if his son is in another place.20The son was eating together with a common person, but the father was not. He does not have to make a stipulation with regard to another person aside from his son even if that person was together with him at the feast.Therefore if the son of a chavair is present at a feast with a common person, we cannot assume that the food was tithed, for perhaps [the chavair] made a stipulation for [the food] his son ate.21As the previous halachah stated with regard to his own self.
When a common person gives a meah22A silver coin of little value employed in the Talmudic era. to a chavair and tells him: "Buy me a bunch of vegetables or a cake," he may purchase it for him without any qualification and is not obligated to tithe it.23I.e., as stated in Halachah 1, a chavair must tithe what he buys and sells. Nevertheless, in this instance, he is not considered as buying or selling, but merely as acting as an agent for the common person.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 6:12), the Rambam elaborates in his description of this situation, explaining that we are speaking about a situation where the seller of the produce is also a chavair and knows that the other chavair has been sent by the common person to purchase produce. If the chavair who is the agent asks to purchase produce without qualifying his statements and explaining who he is purchasing it for, the seller must give him tithed produce. For he knows that the agent is purchasing for the common person and he does not want to cause the common person to sin. If [the agent] exchanged the meah, he is obligated to tithe [the produce he purchased].24If the seller sees that the agent uses his own money, he might suspect that he is purchasing the produce for himself and not for the common person. Hence, the seller might not tithe the produce (Kessef Mishneh).If the chavair was explicit and did not buy the produce without explanation, but instead said: "This bunch of produce that I am purchasing from you is being bought for my colleague and this bunch is being bought for myself," he is obligated to tithe [only] the produce that he took for himself. He does not have to tithe [the bunch he purchased for his colleague].25The seller will not give him untithed produce for the common person, because he fears that he will partake of it without tithing it. He may, however, give the chavair untithed produce, for he knows that the chavair will not partake of it without tithing it (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah loc. cit.). If these [two batches of produce] became intermingled, even if one measure [belonging to the chavair] becomes mixed with 100 [belonging to the common person], he must make the separations as if the entire quantity was demai.26We do not apply the principle of bereirah and say that the produce that the agent takes as his own was in fact the produce from which he separated the tithes.All the above applies if the purchaser does not ask the seller if the produce was tithed. If, however, he asks the seller and the seller states that the produce was tithed, the agent does not have to make any separations, since the seller is also trustworthy (ibid.). Kin'at Eliyahu questions the very basis of the Rambam's assumption. For if the seller is a chavair, he would always tithe his produce and there would be no obligation to tithe produce purchased from him. See also the Radbaz who understands the halachah as speaking about a seller who is a common person. [Only] afterwards27I.e., after he separated the tithes. may he give the produce to the colleague who sent him to purchase them for him.
When five people tell one person: "Bring us five bunches of vegetables," and [the agent] brings each person one bunch individually, the chavairim among [the recipients] are required to tithe only their portions.28We do not require them to separate tithes for the entire amount. They are not responsible for the portion of the other individuals. If [the agent] brought [the entire quantity] mixed together, the chavairim among [the recipients] are required to separate tithes for the entire amount.29Since the portion belonging to the common person is not distinct, we do not apply the principle of bereirah (Radbaz). Thus when making the division, it is as if each person is selling to the other (Kessef Mishneh). Alternatively, the agent indeed purchased the produce for all five individuals and then the entire mixture became intermingled (Rav Yosef Korcus).
When a common person tells a chavair: "Collect figs for me from my fig tree," the chavair may snack from them30Without tithing. Since a present is not like a sale (Chapter 5, Halachah 6), he is not considered to have purchased the figs from the common person. That would have required him to tithe (Radbaz). and tithe them as one tithes demai.31If he desires to eat a significant meal of them. He cannot be certain that the produce is untithed, because it is possible that the common person separated the tithes from other produce (ibid.). The Kessef Mishneh, by contrast, explains that there is an error in the text and he is in fact making separations from produce that is definitely untithed.If a chavair told a common person to gather figs for him and another chavair heard him, the latter may partake [of the figs] without tithing them. [The rationale is that] a chavair will not release produce from his domain unless the appropriate separations were made. [Thus] we can assume that [the owner] separated [terumah and the tithes for this produce] from other [produce]. Although [generally] we do not suspect that a chavair will separate terumah from produce that is not in the same place as the terumah,32See Hilchot Terumah 3:17 with regard to the great terumah, ibid.:20 with regard to terumat ma'aser. he may do so to prevent the common person from confronting a spiritual stumbling block.33For we fear that the common person will partake of the produce without separating the tithes and thus without separating terumat ma'aser. We do not, however, fear that the common person will partake of produce without separating the great terumah.
It is permitted to feed34In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 3:1), the Rambam explains that this wording implies that the poor are given only one meal's worth of food. If they are given a substantial amount, they must make the appropriate separations. Support for this leniency can be derived from the fact that the majority of the common people do in fact separate the tithes. demai to the poor and to guests.35Without separating tithes from it. This is a leniency instituted so that people will give charity and show hospitality (ibid.).Although guests may themselves be wealthy, since they are required to accept hospitality, they are considered as poor (Meiri, Eruvin 31a). They must, however, be notified of such. If the poor person or the guest desire to make the appropriate separations, they should.
The collectors of charity collect from all people36I.e., even common people. without clarifying [whether separations have been made] and they divide the donations without specifications. If one desires to make the appropriate separations, he should.
When a doctor who is a chavair is feeding a common person who is sick37But not in mortal danger. Needless to say, if the sick person is in mortal danger, any prohibition can be violated to save his life. A person who is not dangerously ill is generally not permitted to partake of any substance that is forbidden by Rabbinic decree (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 155:3). Nevertheless, since the prohibition against demai is more of a safeguard than an outright ban, leniency was granted. from the produce of a common person, he should place [the food] in his hand, but not in his mouth.38So that he will not be directly responsible for feeding him demai. If the demai belonged to the doctor, he should not even place it in his hand. And similarly, if he knows that it is definitely tevel,39Even if it belongs to the common person. it is forbidden to place it in his hand.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
It is forbidden to sell demai to a common person or to send demai [as a present to a common person], because one assists him in partaking of forbidden food. It can, however, be sold or sent to a Torah scholar, for a Torah scholar will not partake of it until he tithes it or until a trustworthy person tells him that it has been tithed.1Produce which definitely has not been tithed may not be sent even to a Torah scholar. It may, however, be sent to him in a pressing situation (Chapter 6, Halachah 6).
All of those who add to the measure when they sell in large quantities, e.g., wholesalers and grain merchants are permitted to sell and send demai [as a present].2I.e., to Torah scholars, but not to common people, as stated in the previous halachah. Since they add to the measure,3And the purchaser receives more than what he deserves [the Rambam's Commnentary to the Mishnah (Demai 2:4)]. our Sages ordained that the purchaser or the recipient be the one who separates the tithes from the demai.4Hence, the purchaser must assume that the produce is untithed. When, by contrast, people measure with a small measure, since the seller is the one who profits, he should make the separations. [Hence,] he should not sell or send [produce] unless the appropriate separations have been made.
What is meant by a large measure? With regard to dry measure, half a se'ah;5A se'ah is 8.3 liter in modern measure according to Shiurei Torah and 16.2 liter according to Chazon Ish. with regard to liquid measure, something that holds a dinar's6A dinar is a silver coin of significant value. worth of the said liquid.
Even though a person sells baskets of olives and grapes or containers of vegetables by estimation,7I.e., instead of weighing the produce, the seller gives the purchaser a full basket or container, whatever its weight might be. One might think that since the seller is selling by estimation, he is considered as being generous like the wholesalers mentioned above. The Rambam (based on Demai 2:5) teaches us that this is not so.The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, noting that the mishnah quotes Rabbi Yossi as exempting the seller in this situation and does not mention a differing opinion. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that the wording of the mishnah indicates that Rabbi Yossi's view is being cited as a minority opinion and not as a view accepted by all. he is forbidden to sell them as demai.8I.e., he must make the required separations first.
If one of them, [either the seller or the buyer] - whether the sale is made with a small measure or a large measure9I.e., the individual who would not be obligated to make the separations suggests that they be made as a joint effort, thus obligating himself even though he would otherwise be exempt (Radbaz in response to the Ra'avad). - says: "Come let us make the separations for this produce," the seller should separate terumat ma'aser and the purchaser should separate the second tithe.10I.e., the separations are not made equally. This is an edict of the court.
When a chavair and a common person inherit [the estate] of their father who was a common person,11And thus we cannot assume that the produce was tithed beforehand. [the chavair] may say: "Take the wheat in this-and-this place and I will take the wheat in this-and-that place. Take the wine in this-and-this place and I will take the wine in this-and-that place."12I.e., it is not considered as if he is exchanging one batch of produce for another and he is not required to separate tithes for his brother's portion. The rationale is that with regard to matters concerning Rabbinic Law, including demai, we apply the principle of bereirah, and retroactively - after the division of the property has been made - we consider that from the outset, it was as if the estate had originally been bequeathed to each of the sons separately, according to this division. He should not say: "Take wheat and I will take the barley. Take the produce that is fresh and I will take what is dry," for this is considered as selling demai.13For we do not apply the principle of bereirah with regard to two different types of produce.
When a person is carrying [a load of] vegetables,14I.e., produce that is demai which had reached the stage where the tithes were required to be separated from it. his load becomes heavy for him and he desires to cast some vegetables on the road to lessen his burden, he should not cast them away until he tithes them.15If produce is declared hefker, ownerless, before the obligation to tithe becomes incumbent upon it, there is no need to tithe it afterwards. If, however, that obligation has already taken effect, declaring produce ownerless does not remove that obligation (see Chapter 3, Halachah 20; Radbaz). [This is necessary] so that it shall not create a stumbling block for the common people who consume demai.
When a person purchases vegetables16I.e., produce that is demai which had reached the stage where the tithes were required to be separated from it. from the market and draws them into his possession, even though he did not weigh them, measure them, or pay for them, if he changes his mind and returns them to the owner of the store,17I.e., the owner of the store must consent to accept the produce, for as explained in the following note, the purchaser has already acquired the produce. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 3:2). he should not return them until he tithes them.18According to Rabbinic Law, once a person draws movable property (the vegetables) into his possession, he acquires it. The fact that he does not perform any of the other activities mentioned does not detract from his acquisition. Hence, by returning it to the seller, he is in effect selling it back to him. Hence, he is required to tithe it.
[The following laws apply when a person] discovers produce on the way. If the majority [of the local populace] bring the produce to their homes, he is not required to tithe it, for the obligation to tithe has not yet taken effect.19Since the obligation to tithe will take effect when the person brings it home, we assume that he tithed it. Hence, the person who discovers it is not required to tithe it again [(the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Machshirin 2:10)]. It must be noted that the Radbaz and many other commentaries offer different interpretations of this law. Indeed, the Rambam in Chapter 3, Halachah 22, appears to operate according to another perspective. If, however, the majority bring it to sell in the marketplace, it is considered as demai.20The person bringing his produce to the marketplace may not tithe it until he reaches there, because until that point it is not common to partake of it in an substantial manner only as a snack. Hence, it is possible that it is tevel (ibid.). Nevertheless, the possibility also exists that the tithes have been separated and hence it is considered as demai. If the ratio is half and half, it is considered as demai.21As a safeguard. One might ask: Seemingly, the situation is a sefek-sefeikah, a situation where the doubt is compounded, i.e., perhaps it came from those who bring it home. Even if it came from those who bring it to the marketplace, perhaps these individuals tithed it. Nevertheless, extra stringency is shown with regard to the prohibition against demai than is shown with regard to other prohibitions (Kessef Mishneh to Halachah 13).
If a person took [the produce]22I.e., produce discovered in a community where it is customary to bring produce to the marketplace. with the intent of partaking of it and changed his mind [and decided to] store it, he should not keep it until he tithes it, so that it will not present a stumbling block to others.23I.e., the members of his household who might partake of it under the impression that it has been tithed. If he took it originally only so that it would not perish,24I.e., he took it without the intent of acquiring it as his own, but only to protect it from enemy armies, a fire, or the like [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 3:3)]. he can store it25Without tithing it. Since he did not acquire it as his own, he is under no obligation to tithe it. until he desires to partake of it, send it [as a present], or sell it. At that point, he should tithe it as demai.
The extremities of vegetables that are found in a garden26I.e., the leaves pruned by a gardener. Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ediot 3:3). Compare to Hilchot Terumah 11:10. are exempt from [the laws of] demai.27For they discard produce that is really unsuitable for ordinary consumption. Those that belong to a homeowner and found in his home28The tops and the stems of vegetables that are discarded by a homeowner when preparing the vegetables to be served. are obligated [to be tithed].29For even though the homeowner may not desire to serve them, they are still fit to be eaten. Those on a dung heap - wherever it is found - are permitted.30For they are no longer considered as food.
When a person gives [produce] to a female inn-keeper to cook or bake for him,31In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 3:5), the Rambam explains that guests would give the mistress of an inn flour and meat and she would prepare meals for them. As the Rambam states, this woman is suspect to exchange the food given for other food of the same type, but of lesser quality. She rationalizes that since she cooks for her guests for little or no payment, she is entitled to make this exchange (Chullin 6b). he must tithe what he gives her - lest it present a stumbling block to others32I.e., he must tithe the produce he gives her, lest she give it to others and they partake of it without tithing it. - and what he receives from her,33Lest she have given him untithed produce. for she is suspect to exchange produce belonging to one person for that belonging to another. He may, by contrast, give produce to his mother-in-law - whether her daughter is his arusah or his wife34According to Jewish Law, marriage is a two-staged process involving erusin, "consecration," and nisuin, "marriage." After erusin, the marriage bond has been established and the woman cannot marry another man without a divorce. Nevertheless, the couple do not begin living together as man and wife until the second stage, nisuin. The Rambam is clarifying that even if the couple have not begun living together, he still trusts his mother-in-law. - or to his neighbor to cook or bake for him and he need not show concern, neither for tithes, nor for produce of the Sabbatical year,35I.e., we do not suspect that he gave produce from the sixth year and these women exchanged it for produce of the seventh year which is forbidden. because [these individuals] are not suspect to exchange produce.36This appears to represent a reversal of the Rambam's ruling in his Commentary to Mishnah (Demai 3:6). The Radbaz explains that the Rambam's ruling here is based on the Jerusalem Talmud.When does the above apply? When he [also] gave her yeast for a dough and spices for a cooked dish. If he did not, we must show concern because of the tithes and because of [produce of] the Sabbatical year.37For even though she is not suspect to exchange, we fear that she used forbidden yeast or spices. Therefore in the Sabbatical year, [the bread] is forbidden, for perhaps the yeast came from produce that grew in the Sabbatical year.
When a person brings wheat38From which the tithes have already been separated. to a miller who is a common person, he may assume that their status is unchanged.39Both with regard to tithes and the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year. He is not suspect to exchange it [for other wheat].40Though we suspect that he is lax in his observance of the mitzvah of tithing, we do not suspect that he will commit a transgression that involves a colleague's money (see Gittin 61b). If he brought them to a gentile miller, they are demai; [we suspect] that he exchanged it for the wheat of a common person.41Who also gave him wheat to grind without separating the tithes from it [the Rambam's Commentary to Mishnah (Demai 3:6)]. We do not know whether he tithed them. Therefore, they are considered as demai.The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling: Seemingly, the situation is one of compounded doubt (sefek-sefeikah). Perhaps the gentile did not exchange the grain. Even if he exchanged it, perhaps he exchanged it with grain from a common person which need be tithed only because of a doubt. (The Ra'avad himself accepts the Rambam's ruling, but uses it as support for his thesis that there is an obligation for a Jew to tithe produce belonging to a gentile if it comes into his possession, for he maintains that the possibility is that the gentile exchanged it with his own produce.)The Kessef Mishneh does not accept that thesis and instead offers a resolution, explaining that extra stringency is shown with regard to the prohibition against demai than is shown with regard to other prohibitions. He supports that contention based on Shabbat 23a which states that the majority of the common people separate tithes and yet our Sages imposed stringencies. Similarly, if one entrusts [produce] to a common person for safe-keeping, it is permitted. He is not suspect to exchange the produce entrusted to him.42With regard to produce given to a gentile for safekeeping, see Halachah 15.
When a common person is managing a store belonging to a chavair, it is permitted [to partake of the produce].43Without tithing. We do not suspect that he exchanged it. [This applies] even if the chavair [only] goes in and out [of the store from time to time].44And is not involved in the management of every particular of its operation. This reflects a general principle with regard to questions involving the kashrut of a person's produce. As long as the owner makes his presence known from time to time, his workers - even gentiles - are not suspected to exchange his produce with other produce.Implied is that if the owner does not enter from time to time, we would suspect that the worker would exchange the produce. The Radbaz notes that the previous ruling implies that a Jew who is a common person would not be suspect to exchange the produce even if the owner did not enter from time to time. He therefore suggests that this phrase be omitted from the text. There are, however, other commentaries who offer explanations why a manager is judged more stringently than the bailee mentioned in the previous halachah. After all, he is working on an ongoing basis.
When produce was entrusted to a gentile for safekeeping, [the produce one receives is] considered as the gentile's produce, for we assume that he exchanged it for his own produce.What are laws that govern it? If the tasks necessary to prepare the produce were not completed as of yet and they were completed by the Jew after he took back the produce he entrusted, he must separate the tithes as we explained.45Hilchot Terumot 1:11. If the produce that he entrusted was tevel and the tasks necessary for its preparation were completed, he is obligated to separate the tithes, for perhaps the gentile did not exchange it. For this reason, it appears to me, that the status of the tithes he separates is doubtful.46I.e., since it is possible that the gentile did exchange, it is possible that there is no obligation to tithe.If he entrusted ordinary produce from which the required separations were made, he is not obligated to separate anything, for even if the gentile exchanged [it for his own], it is exempt. As we explained in Hilchot Terumot,47Hilchot Terumot, loc cit.. [the obligation to tithe] is on "your grain," and not the grain of a gentile.48We do not suspect that the gentile exchanged the grain with grain belonging to a Jew who did not separate the tithes, because it is not that common for people to entrust their produce to others. In contrast, people do bring containers of grain to a miller. Hence as mentioned in Halachah 13, we fear that the miller exchanged one person's grain with another's (the Radbaz and Kessef Mishneh in resolution of the Ra'avad's objections).

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
When a person purchases produce from a person upon whom we do not rely with regard to the tithes1From Halachah 16, it is apparent that here the Rambam is speaking about a common person whose level of observance is a matter of doubt. If, however, it is known that a person is lax with regard to the separation of tithes, his word is not accepted even on the Sabbath. and forgot2The Jerusalem Talmud (Demai 4:1) emphasizes that this leniency is granted only when a person failed to tithe out of forgetfulness. If he intentionally did not tithe the produce, there is no leniency upon which he can rely to partake of it on the Sabbath. to tithe it before the commencement of the Sabbath or a festival - upon which he may not tithe it3Hilchot Shabbat 23:9, 14; Shvitat Yom Tov 4:26. - he should ask that person regarding their status. If he tells him that it is tithed, he may rely on his word on [that] Sabbath.4Because of the holiness of the day, the common people regard transgressing on the Sabbath as more severe than transgressing on other days [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 4:1)].Similarly, if another person upon whom we cannot rely tells him that it was tithed, he may partake of it because of his word on that Sabbath.5In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam notes that there is a general principle (Kiddushin 63b) that a person will not sin unless he personally benefits. Thus one might think that we could rely on this person's word, even during the week. Hence, it is necessary to explain that we rely on his statements only on the Sabbath. The rationale is that the presumption that he will not lie applies to most people. There are, however, some that will lie even on the Sabbath [the Jerusalem Talmud (Demai 4:1)]. [This applies] even if he possesses other produce of that type from which the separations have been made. [The rationale is that] the awe of Sabbath affects the common people and they will not violate a transgression on that day.
Even though one relies on the word of a common person to eat on the Sabbath, he should not partake of that produce after the conclusion of the Sabbath until he separates the tithes as appropriate for demai for the entire amount, what he ate on the Sabbath and what remains. For the leniency [to] trust him was granted only out of necessity for that Sabbath.6The Rambam is clarifying that the statement made in Halachah 2: that we trust that the common person will not lie on the Sabbath is conditional. It is a leniency accepted to allow a person to honor the Sabbath alone.If the Sabbath and a festival followed in succession,7I.e., the festival fell on Friday or on Sunday. if one asked [a common person concerning produce] on one, he may partake of it on the other,8This leniency is granted even though the two days are not considered as a single continuum of holiness (see Hilchot Eruvin 8:5). because he did not have the opportunity to tithe in the interim. Similar laws apply with regard to the two days [for each festival celebrated] in the Diaspora.
When a person takes an oath9I.e., he takes an oath that he will never benefit from him unless he partakes of his hospitality [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 4:3)]. (Although the mishnah speaks of taking a vow, the Rambam speaks of an oath.) The oath is taken to emphasize to the colleague that the failure to accept his hospitality is a sign of serious enmity between them. Hence, this leniency was granted to encourage feelings of closeness.Kaftor VePerach, ch. 39, states that we are speaking about a situation where the oath was taken on the Sabbath itself. Otherwise, the guest could make a stipulation allowing for a retroactive separation as described in Chapter 9, Halachah 7. The Radbaz, by contrast, states that we are speaking about a situation where the interaction took place during the week. Otherwise, there would be nothing new taught by this halachah, everything could be understood from the previous one. that a colleague partake of his hospitality on the Sabbath, but [the guest] does not trust [the host] with regard to tithes, he may ask him10Whether the tithes were separated or not. and eat based on his statements the first Sabbath. On the second Sabbath, even though he took an oath not to benefit from him unless he accepts his hospitality, he should not eat until he tithes as one does for demai.
When we see a person who is not trustworthy11From Halachah 16, it is apparent that here the Rambam is speaking about a common person whose level of observance is a matter of doubt. If, however, it is known that a person is lax with regard to the separation of tithes, his word is not accepted even on the Sabbath. [with regard to the separation of tithes] separate terumat ma'aser from produce belonging to him that is demai and we saw that it later fell back in, whether to that [store of produce] or another and he said: "I separated it,"12I.e., the terumat ma'aser fell in a manner in which it was distinct and could easily be separated from the store of produce. we accept his word - even during the week - and may partake of the produce on that basis. Just as the common people are in dread of the Sabbath,13As stated in Halachah 2. so too, they are in dread of dimua,14Produce into which terumah or terumat ma'aser has been mixed. The rationale is that partaking of such substances is punishable by death at the hand of Heaven. and they are not suspect to cause others to partake of such produce.15The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer interpretations that substantiate the Rambam's ruling.
When we see that a person who is not trustworthy separates the first tithes from such produce and he says that he separated the second tithes, his word is accepted.16The Jerusalem Talmud (Demai 4:1) explains the logic: If he is willing to separate the first tithe which is given to a Levite, he is certainly willing to separate the second tithe which remains his own (but must be eaten in Jerusalem). See Halachah 15. If he separated the second tithe in our presence and said that he separated the first tithe, his word is not accepted, because the second tithe belongs to him.17While the first tithe must be given away as above. [Thus] one who is trusted with regard to the second tithe is not trusted with regard to the first, but one who is trusted with regard to the first is trusted with regard to the second.Accordingly, when a person who is not trusted brings produce from his home and says: "This is the first tithe," his word is accepted18The Ra'avad objects to this ruling, stating that it is not necessarily a logical continuation of the ruling in the previous clause. and there is no need to separate terumot19I.e., terumah and terumat ma'aser, if he said that he made these separations (Kessef Mishneh). and tithes20I.e., both the first tithe and the second tithe. from [the produce separated].21This bracketed addition represents the resolution offered by the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh to the Ra'avad's objection. If he says: "This is the second tithe," his word is not accepted. [The produce separated] is considered as demai and we must separate terumat ma'aser from it. It appears to me that he must redeem the entire amount.22I.e., even the amount separated as terumat ma'aser. For although we are stringent and do not accept his word, we do not reject his statements entirely. Certainly, he himself must bear their consequences and consider the separated produce as if it is required to be redeemed (Radbaz).
When one tells a person whose word is not accepted with regard to the tithes: "Purchase [produce] for me from someone who tithes." And that person went and brought him produce, his word is not accepted.23Since he is not trustworthy in this regard, his word is not accepted with regard to others as well. Even though one might say that he would not lie since his falsehood could easily be revealed, for it is possible to ask the identity of the seller and determine if he is trustworthy, the agent could always excuse himself saying: "I thought he was trustworthy" (Radbaz).Although one might argue that there is no reason for him to sin, for he will not benefit from it, that argument is not accepted. For the ease the person experiences in bringing the produce from a close person could be considered enough of a benefit to influence him to lie. If he told him: "Purchase [produce] for me from so-and-so," the other person's word is accepted if he says that he purchased it from him, for he will fear [to lie], lest [the principal] ask that person.24And the lie be detected. If he went to purchase [the produce] from the person who was named, but said: "I could not find him, so I purchased it for you from another person who is trustworthy," his word is not accepted.
[The following rules apply when a person] enters a city where he does not know anyone and asks: "Who is trustworthy? Who tithes?" If someone answers: "I am," his word is not accepted.25Because he would personally benefit from the wayfarer's acceptance of his statements.The Ra'avad clarifies the Rambam's ruling, noting that his text of the Jerusalem Talmud (Demai 4:5) states: "In the presence [of the person being recommended], his word is not accepted. Outside his presence, his word is accepted." The Radbaz states that this concept is implied by the Rambam's words, since "so-and-so" implies that the person is not present. The Kessef Mishneh interprets the standard version of the Jerusalem Talmud as follows: "If he says he is not trustworthy, in his presence, he is not considered trustworthy (for he would not say so unless it was true). If he says so outside his presence, he is considered trustworthy (for the other person's statements are considered as slander)." This interpretation fits the Rambam's ruling. If he says: "So-and-so," his word is accepted26Because we follow the principle that a person will not sin unless he personally benefits (Kiddushin 63b). This, however, is a leniency, granted to the person, because he is a wayfarer [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 4:7)]. and [the wayfarer] may purchase [produce] from that person and eat on that basis. If [the wayfarer] went and purchased from that person and asked him: "Who here sells vintage wine?" and the person answers: "The one who sent you," his word is accepted even though it appears that they are in collusion.27And thus could be lying. See parallels in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 20:11.
When does the above apply? When [the wayfarer] is not familiar with any person in that place.28The Ra'avad qualifies the Rambam's ruling, stating that it applies only when the person he knows is trustworthy. If he is not trustworthy, his recommendation cannot be relied upon. Rav Yosef Korcus states that this is also the Rambam's intent. If, however, he is familiar with people there, he should purchase only from a person [with an established reputation] for observance.29In the present age, this problem is solved by Rabbis and/or institutions giving kashrut certificates that are hung in the respective stores or institutions. If he stays in that place for 30 days, even if he is not familiar with anyone there, he should purchase produce only from an expert.30For after 30 days have passed, the person has had ample time to familiarize himself with the place and there is no need for further leniency. He will certainly have found a place that will offer him hospitality (Radbaz).
These leniencies were granted only with regard to terumot and the tithes,31The rationale for the leniency is that the majority of the common people do separate tithes. The laws of demai are merely an additional stringency. but with regard to produce of the Sabbatical year and questions of ritual purity, one should purchase only from a person [with an established reputation] for observance.32For the common people are generally lax in observance of these prohibitions.
When donkey-drivers33Who bring produce from other places to a city for sale. enter a city and one says: "The appropriate separations have not been made from my produce, but they have been made from my colleague's produce," his word is not accepted. [We fear that] perhaps they are colluding in deception.34The Radbaz asks: Why are we more suspicious here than in the situation mentioned in Halachah 7. In resolution, he explains that people coming to sell their merchandise from another place are more likely to act in collusion than two businessmen in a city.
When a person sells produce in Syria35As explained in Hilchot Terumot1:3, the status of Syria is an intermediate level between that of Eretz Yisrael and the Diaspora. There terumah and the tithes have to be separated because of Rabbinic decree, but not because of Scriptural Law. For this reason, our Sages did not enforce the restrictions of demai on such produce [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 6:11)]. and says that it comes from Eretz Yisrael,36And was purchased from a common person so that the restrictions associated with demai apply. the purchaser is required to tithe it.37The fact that they have been taken out of Eretz Yisrael is not significant. If he says that it has been tithed, his word is accepted.38And tithing is not required. [The rationale is that] the same person whose words aroused our suspicion also allayed it.39This is a general principle applicable in many areas, both in Jewish business law and with regard to the Torah's prohibitions. When our suspicions are based only on one person's statements, if that person makes a statement that allays those suspicions, we accept it. For our knowledge of the suspicious factor stems from his statements alone; there is no other evidence of such (ibid.). The rationale is that had he desired to lie, he would not have mentioned the factor that arouses the suspicions at the outset.If he says: "They are mine,"40I.e. "from my field in Syria;" i.e., a place from whose produce tithes must be separated according to Rabbinic decree and he does not say that he tithed the produce. [the purchaser] is obligated to tithe it.41Were he not to have said that they were from his own field, there would be no obligation to tithe the produce, because we would have assume it came from a gentile's field. If he says that it has been tithed, his word is accepted. [The rationale is that] the same statement that aroused our suspicion also allayed it. If it is known that [the seller] owns land in Syria and most [of the produce] he sells is from his own field, one who purchases from him is obligated to tithe,42I.e., even if he does not say specifically that they are his. for we assume that he brought the produce from his own field.
When poor people43Even if they are common people whose word is not ordinarily accepted with regard to tithes. say: "This produce is from leket, shichachah, and pe'ah,44Presents given the poor that are exempt from the obligations to tithe (Chapter 2, Halachah 9). their word is accepted as long as there are granaries in which leket, shichachah, and pe'ah can be found and provided [a poor person] is close enough to the granary so that he can go [to it] and return on the same day.If they said: "They are from the tithes given to the poor,"45In which instance we would assume that the terumot and the first tithe were also separated. their word is accepted throughout those years.46I.e., in the third and sixth years of the seventh year agricultural cycle. The word of these individuals is accepted only with regard to objects which people would ordinarily give [to the poor].
What is implied?47I.e., what is meant by the last statement that the ruling depends on whether it is common for people to give such articles as leket, shichachah, pe'ah, or as tithes to the poor. [Poor people say:] "This wheat is from leket, shichachah, and pe'ah,"48Pe'at HaSadeh states that the Rambam's words are chosen carefully. It is customary to give leket, shichachah, and pe'ah in the field. Hence, it is not likely that they were given as flour. The tithes for the poor, by contrast, are generally given from the home (see Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 6:10). Hence it is possible that flour was given to a poor person in fulfillment of that mitzvah. their word is accepted.49For it is common for people to leave grain as leket, shichachah,and pe'ah, but not to process the grain any further before giving it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 8:3)]. [If they say:] "This flour50I.e., if he says that a homeowner gave him flour, his word is not accepted. If, however, he says that he was given grain and he had it ground into flour himself, his word is accepted. from leket, shichachah, and pe'ah," their word is not accepted.51Because it is not common for a person to have grain ground into flour and then give the flour to the poor. Needless to say, their word is not accepted when they say that bread comes from presents to the poor. Instead, [such articles] should be tithed as demai is.
Similarly, their word is accepted with regard to kernels of rice [while in their husks]. Their word is not accepted, however, with regard to husked kernels or cooked ones.52For it was customary for people to give presents from rice while the kernels are still in their husks and not when they have been processed [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.)]. Our interpretation of the following clauses is also based on that source. Their word is accepted with regard to beans [in their kernels]. Their word is not accepted, however, with regard to raw, husked beans or cooked beans.Their word is accepted when they say that oil was from the tithe for the poor. Their word is not accepted, however, if they say it comes from leftover olives.53Which are left for the poor. We do not accept their word in this instance, for it is not common for a sufficient quantity of such olives to be left to make oil. Their word is accepted with regard to raw vegetables, but not with regard to cooked vegetables unless we are speaking about a small quantity. For it is customary for homeowners to give a poor person some vegetables from their pot. And since he can say: "A homeowner gave it to me," he can say: "I cooked it from the presents given me."54I.e., we accept his word based on the principle of miggo; were he to have desired to lie, he could have chosen a more plausible falsehood.
Similarly, the word of a Levite55Even if he is a common person. who says: "This produce is from the first tithe from which terumah was separated" is always56In contrast to leket, shichachah, pe'ah and the tithe for the poor concerning which the poor person's word is accepted only at certain times. accepted with regard to terumat ma'aser,57I.e., the Levite's word is accepted if he says that he separated terumat ma'aser from the tithes that he was given. just as the word of an Israelite is always accepted with regard to the great terumah.58Chapter 9, Halachah 1. In both cases, the transgression is punishable by death at the hand of Heaven. [The Levite's59Unless he is a chavair. word] is not accepted, however, with regard to exempting [the grain] from the second tithe.60I.e., if an Israelite purchases produce from a Levite who is not a chavair and the Levite states that the produce has been tithed and also the second tithe has been separated, the Levites word is not accepted. Although an Israelite's word is accepted regarding the second tithe when we see that he has separated the first tithe (Halachah 5), this does not hold true for a Levite. The rationale is that an Israelite makes a sacrifice when separating the first tithe, but a Levite does not.
All of the above61I.e., that produce could be purchased from a common person and the separations made afterwards. This concept applies also with regard to the subsequent laws mentioned in this chapter. See similar concepts in Hilchot Shemitah VeYoval 8:14. applies with regard to a common person who is neither suspect [to violate these prohibitions], nor trustworthy [in their observance]. If, however, someone is suspected of selling terumah as ordinary produce, it is forbidden to purchase anything from him that has a connection to terumah and the tithes.62For if terumah was mixed with the produce, the prohibition is much more severe. Even the intestines of fish [may not be purchased from him] because oil is mixed with them.63And we fear that the oil might be terumah or mixed with terumah. It is, however, only forbidden to purchase the produce that is being sold by such a person at that time. It is, by contrast, permitted to purchase from his storehouse, because he will fear to mix terumah into his stores [of produce], lest the matter become known and he lose everything.64I.e., if the Rabbis would discover that such a mixture would be made, they would declare his entire store of produce forbidden.Similarly, it is forbidden to purchase anything that has a connection to tithes from a person who is suspect of selling the second tithe65That has not been redeemed. as ordinary produce. All of this is a penalty [imposed] by Rabbinic decree.
When a person who is suspect to transgress attests [to the tithes being separated from produce] belonging to another person, his word is accepted.66The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the word of a person who is suspect is never accepted even when he testifies with regard to the produce of another person. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's view. [The rationale is that we operate] under the presumption that a person will not sin without receiving any benefit. Needless to say, this applies with regard to a common person.67For his word is accepted more readily than that of one who is suspect. Therefore, if a common person says: "[This produce] is tevel and this is terumah. This is definitely untithed and this is demai," his word is accepted, even with regard to his own produce.68For in these instances, his statements do not enable ordinary produce to be eaten. If he said: "The required separations have been made from this produce," his word is accepted with regard to the produce of others69But not with regard to his own. provided it does not appear that they are acting in collusion, as we explained.70In Halachah 10.
When a person sells produce to a colleague and, after the produce leaves his hand, he tells the purchaser: "The produce I sold you is tevel. The meat is meat from a firstborn animal.71Which was slaughtered before it was clarified that it possessed a disqualifying blemish. Thus it is forbidden to partake of it and it must be buried. And the wine is wine that was poured as a libation to a false deity.72And is hence, forbidden and must be destroyed. The letter of the law dictates that the seller's word should not be accepted, even if he is a chavair.73I.e., the seller claims that the sale was made in error. He wants to nullify the sale so that he can fulfill the mitzvah of tithing the produce and destroying the forbidden produce. Since the objects have already left the seller's hand, his word is not accepted whether he is a chavair or not. A person who is eager should be stringent with himself. If he accepts his word, [his conduct] is praiseworthy, even if [the seller] is a common person.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
Fruits that we can assume to be ownerless:1That grow wild and do not have an owner. Such produce does not have to be tithed. e.g., wild figs,2Our definition of this and the following terms are dependent on the definitions given in the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:1) as interpreted by Rav Kapach. brush berries, thorn apples, white figs, other species of wild figs, anise, dates that fall of the tree before they have swelled,3The literal translation is "when they will become yeast," the intent is when they will swell like bread into which yeast was placed. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:2). capers, coriander, and the like are free from the stringency of demai. One who purchases them from a common person does not have to separate terumat ma'aser or the second tithe from them for we assume that they grew ownerless. Even if a common person told him that they have not been tithed, they are exempt from the tithes until it is known that they grew from produce that was guarded.4In which instance even if generally, the species is exempt, in this instance, the produce must be tithed.
Produce that ripens first and last in a valley are exempt from the obligations of demai.5The owners generally leave such produce free to be taken by anyone, as the Rambam proceeds to explain. Hence, there is no obligation to separate tithes from it. Similar produce in a garden is liable, because it is watched.What is meant by produce that ripens first? All the produce that ripens before [the owner] employs a guard for the valley to protect his produce.What is meant by produce that ripens last? The produce that remains after the reapers have folded away their nets6The nets where grapes and figs that have been harvested are kept to dry [ibid. (Nedarim 8:4)]. in the field and left them without a guard. Similarly, vinegar made from wine dregs7The peels and seeds of the grapes and the dregs that are separated from the wine and fall to the bottom of the container [ibid. (Ma'aserot 5:6)].Our translation follows the standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah. There are manuscripts and early printings that stated tamarim instead of temadim. According to that version, the translation would be "date vinegar." The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, follow the version stated in the standard texts. is exempt from the obligations of demai.8The Kessef Mishnehexplains that the rationale is that the wine dregs are usually left as ownerless. Hence, it is only in a place where that is the common practice that this law applies.
When decrees were enacted concerning demai, they were enacted only with regard to produce from the land that was inhabited by the Jews who returned from Babylonia,9In contrast to the area inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Egypt in the first conquest. i.e., from Kziv inward.10See Hilchot Terumah, ch. 1, for a description of these geographic terms. Kziv itself is considered as outside these boundaries. All produce from Kziv and further are exempt from the obligations of demai for we operate under the assumption that the produce came from the place where it is found.11Conversely, we operate under the assumption that any produce found within the borders of Eretz Yisrael is bound by the restrictions of demai [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:3)].
When we know12If, however, there is a doubt concerning the matter, we assume that the produce grew in the land where it was found. that produce was grown in the land that was inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia, the laws of demai apply with regard to it even though it is presently found in Syria or in the land that was inhabited only by the Jews who ascended from Egypt. [Thus] terumat ma'aser and the second tithe must be separated from it.Therefore a fat fig whose species is found only in the land inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Babylon - and similarly, large dates, straight carobs,13Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 2:1). rice that is exceedingly white, and oversized cumin14All of these species grow only in Eretz Yisrael. - must be tithed like demai in the entirety of Eretz Yisrael and in Syria. Similar laws apply with regard to all produce that is comparable to these species.
When donkey-drivers bring produce to Tyre,15A city in Southern Lebanon, close to, but not immediately bordering on Eretz Yisrael. the laws governing demai apply to it, for we assume that it came from the nearby land inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia.16Since the produce was brought by donkey-drivers who travel longer distances, we consider the possibility that it was brought from Eretz Yisrael (Radbaz). As indicated by a comparison to the following halachah, here we are speaking about a caravan of donkeys. We do not harbor any suspicions with regard to rice. Instead, all the rice that is found in the Diaspora that neighbors the land which was inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia is exempt17Because rice which requires plentiful water is not usually grown in Eretz Yisrael. from demai unless it was obvious that it grew [only in Eretz Yisrael] as we explained.18As explained in the previous halachah.
When a person purchases [produce] from the owners of storehouses in Tyre, he is exempt from [the obligations of] demai. We do not say that they stored produce from Eretz Yisrael.19But instead, stored the local produce. Similarly, if one donkey20As opposed to the caravan mentioned in the previous halachah, a single donkey-driver will travel short distances. enters Tyre laden with produce, it is exempt from [the obligations of] demai, for we assume that [the produce comes] from the fields around the city.
When a person purchases [produce] from the owners of storehouses in Tzidon,21Also a city in Southern Lebanon. It is very close to Eretz Yisrael.The commentaries have questioned the Rambam's comments, noting that in actual fact, Tyre is closer to Eretz Yisrael than Tzidon. Among the explanations given is that there were two cities named Tzidon and the smaller one was in fact closer to Eretz Yisrael than Tyre. See Rambam LeAm. he is obligated in [the laws of] demai, because it is closer to Eretz Yisrael than Tyre and we operate under the assumption that they store produce from the land inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia. If, however, one purchases [produce] from donkey-drivers in Tzidon, it is exempt from [the obligations of] demai, for we assume that they are bringing [the produce] from the Diaspora.22Here as well we are speaking about a caravan of donkey-drivers who travel long distances. As such, it is unlikely that they brought produce from Eretz Yisrael, for it is relatively close.
[The following rules apply when a person] purchases [produce] from a gentile in the land inhabited by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia. If the gentile was a merchant23If, however, the gentile grew the produce himself, it is exempt from the obligation of tithes. who purchases produce from Jews, the produce is [considered as] demai. Therefore at the outset, when the majority of Eretz Yisrael was in the hands of Jews,24In later eras, by contrast, the land was owned primarily by gentiles and there is no need to consider the produce as demai (Radbaz). when a person purchased produce from a gentile merchant, he would separate tithes as one does for demai just like one does when [purchasing] from a [Jewish] common person.
Who is a merchant? One who brings [produce to the market] two or three times. If, however, he brings once - even if he brings three loads at once, or even if he, his son, and his servant each brings loads - he is not presumed to be a merchant.25And it is possible that he brought from his own produce.
When [our Sages] issued a decree concerning demai, the decree did not apply to produce from the Diaspora that was brought into Eretz Yisrael.26The Radbaz states that this applies to produce that was sold to a Jew who completed the tasks associated with its preparation. Even though such produce must be tithed, the stringency of demai does not apply.
When the majority of the produce [in a mixture] is from Eretz Yisrael and not from the Diaspora, [the laws of] demai apply.27For as in all matters, the ruling is dependent on the majority (Radbaz). If the majority of the mixture is produce from the Diaspora, it is exempt from demai. [This law applies] also to species that we can presume that most frequently come from the Diaspora, e.g., nuts and plums.28The particular species of plums the Rambam mentions grew primarily in Damascus and the laws of demai do not apply to produce that grows there (Chapter 12, Halachah 11).
[When there was a doubt whether] produce came from the Diaspora or not, our Sages [maintained that the ruling] is not dependent on the appearance [of the produce], its flavor, or its fragrance,29I.e., one might say that as a result of these factors one could identify the source of the produce. but rather where the majority [of produce in the marketplace originated]. If produce [from the Diaspora] constitutes the majority, it is permitted.30I.e., without tithing. If not, it is forbidden.What is implied? When there is a majority [of produce from the Diaspora] in a city, but not in its outlying areas, or in the outlying areas31This is the interpretation of the term medina followed by most authorities. From the Rambam's wording in Hilchot Ishut 13:17, the interpretation of this halachah would be: "When there is a majority in a town, but not in a metropolis...." and not in the city, in the mountain, but not in the valley, in the valley, but not in the mountain, for a storekeeper, but not for a private homeowner, for a private homeowner and not for a storekeeper, for those where [produce from the Diaspora] is the majority, they are permitted.32To partake of it without observing the restrictions of demai. For those where it is not in the majority, they are obligated [to heed the restrictions of] demai.
If, at first, there was a majority of produce from the Diaspora in the market place and then, that quantity was reduced, the market place returns to its original status, and one who purchases [produce] is obligated in [the restrictions of] demai.
At the time the decree concerning demai was issued, it was not applied in the following situations. All of the [following] instances are exempt from the obligations of demai: One who purchases: produce for seed or as animal fodder, flour for the processing of hides33See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:3) for clarification regarding this and the other subjects mentioned in this halachah. or for a compress or a bandage, oil to kindle a lamp or to apply to utensils, wine for an eye ointment.34Produce used for purposes other than for food. [This ruling also applies to] challah separated by a common person,35For challah like terumah carries a punishment of death at the hand of heaven and even the common people were careful with regard to its observance. a mixture of terumah and ordinary produce,36Since such a mixture contains terumah which involves such a severe penalty, the common people were careful with regard to the prohibitions involved. produce purchased with money from the second tithes,37I.e., after the second tithe is redeemed, the money used for its redemption must be used to purchase food in Jerusalem. flour left over from a meal offering,38The priest would take a handful of flour from a meal offering to offer on the altar. The remainder was eaten by the priests. We do not suspect that the remainder was demai. and produce added to the bikkurim offerings.39The first fruits of the seven species for which Eretz Yisrael is praised must be brought to the Temple and given to the priests as the bikkurim offerings. Occasionally, fruits of the same species were added to the offering to make it more impressive. These are referred to as "produce added to the bikkurim." If a common person tells him that the appropriate separations have been made, there is no obligation to tithe it.40Nevertheless, even in these instances, the initial preference should be to purchase the produce from a trustworthy source (Radbaz).
When a person purchases produce to eat and changed his mind and thought to use it as animal fodder, he should not sell them to a gentile41The separations are necessary in this instance, for the gentile may sell the produce to another Jew (Radbaz). or feed them to an animal - even an animal belonging to others - until he makes the separations associated with demai.42For once he has incurred the obligation to make the separations associated with demai, he is not absolved from that responsibility until he does so (ibid.).
Fragrant oil43Olive oil mixed with fragrant spices [Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:3)]. is exempt from [the obligations of] demai for we assume it will not be eaten. When a comber of wool purchases oil to put it in the wool,44Wool would be combed to remove its dirt and other impurities attached to it. Oil was applied to the wool to make the combing process easier. it is exempt from [the obligations of] demai, because it is absorbed by the wool.45Like the oil applied to utensils mentioned in Halachah 14. When, however, a weaver purchases oil to apply between his fingers,46As protection for them in the weaving process. it is obligated in [the laws of] demai. The rationale is that it is absorbed in his body and the application of oil is considered as drinking in all instances.47See Hilchot Shivitat Esor 1:5.
When a gentile asks a Jew to place oil on his wound,48I.e., he is asking a chavair to use the chavair's own oil for this purpose. he is forbidden to use oil from which he is certain the appropriate separations have not been made. He is, however, permitted to use demai for this purpose.49As a salve. If a chavair knows that produce has not been tithed, he may not use it in a manner that removes it from his possession or destroys it until he tithes it. For using it to benefit another person is equivalent to a sale (Chasdai David). With regard to demai, however, leniency may be shown, for he is using it for medical purposes for a gentile. If, however, he is using it for a Jew, the tithes must be separated even in this instance. If a gentile places oil50This refers even to oil from which we are certain separations have not been made. on a tablet to twist around,51One of the ways people would apply oil to their flesh was to place it on a marble tablet and then roll on the tablet. after he arises, it is permitted for a Jew to sit on it afterwards.52Even though the oil will be applied to his flesh. The rationale is that once the gentile used it, the holiness vested in the terumah has been defiled and it is no longer necessary to make any separations from it. Note a parallel in Hilchot Terumot 11:8 (Chasdei David). In this instance, we are speaking about demai (which is feared to be tevel) and not terumah and in its present state, it is not holy. Nevertheless, the same principles can be applied.
When oil that is demai falls on a person's flesh, he may rub it without concern.53As mentioned above, one should not apply oil that is demai to one's body. In this instance, however, the oil fell on the person's body against his will and its holiness is defiled at that time. Hence, what happens afterwards is not significant and he can continue rubbing that oil into to his flesh. When a person purchases wine for fishbrine or a mixture of wine and water or legumes to crush and mix with honey, he is obligated in the restrictions of demai.54Because they were already distinct entities obligated in the restrictions of demai before the mixture came into being. If, however, he purchased fishbrine that contains wine, a mixture of wine and oil, or a mixture of crushed legumes and honey, he is exempt from the restrictions of demai, for [our Sages] did not apply their decree to a mixture of demai and other substances. If the entity that was demai that became mixed with other substances was something like spices or yeast,55I.e., an entity that has an effect that is far greater than what could be expected from its size. This is a general principle applied with regard to all of the Torahs prohibitions; see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:1-2. since its flavor is evident, the restrictions involving demai must be observed for the entire mixture.
In all those situations where one is exempt from demai because [our Sages] did not apply their decree in these instances, if one corrected [the produce as one does] demai, separating terumat ma'aser and the second tithe, his actions are considered of consequence.56He must give the terumat ma'aser to a priest and redeem the second tithe and use it to purchase food in Jerusalem. If, however, he sought to correct [produce that is] demai like one does produce from which we are certain that no separations were made,57Our translation follows the text suggested by the Kessef Mishneh. It is found in several authentic manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. The version in the standard printed text - which was also the version possessed by the Ra'avad - differs slightly. separating the great terumah and the tithes from it58This is unnecessary, for we assume that terumah has already been separated. With regard to the tithes - the first tithe and the tithe for the poor - for demai, it is not necessary to give these to the Levite and the poor person, as one does when he is certain that the separations have not been made. Instead, all that is necessary is to make the separations. or he sought to correct produce from which we are certain that no separations were made by making separations like one does demai, his deeds are of no consequence.59In the latter instance, his deeds are of no consequence, because since he is not separating the great terumah, he is making the separations in improper order. Since that is undesirable, we assume that had he known what he was required to do, he would have made the separations in the appropriate order. Hence the separation that he did make is considered to have been made in error and therefore invalid.
[The following laws apply when] all [of the individuals in] a town sell produce that is definitely [tevel], one person sells demai , and one purchases [produce] from a person without knowing from whom he purchased. How should he correct the produce?60Because it is possible that it is demai and it is possible that it is definitely tevel. Generally, we follow the principle that whenever the existence of an entity is fixed, we do not look at the actual ratio of permitted and forbidden entities. Instead, we consider it as if half are forbidden and half are permitted (see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 8:11) . Now, in this instance, there is a stringency in considering the produce as tevel - that one must separate the great terumah. And there is a stringency in considering the produce as demai - that he must separate terumat ma'aser and the second tithe. To permit the use of the produce, he must fulfill both stringencies. He must also separate the first tithe and the tithe for the poor. He does not have to give this produce away, because of the doubt concerning its status. Instead, he may keep it for himself. He should separate terumah and terumat ma'aser and give it to the priest. And then he should separate the second tithe and it is considered as the second tithe of demai.
Similar [concepts apply] if there were two containers [of produce] before a person: one containing tevel and one containing produce from which the separations were made. If one of them is lost,61But we do not know which one. one must separate terumah and terumat ma'aser from the other one and give it to any priest he desires. And he should separate the second tithe and it is considered as the second tithe of demai.62In this instance as well, since it is possible that the separations have already been made, we do not require him to give the first tithe and the tithe of the poor. Those separations that involve prohibitions, by contrast, must be made.

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
When a person purchases [produce] from a wholesaler and then purchases [produce] from him a second time, he should not separate tithes from one batch for another. [This applies] even if they are of one species, and even from one container, and even if he himself recognized the barrel [from which the produce was taken].1And thus one might think that both batches came from the same person. [The rationale is that] a wholesaler purchases from many different people and sells [it]. Perhaps the produce he first sold was from a common person whose produce is demai2Since the wholesaler sells in large quantities, he is permitted to sell demai (Chapter 11, Halachah 2). and the batch he sold later was from a chavair who made the appropriate separations. As we already explained,3Chapter 1, Halachah 6; Hilchot Terumah 5:12. we do not separate tithes from produce that is obligated to be tithed for produce that is exempt or from produce that is exempt for produce that is obligated. If the wholesaler said that [both batches] are from one person, we rely on his word.4Even though he is a common person. The rationale is that he has nothing to gain by lying.
When [a wholesaler] sells hops or vegetables and they are being brought and collected before him, a purchaser should tithe each bunch of hops, each bundle [of vegetables], and each date individually.5The tithes cannot be separated from one for the other for the reason stated in the previous halachah.
When a person purchases [produce] from a private individual and then purchases [the same species] from him a second time, he may separate the tithes from one batch for the other.6For each person may separate tithes from one batch of his own produce for another. Since the person who grows this produce has this option, it is also granted to one who purchases from him. [This applies] even when he purchases [produce] from two containers, and even from two cities. [The rationale is that] we operate under the presumption that a private person sells only his own produce.
[Different rules apply when] a private person sells vegetables in the market place. When [produce] is brought to him from his gardens, [a purchaser] may tithe from one batch for the entire quantity. If, however, he is also brought [produce] from other gardens, should one purchase a batch from him and then purchase a second batch, he should not tithe from one for the other.7For it is possible that the second batch came from a different person and the difficulties mentioned in the first halachah might apply. This suspicion also applies in the halachot that follow.
When a person purchases bread from a baker, he should not tithe from the warm bread for the cool bread, for one might say that the wheat [used for] yesterday's [bread] was from one person and that [used] for today's is from another.8This applies even if the appearance of the bread is similar and they were baked in the same mold [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:3)].
When a person purchases [bread] from a bakery9Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). he may tithe from one loaf for all the others even if [the loaves] are from different molds. For a baker who sells to a bakery10Our version of the text is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.). The standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah follows a slightly different version. bakes his dough in different molds. If, however, one purchases [bread] from a distributor, one should tithe each mold individually,11When many loaves were made from the same mold, it is sufficient to separate tithes from one loaf for all those made in the same mold. One need not separate from each loaf individually, because we assume that all the loaves from the same mold came from the same baker. for a distributor purchases from two [or more] bakers.
When nine distributors purchase [bread] from ten bakers, since one of them purchases from two [bakers], anyone who purchases [bread] from one of the nine must tithe each mold individually.12This applies even when the majority of the distributors bought their bread from one baker.
When a person purchases [bread] from a poor person and similarly, if a poor person was given13I.e., as charity. If he was given them as part of the presents given to the poor, he is not liable to make separations from them. slices of bread or slices of a cake of dried figs, he should tithe each one individually. For dates and dried figs, he should group the entire quantity together and tithe them.When does the above apply? When he was given a large present.14Since the donor is generous, we assume that he also separated the tithes. Hence, the obligation to separate the tithes is merely a stringency. Therefore we are lenient with regard to its observance and do not suspect that the produce was given to the poor person by different people [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:5)]. If he was given a small present, he should tithe each present individually.15Since the donor was tightfisted, it is unlikely that he separated the tithes. Hence, the obligation to separate the tithes is more compelling and we are stringent with regard to the above suspicion (ibid.).
If a person ground a loaf of bread [into] crumbs or ground dried figs and made them into a cake,16A loaf of bread and a cake of dried figs is considered as a large present. Hence the more lenient laws mentioned in the previous halachah apply (see Radbaz). he should separate tithes for the entire quantity.
When workers or guests were reclining and eating and they left over slices [of bread], one should tithe each one individually.17We are speaking about the guests or workers of one person. Nevertheless, one cannot be lenient and separate tithes for the entire batch as one, for it is possible that one of the workers or guests separated the tithes and others did not and thus one might be separating tithes from produce from which tithes had been separated for produce from which they had not been. Although demai may be fed to guests (Chapter 10, Halachah 11), there may be some who desire to separate tithes as a stringency, but others will not.
