=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 216) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 598) include this mitzvah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.In his Guide for the Perplexed, the Rambam explains that marriage of this nature was a custom carried out before the giving of the Torah (as reflected by Genesis 38:8 , and the Torah allowed this rite to be perpetuated. Sefer HaChinuch explains that the closeness shared with the deceased by both his widow and his brother enjoins them to come together and produce a child who will perpetuate the deceased's memory and virtue. As Sefer HaChinuch mentions, there are also profound mystic concepts associated with this mitzvah. of Scriptural law for a man to marry the widow of his paternal2Implied is an exclusion. One should not perform this rite with the widow of one's maternal brother (Yevamot 17b; Halachah 7 below). brother if he died without leaving children, as [Deuteronomy 25:5] states: "[And one of them dies] childless,... her husband's brother should cohabit with her." [This applies to a widow] from nisu'in, or from erusin.[The childless widow is referred to as a yevamah; the rite through which they marry, yibbum.]Scriptural law does not require a man to consecrate his yevamah, for she is his wife that heaven acquired for him. [All that is necessary] is that he cohabit with her. Her deceased husband's estate is responsible for her marriage contract.3See Hilchot Ishut 22:10-14.
If the yavam does not want to perform the rite of yibbum, or if the woman does not consent,4According to the Rambam's conception, the woman cannot be compelled to marry her brother-in-law against her will. See Chapter 2, Halachah 10 and notes. he should [free her from this obligation through the rite of] chalitzah. [Only] afterwards is she permitted to marry another man.It is a positive commandment5Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 217) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 599) include this mitzvah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. of Scriptural law for [a brother] to perform chalitzah for [the deceased's widow], if he does not want to perform the rite of yibbum, as [Deuteronomy 25:9] states: "She shall... remove his shoe."6The woman also participates - indeed she plays a more active role - in the rite of chalitzah. Nevertheless, the mitzvah is considered to be incumbent on the brother of the deceased, because the effect of this mitzvah is that he foregoes a right - the right to marry the woman - that belongs to him. Until he performs chalitzah, the woman is bonded to him, and through performing chalitzah he severs this connection. Therefore, the mitzvah is considered his.Moreover, chalitzah is a means to dissolve the connection established by kiddushin. Since kiddushin are established by the man, chalitzah is also his initiative. See the Kovetz who questions whether the man is obligated to perform chalitzah or he merely has the opportunity of doing so.The mitzvah of yibbum takes precedence over the mitzvah of chalitzah.7The concluding mishnah of the first chapter of Bechorot states:The mitzvah of yibbum takes precedence over the mitzvah of chalitzah. [This applied] originally, when the participants [in the rite] intended to perform a mitzvah. In the present age, when they do not intend to perform a mitzvah, the mitzvah of chalitzah takes precedence over the mitzvah of yibbum.In his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that the Mishnah follows the opinion of Abba Shaul, who maintains that the prohibition against marrying one's brother's wife is not removed entirely by the mitzvah of yibbum. Instead, it is merely temporarily superseded. And therefore, if the couple have any intentions other than the fulfillment of the mitzvah, they transgress this prohibition. As such, rather than involve oneself in such a challenge, one should perform the mitzvah of chalitzah.In that commentary, and in a subsequent responsum, the Rambam explains that the halachah follows the opinion of the Sages who differ with Abba Shaul. These Sages maintain that when a man dies childless, the prohibition against his brother's marrying his wife is lifted entirely. Even if the brother marries the widow because of her looks, or because of her money, there is no prohibition involved. For that reason, the mitzvah of yibbum takes precedence.The Ashkenazic community, following the rulings of Rabbenu Tam and the authorities who succeeded him, do not accept this ruling and follow Abba Shaul's opinion. Accordingly, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 165:1) quotes the Rambam's view, while the Ramah states that chalitzah is preferable, and that a couple should not be allowed to perform yibbum unless the court is certain that their intent is solely to perform the mitzvah.There is some discussion of the Rambam's intent by the commentaries, for his ruling in Hilchot Gerushin 10:16 implies a recognition of the importance of chalitzah. Nevertheless, the clarity of his statements in his Commentary on the Mishnah and in Sefer HaMitzvot makes it obvious that he follows the opinion of the Sages who differ with Abba Shaul. At present, even within the Sephardic community, the mitzvah of chalitzah is generally observed.[Note also the opinion of the Beit Shmuel 174:3, who states that even according to the Ashkenazic authorities, by Scriptural law yibbum takes precedence, and that the primacy given to chalitzah is a Rabbinic institution.]
The Torah's words [Deuteronomy 25:5], "When one of them dies childless" [should not be interpreted narrowly].8The Hebrew word בן, translated as "son," can also mean "child" or "descendant." Hence, the ruling mentioned by the Rambam. [When the deceased] has a son, a daughter, a descendant of a son, or a descendant of a daughter, as long as he has left progeny9If, however, a man fathered a child [or children], and he [they all] died in the father's lifetime, the man's wife is obligated to perform the rite of yibbum. - whether from the woman [to whom he is presently married] or from another woman, his wife is free from the obligation of chalitzah or yibbum.Even if he has a descendant who is illegitimate or an idolater, [that descendant] frees [the deceased's] wife from the obligation of chalitzah or yibbum.
[The above applies to children born from a Jewish woman.] If, however, [a deceased man] has a child born from a maidservant or a gentile woman, his wife is not free of these obligations. For the offspring of a maidservant are servants. And the offspring of a gentile woman are gentiles, and considered as if they have no connection to him.[These concepts are derived as follows:] With regard to a maidservant, [Exodus 21:4] states: "The woman and her children will belong to her master," teaching that her offspring have the same status as she.10Regardless of who the father is. And with regard to a gentile woman, [Deuteronomy 7:4] states: "They will lead your son away from Me" - i.e., prevent him from being considered part of the congregation.Even when a man's son born from a maidservant is freed, or his son born from a gentile woman converts, he is regarded in the same way as other converts or freed slaves and does not cause [the deceased's] wife to be freed [from the obligation of yibbum]. [Even when a man] fathered a son with a maidservant, freed the son and the mother, and married her - if he dies without fathering any other children, his wife should perform the rite of yibbum with his brother, although the son [whom the deceased] fathered is alive and has been freed.11See Hilchot Gerushin 10:19.
[The following rules apply when a man] dies and leaves his wife pregnant: If she miscarries after he dies, his wife [is obligated to] perform the rite of yibbum. If she bore the child, and the fetus emerged into the world alive, the mother is free of the obligation to perform the rite of chalitzah or yibbum. This applies even when the child dies immediately after being born.According to Rabbinic decree, however, [this does not apply] unless it is known that the child was carried for a full term pregnancy and was born after nine full months had passed.12The Ramah (Even HaEzer 156:4) states that these laws apply as long as we know that the pregnancy lasted into the ninth month. If, however, the term of the pregnancy is unknown [the following rules apply]: If the child lives 30 days, the child is considered viable, and he frees his father's wives from the obligation of yibbum or chalitzah.If the child dies within 30 days [of his birth], even on the thirtieth day, there is a doubt whether the child is viable or non-viable. This applies regardless of [the cause of the infant's death], whether he died as a result of illness, fell from a roof or was eaten by a lion. According to Rabbinic law, [the deceased's wives] must perform the rite of chalitzah;13The Ramah (ibid.) rules that even if a fetus is stillborn, these laws still apply. they may not perform the rite of yibbum.14For according to Scriptural law, there is no obligation for yibbum, and the prohibition against relations with her husband's brother remains in force.
Whenever a man has a brother, even if the brother is illegitimate or an idolater, whether he is above the age of majority or below the age of majority,15In such an instance, the brother may not perform the rites of yibbum or chalitzah until he comes of age, as is explained below. as long as his head and the majority [of his body]16The Gur Aryeh notes that Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 10:6 appears to imply that the emergence of an infant's forehead alone is sufficient for it to be considered having been "born." Hence, he interprets the Rambam's words as meaning either the forehead or the majority of the body. emerged into the world before his brother's death,17If, however, the brother is not born until after the man's death, the deceased's wife is not obligated to perform the rite of yibbum, as explained in Chapter 6, Halachah 16. his existence causes [his brother's wife] to be obligated to perform the rite of yibbum.18Needless to say, the woman should not marry the illegitimate man or the idolater. Instead, she should seek to be freed from her obligation through chalitzah.The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 157:4) and the Ramah mention the possibility of leniency, if the deceased's brother was an apostate at the time the deceased married his wife.If [the deceased] had a brother who was born to a maidservant or to a gentile woman, he is not considered to be his brother in any [halachic] context. [His existence] does not cause [his brother's wife] to be obligated to perform the rite of yibbum. Even when [the brother] was born as a member of the Jewish people,19I.e., the maidservant was freed, or the gentile woman was converted, before the baby was born. since his mother was not Jewish when he was conceived, he is not considered to be [the deceased's] brother.
Maternal brothers are considered to be brothers only with regard to the laws of mourning20See Hilchot Aveilut 2:1. and the laws of witnesses.21See Hilchot Edut 13:1.With regard to the laws of inheritance,22See Hilchot Nachalot 1:6. and the laws of yibbum and chalitzah, [maternal brothers] are considered as if they did not exist. For fraternity is derived from the father alone.23Yevamot 17b derives this concept from Genesis 42:13: "We are twelve brothers, the son of one father."
There is no concept of fraternity among converts and freed slaves. [Thus, even two converts or two freed slaves born from the same father] are considered unrelated.24And therefore, one is not obligated to perform the rite of yibbum if his brother dies childless. Even if one of them was conceived before his parents were converted and born after they were converted, and the other was conceived and born after the parents were converted, they are not considered to have any family connection.Even if they are twins who were born after their parents were converted, they are not considered to be brothers25This ruling applies with regard to the laws of yibbum. With regard to the laws of forbidden relationships, by contrast, in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah the Rambam rules that if one twin has relations with the other's wife, he is liable for transgressing the prohibition against relations with his brother's wife. unless they were also conceived after their parents converted.
When a man who has many wives dies, [a brother who] engages in relations or performes the rite of chalitzah with one of them frees the others from all obligations. [The deceased's brother] may not marry two [of the deceased's wives], as [implied by Deuteronomy 25:9]: "...who did not build his brother's house." [This is interpreted as an exclusion:] he may build one house, but not two houses.26As reflected in Halachah 12, there is a prohibition involved.Similarly, if [the deceased had many brothers, one of them should perform either the rite of chalitzah or yibbum with one of the widows. This frees the others of all obligations.
[The following rules apply if] the widows include some who are fit to marry into the priesthood, and some who are not fit to marry into the priesthood: If [the brother] desires to perform the rite of yibbum, he may choose any of the widows that he desires. If he desires to perform the rite of chalitzah, he should perform this rite with one of the wives who is already forbidden to the priesthood, so that he will not disqualify one of the women who may marry into the priesthood through the rite of chalitzah.27Our Sages forbade a priest from marrying a woman who performed the rite of chalitzah (Hilchot Ishut 1:7). Since it makes no difference to the brother with which widow he performs the rite of chalitzah, our Sages counsel that it be performed in a manner that does not damage a woman's future possibilities. See Yevamot 44a.A court should enforce the application of this law (Beit Shmuel 161:2).
[The following rules apply if] many [of a man's] brothers die and he [becomes obligated to perform the rite of yibbum or chalitzah] to [all] their wives: If it is possible for him to perform the rite of yibbum with all of them,28I.e., if he is capable of meeting the responsibilities a husband has - providing for his wife's livelihood, her clothing and her conjugal rights. he should. If not, he may perform chalitzah with all of them, or perform chalitzah with whomever he desires, or perform yibbum with whomever he desires, [choosing one of the widows] from each [of his deceased brother's] households.
When [a yavam] marries a yevamah, all the other widows from that household become forbidden to him and to his other brothers. If he or his other brothers have relations with one of the other widows, they transgress a positive commandment, for [Deuteronomy 25:9] states: "Her yavam will engage in relations with her." [This is interpreted to mean:] With her, and not with another woman from that household. A prohibition stemming from a positive commandment is considered to be a positive commandment.29A person who transgresses a positive commandment is not liable to receive the forty lashes given when a negative commandment of the Torah is violated. Hence, the Rambam clarifies that although a prohibition is involved, it is a prohibition stemming from a positive commandment, and not one stemming from a negative commandment.Similarly, when [one of the brothers] performs chalitzah with his yevamah, the woman with whom chalitzah was performed and all the other widows from that household become forbidden to [the brother who] performed chalitzah and to the other brothers. They are all forbidden to the brothers by Rabbinic decree,30The Ramban (Nachmonides, Hasagot L'Sefer HaMitzvot, Hosafot Negative Commandment 14) differs and maintains that the violation of a Scriptural prohibition is involved. The difference between their opinions stems from their interpretation of Yevamot 10b.That passage interprets Deuteronomy 25:9: "... who did not build his brother's house," as implying a prohibition. "Once he did not build it, he no longer has the right to build it." The Ramban follows the authorities who maintain that this is a Scriptural prohibition, while the Rambam (based on Yevamot 40b) maintains that the prohibition is Rabbinic in origin, and the reference to the verse is merely an asmachta, a support. sharing the status of sh'niyot.31Literally, "prohibitions of a second degree," relatives with whom relations are permitted by Scriptural law, but forbidden by Rabbinic decree. See Hilchot Ishut 1:6. [This is the only prohibition involved,] for since their brother died childless, the severe prohibition against sexual relations (issur ervah) is removed. Therefore, [if one of the brothers consecrates such a woman,] the consecration is binding, as it would be if he consecrated one of the sh'niyot.
When a person performs the rite of chalitzah with his yevamah, not only does she become forbidden to him, but her relatives32This refers to seven women who are included in the category of arayot and with whom sexual relations are forbidden, as mentioned in Leviticus, Chapter 18, and Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 2:7,9. They include her mother, both her maternal and paternal grandmothers, her daughter, the daughter of her son, the daughter of her daughter and her sister. - e.g., her mother and her daughter - also become forbidden. Similarly, she is forbidden to marry his son and his brother.33I.e., even a brother who was not born during the lifetime of the widow's husband. Even the sh'niyot - e.g., her daughter's granddaughter - related to her are forbidden to him, and she is forbidden to his son's grandson. To summarize: Her status is like that of a divorced wife.Similarly, if his yevamah dies while she is still under obligation to him,34I.e., before she performs either yibbum or chalitzah. he is forbidden to marry these relatives of hers, as if she were his wife and she died in his lifetime.35He is, however, permitted to marry the woman's sister, just as he is allowed to marry his wife's sister after her death. All these prohibitions are of Rabbinic origin.[If the deceased had two wives, his brother] may marry the sister of the wife with whom he did not perform the rite of chalitzah, or any other of her relatives.36Although the woman herself is forbidden, as stated in the previous halachah, her relatives are permitted.
It is forbidden for a man to marry a close relative of a woman with whom he is obligated to perform either yibbum or chalitzah - e.g., her mother or her daughter - until one of his brothers performs yibbum with the woman who is obligated, or performs chalitzah with her to free her of her obligation.37See Chapter 7, Halachah 8.Afterwards, [the other brother] may marry the woman's mother, daughter, or any of her other relatives, despite the fact that these relatives are all forbidden to the brother who performed either yibbum or chalitzah, as explained [in the previous halachah].
When a man marries his yevamah and then divorces her, he may remarry her if he so desires. She is considered to be his wife with regard to all matters. There remains no trace of the prohibition [that existed when she was] his brother's [wife], neither from Scriptural law nor from Rabbinic law.38I.e., we do not say that he has already fulfilled the mitzvah of yibbum, and now the woman's status reverts to the prohibition under which she was previously forbidden. See Yevamot 39a.
As explained in Hilchot Ishut,39Chapter 11, Halachah 3. the sexual relations in which a boy of nine years and one day engages are halachically significant. This is a law received through the Oral Tradition.Accordingly, when a yavam who is below the age of majority, but over the age of nine, engages in sexual relations with his yevamah, he should maintain [his bond with her].40I.e., none of the other brothers should marry her instead. See Chapter 5, Halachot 18-19. He may not, however, perform the rite of chalitzah until he attains the age of majority and is inspected [for signs of physical maturity].41Two pubic hairs, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 2:10. For with regard to chalitzah, the term ish ("man") is specifically mentioned in the Torah.42Deuteronomy 25:7 states: "If the man does not desire...."If [a yavam] is below this age, sexual relations in which he engages are of no halachic significance. [Moreover,] even the sexual relations in which a nine-year-old engages do not acquire [the yevamah for him in a manner that is] binding [entirely].43Rather, these sexual relations are considered to be equivalent to a ma'amar, the status of which is discussed in Chapter 2, Halachah 1. Therefore, his yevamah is not permitted to marry another man until he engages in relations with her after he attains majority [and divorces her], or performs the rite of chalitzah [at that age], as will be explained.44See Chapter 5, Halachah 21, where this situation is described in detail.
Similarly, with regard to a yevamah who is below the age of majority: If her yavam desires to perform the rite of yibbum with her, he may.45Yevamot 119a explains that there is a certain dimension of leniency implied by this ruling. Since the woman is below the age of majority, it is possible that as she grows older she will manifest signs of being an aylonit, a woman who lacks female sexual characteristics (Hilchot Ishut 2:3,6). If that were to be the case, then the mitzvah of yibbum would not apply to such a woman, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 8, and relations with her would still be forbidden. Nevertheless, since the overwhelming probability is that a woman will not be an aylonit, our Sages did not impose any restrictions. He may not, however, perform the rite of chalitzah with her until she attains the age of majority and is inspected [for physical signs of maturity]. Even if she engaged in sexual relations after she became twelve years old,46Rav David Arameah interprets this to be referring to engaging in relations with her previous husband before her death. Although with regard to her husband, we assume that she has manifested signs of physical maturity, as stated in Hilchot Gerushin 11:5, with regard to the laws of yibbum and chalitzah an inspection is required. Note an alternative explanation offered by the Or Sameach. she may not perform the rite of chalitzah until she undergoes an inspection and manifests signs of physical maturity.
Just as a yavam may not perform chalitzah until he attains manhood, so too, a yevamah may not perform chalitzah until she attains womanhood.47See Chapter 6, Halachah 6.When a yavam who is below the age of majority engages in sexual relations with a yevamah who is also below the age of majority, they should grow up together.
As all other women,48See Hilchot Gerushin 11:18, which prohibits a widow or a divorcee from remarrying within 90 days of her husband's death or their divorce, to preclude the possibility of questions arising concerning who is the father of her child. a yevamah should not perform either yibbum or chalitzah until she waits a 90-day interval. [These 90 days] do not include the day of her previous husband's death or the day of yibbum or chalitzah.Why may she not perform chalitzah within these 90 days?49For performing chalitzah will not prevent the determination of a child's father. Because she is not fit to perform yibbum [at that time]. [Deuteronomy 25:7-9] states: "And if the man does not desire to take his yevamah,... she should remove his shoe" [establishing an equivalence between these two rites]. [Thus,] when she is fit to perform yibbum, she is fit to perform chalitzah. And when she is not fit to perform yibbum, she is not fit to perform chalitzah.50The converse of this principle - that one who does not perform chalitzah (e.g., a king) does not perform yibbum - also applies. See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Sanhedrin 2:1 and Hilchot Melachim 2:3).Should [a brother] perform yibbum or chalitzah with her within these three months, since she is not pregnant, she has discharged her obligation and need not perform any further activity.51The Ramah (Even HaEzer 164:1) differs and maintains that such a woman requires chalitzah from her deceased husband's other brothers after the three months have passed. See also Beit Shmuel 164:4.
[The following rules apply when a brother] performs chalitzah with his yevamah, and afterwards it is discovered that she is pregnant: If she gives birth and the child is viable, it is considered as if she had never performed chalitzah. She is permitted to [marry into the] priesthood, and [the brother who performed chalitzah with her] is permitted [to marry] her relatives.If the woman miscarries, or if the child who is born does not live for 30 days after being born, this - or another - brother52The Ramah (Even HaEzer 164:2) states that the chalitzah should be performed by another brother, and not by the brother who had originally performed chalitzah with her. should perform chalitzah with her again. For chalitzah performed with a pregnant woman is not considered chalitzah,53See Chapter 4, Halachah 26.The Beit Shmuel 164:5 quotes the view of Tosafot, who maintain that, according to Rabbinic law, performing chalitzah while pregnant disqualifies a woman from marrying into the priesthood and prevents her from performing yibbum if she miscarries. nor are relations with a pregnant woman considered yibbum.
Therefore, when [a man] marries or performs chalitzah with his yevamah who is pregnant, another woman who was married to the deceased husband should not remarry until this woman gives birth. For a child does not remove [the obligation of yibbum] until it emerges into the world.54And the yibbum or the chalitzah performed by the woman is of no consequence whatsoever.
[The following laws apply when a yavam] marries his yevamah, and then she is discovered to be pregnant. They should be separated [immediately],55Lest she give birth, in which case she would be forbidden to the yavam. and we wait [to see the results of] her pregnancy. If she miscarries, he should maintain her as his wife.56The Ramah (Even HaEzer 164:5) states that this rule applies only if he marries her before her pregnancy is discovered. If he marries her after her pregnancy is discovered, their relationship should be terminated even if she miscarries.If she gives birth [different rules apply]: If the child dies, even on the day it was born, the yavam should divorce her, [give her] a get and perform chalitzah with her.57The divorce is necessary lest it appear that a married couple are separating without a divorce, and the chalitzah is necessary as explained in Halachah 5. (See also Chapter 2, Halachah 21.) [Only] then, is she permitted to marry another man. If the child lives for 30 days after its birth,58The Maggid Mishneh states that the same law applies if the child is born with its limbs properly formed after a full-term pregnancy, even if he dies on the day of birth. This ruling is quoted by the Ramah (Even HaEzer 164:6). [the child] is considered to be viable, and there is no need for a divorce, for [relations between the two are forbidden by] a severe prohibition].59She does not require a get, because everyone knows that the consecration of such a woman is not binding.
If she gives birth to a viable child six months after she performed yibbum, there is a doubt whether this child is the son of her first husband and was born after a nine-month pregnancy, or is the son of her [yavam] and was born after a six-month pregnancy. Therefore, [the yavam] should divorce his wife, giving her a get. The child is not, however, considered illegitimate.60For whether he is the son of the woman's first husband or the son of her second husband, no sin was committed in his conception.If [the yavam] has relations with her after she gives birth, the children that are born afterwards are considered to be of doubtful legitimacy.61For we are unsure whether or not the woman is permitted to remain married to her yavam. The laws governing a person of doubtful legitimacy are discussed in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 15:21-22.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
It is a Rabbinic ordinance that a yavam should not enter into marital relations with his yevamah until he consecrates her in the presence of two witnesses, with a p'rutah or an article worth a p'rutah.1A ma'amar can also be effected with a sh'tar, a legal document (Maggid Mishneh).From Yevamot 52a it would appear that this practice was instituted as an expression of modesty. Just as with regard to marriage, although it is acceptable to consecrate a woman through sexual relations according to Scriptural law, our Rabbis ordered a ban of ostracism to be placed on a person who does so; so too, with regard to yibbum, they required that the man designate the woman as his wife before entering into marital relations with her. This [act] is called a ma'amar.2The word ma'amar means "statement." The Tosefot Yom Tov explains that the term was chosen because the yavam must make a statement of intent. Rav Kapach offers an alternative interpretation, citing Deuteronomy 26:17,18, which uses the root אמר to mean "designate," or "declare allegiance to."A ma'amar does not complete the acquisition of a yevamah, as will be explained.3See Chapter 5, Halachot 2-3.The standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah continues "as does sexual relations." Nevertheless, authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah do not contain this addition. Based on that version, Rav Kapach explains that the comparison may be, not to sexual relations with a yevamah, but rather to the effectiveness of the transfer of money in ordinary kiddushin.When [a yavam] performs a ma'amar with his yevamah without her knowledge, his deed is of no consequence. For a woman can be consecrated only willingly.4See Hilchot Ishut 4:1. When a minor is widowed after being merely consecrated,5If the minor's marriage is consummated, she leaves her father's authority and acts independently. As long as she is merely consecrated, however, she is under her father's authority. See Hilchot Ishut 3:11-12. a ma'amar can be performed only with the consent of her father.
Just as [the yavam] must consecrate his yevamah, so too, he should recite the marriage blessings in the presence of ten men6See Hilchot Ishut 10:3 for the text of these blessings. The Ramah (Even HaEzer 166:2) states that the ceremony of chuppah should also be performed, and the Ma'aseh Rokeach adds that Birkat Erusin (Hilchot Ishut 3:23) should be recited. and compose a ketubah ("marriage contract"), as is required of any man who marries a woman.7The text of the ketubah to be composed by the yavam appears in Chapter 4, Halachah 32.When [a yavam] enters into marital relations with his yevamah without previously performing a ma'amar with her, he acquires her in a binding manner;8The fact that he disobeyed our Sages' wishes does not cause his deed to lose its effectiveness. he does not have to consecrate her after engaging in marital relations with her. He should be given stripes for rebellious conduct9The punishment given for disobeying a Rabbinic ordinance. See Hilchot Ishut 3:21. and should write a ketubah for her.
When [a yavam] engages in marital relations with his yevamah, he acquires her [as his wife]. [This applies] regardless of whether he entered into these relations unintentionally10Note the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 166:9), which cites a minority opinion that differentiates between whether the yevamah had been married to her first husband or merely consecrated by him. In the latter instance, she must be consecrated a second time. or with a licentious intent,11Our translation is based on Rashi's gloss, Yevamot 53b. under duress or willingly, whether he acted with a licentious intent and she acted unintentionally or under duress, or she acted with a licentious intent and he acted unintentionally or under duress, whether she was asleep12Although it is improper for a husband to engage in relations with his wife when she is asleep, this does not negate the effectiveness of the yavam's act. or awake, whether he performed vaginal or anal intercourse,13The purpose of yibbum is to "perpetuate the name of his brother" (Deuteronomy 25:7  - i.e., to conceive progeny. Although this objective cannot be achieved through anal intercourse, it is still an effective means of acquisition. Since both the man and the woman are capable of conceiving children, the fact that they cannot accomplish that through this sexual act does not detract from its effectiveness (Beit Shmuel 166:6). whether he inserted merely the head of his penis or the entire organ.14Our translation is based on Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 1:10.
When does the above apply? When [the yavam] intends to perform a sexual act. If, however, he fell from the roof [with an erection] and [accidentally] inserted his organ into his yevamah, had relations with her when he was so intoxicated that he was not conscious of anything,15Note the Or Sameach, who questions this ruling based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Yevamot 6:1, quoted by the Rambam in Chapter 6, Halachah 3), which states that when a mentally incompetent person performs yibbum, his act is binding. The Or Sameach explains that a mentally incompetent person may have the intent to engage in sexual relations. In this instance, however, the person has lost control of his faculties to the extent that he has no intent whatsoever. or when he was asleep, he does not acquire her [as his wife].If he intended to masturbate in a hole in the wall and unintentionally inserted his organ into his yevamah, he does not acquire her [as his wife].16For masturbation is not considered to be sexual relations. If he intended to sodomize an animal and unintentionally inserted his organ into his yevamah, he does acquire her [as his wife].17For sodomy is considered to be a forbidden form of relations.
[The following rules apply when a yavam takes] his yevamah [home to] perform yibbum, and within 30 days she claims that they did not engage in sexual relations. [The yavam] claims that they did engage in relations and then divorces her. Since he already took the initiative and divorced her, we compel him to perform chalitzah with her.18Since it is within 30 days, we accept the possibility that the yavam did not engage in relations with her, and compel him to perform chalitzah so the yevamah can remarry another man (Yevamot 111b).If he did not divorce her, we compel him to engage in relations with her,19And remain married to her. or to perform chalitzah and also to divorce her, giving her a get.20Since he brought her home as his wife, even if he agrees that they did not engage in relations, he is required to divorce her, because it is likely that they did engage in relations (Maggid Mishneh; Ramah, Even HaEzer 167:6). Nevertheless, since she claims that they did not, and there is plausibility to her claim, he is also required to perform chalitzah.If he divorced her after thirty days had passed, and she claims that they did not engage in sexual relations, we request that he perform chalitzah with her.21After a couple have lived together for thirty days, we assume that they have engaged in relations, for a man will not restrain himself any longer. Hence, the man cannot be compelled to perform chalitzah (Yevamot, ibid.). Nevertheless, we ask him to perform this rite, for otherwise the woman will not be permitted to remarry. If, however, he admits that he had not entered into relations with her, we compel him to perform chalitzah with her.22He has nothing to lose in this concern, for since he divorced her without entering into relations with her, he is no longer permitted to fulfill the mitzvah of yibbum. Therefore, he should fulfill the mitzvah of chalitzah so that she can remarry.If she claims that they engaged in sexual relations, and he denies engaging in relations, she is not required to engage in chalitzah, for his word is not accepted [when he desires] to cause her to be forbidden to all other men, once he brings her to his home as his wife.
When a man dies [childless], and he is survived by many brothers, the mitzvah is incumbent on the eldest brother to perform either yibbum or chalitzah, as [implied by Deuteronomy 25:6]: "The firstborn son whom she bears [will perpetuate the name of the deceased brother]." The Oral Tradition interprets the verse as referring to the eldest of the surviving brothers, causing the verse to be rendered: "The eldest brother will perpetuate the name of the deceased brother." The subject of the phrase "whom she bears" is the mother of the brothers and not the yevamah.23According to the simple meaning of the verse, the subject is - as reflected in our translation - the yevamah. Nevertheless, in a halachic context, it is possible for one verse to have several interpretations. Accordingly, Yevamot 2:8 (see the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah) interprets this verse to be referring to the deceased's mother. (See also Yevamot 24a, quoted in Chapter 6, Halachah 8, which considers the yevamah the subject of the phrase in a different halachic context.)
If the eldest brother does not desire to perform yibbum, all the other brothers are given that option.24See Halachah 12. If they also do not desire, we return to the eldest brother and tell him: "The mitzvah is incumbent on you. Perform either yibbum or chalitzah." We do not compel the yavam to perform yibbum;25Although the Rambam maintains that the mitzvah of yibbum takes priority over the mitzvah of chalitzah, we cannot compel a man to wed a woman with whom he does not desire to live. we do, however, compel him to perform chalitzah.26For until this mitzvah is performed, the yevamah may not remarry.
If the eldest brother says: "Give me a respite until [a brother] who is a minor attains majority," "... until [a brother] who is on a journey returns," or "... until [a brother] who has [temporarily] lost his powers of speech and hearing recovers; if he refuses, I will perform yibbum or chalitzah" - his request is not accepted. He is told: "The mitzvah is incumbent on you. Perform either yibbum or chalitzah."27I.e., the yevamah should not be subjected to an unnecessary delay, if possible.
Similarly, if the eldest brother is in another country,28When stating this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 161:5) uses the expression "an overseas country." The Beit Shmuel 161:6 cites the expression used by the Rambam and explains that it refers to a country in which a different language is spoken, even if it is relatively close. He cites a ruling of Mahari Mintz, which states that if the eldest brother is in another city, and the yevamah does not have the funds to pay for travel there, the younger brother can be compelled to perform the mitzvah. (Kin'at Eliyahu notes that the Rambam often uses the word medinah to mean metropolis. He questions whether that is the Rambam's intent here.) [the obligation is transferred to his younger brother]. The younger brother does not have the option of saying: "The mitzvah is incumbent on my older brother. Wait until he comes." Instead, we tell the brother that is present: "Perform either yibbum or chalitzah."29Here also, the intent is not to subject the yevamah to an unnecessary delay.
The laws pertaining to a yevamah who is fit to perform yibbum30I.e., there is no halachic reason preventing her from doing so. and refuses to do so are the same as those governing a woman who rebels against her husband.31See Hilchot Ishut 14:8, which states that a woman who refuses to engage in marital relations because she is repelled by her husband, should be divorced by her husband, because "she is not like a captive, [to be forced] to engage in relations with someone she loathes." She does, however, forfeit the money due her by virtue of her marriage contract and any presents that her husband gave her. As mentioned in the notes on Hilchot Ishut, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 77:2) follows a different perspective with regard to this ruling.There is also a difference of opinion among the authorities whether a woman who refuses to engage in yibbum is considered to have "rebelled." As mentioned in the notes on Chapter 1, Halachah 2, the Ashkenazic authorities maintain that the mitzvah of chalitzah takes precedence over the mitzvah of yibbum. Therefore, they maintain that a woman has the right to refuse to engage in yibbum, and she is not judged to have "rebelled" for this reason. We compel her yavam to perform chalitzah with her,32The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 77:2) differs with the Rambam and maintains that a husband should not be compelled to divorce a woman who "rebels." According to that perspective, a yavam should also not be compelled to perform chalitzah.According to the Ramah (Even HaEzer 165:1), who favors chalitzah, when a yavam desires to perform yibbum and the yevamah refuses, the yavam cannot be compelled by force to perform chalitzah. He should, however, be convinced to do so. Note the gloss of the Beit Shmuel 165:1, which discusses this ruling in detail.All authorities agree that if the yavam is one of the individuals considered unfit to marry (see Halachah 14), he should be compelled to perform chalitzah. and she forfeits [the money due her by virtue of her] marriage contract.When the deceased is survived by many wives, the one that the yavam asks to perform yibbum and refuses is considered to have "rebelled." He should perform chalitzah with her, and she forfeits [the money due her by virtue of her] marriage contract.33This applies even if one of the other women would be willing to marry the yavam; the choice is his and not hers. The other wives who were not asked [to perform yibbum] receive [the money due them by virtue of their] marriage contracts, as other widows do.
If [the deceased was survived by] many [brothers], and the eldest brother states that he wants to perform yibbum with [one of the deceased's wives], [she is under obligation to him].34The Maggid Mishneh explains that the woman must either consent to yibbum or be considered to have "rebelled." Even if she does not desire [to marry] him, but is willing to marry one of his brothers, her desire is not considered. For the mitzvah is that the eldest brother perform yibbum.
[The following rules apply when] the eldest brother says: "I do not want to perform either yibbum or chalitzah. Behold, my brother is present." If one of the brothers asks her to perform yibbum, and she does not desire [to marry] him, but she does desire [to marry] another brother, and he desires [to marry] her, she is not considered to have "rebelled." Once the eldest brother upon whom the mitzvah is incumbent demurs, all the brothers are equal.35The Ra'avad and others differ with the Rambam on this point and maintain that if the eldest brother demurs, the prerogative is given to the brother who is next in the order of age. This perspective is followed by the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 161:4). Since she desires [to marry] one of [the brothers], and he desires [to marry] her, she is not considered to have "rebelled."36If, however, the brother she desires to marry does not desire to marry her, she is considered to have "rebelled," as stated in the following halachah.Moreover, if one of the brothers was in another country, and the woman says: "I would prefer to wait for him to come and perform yibbum with me. I do not want [to marry] this one," she is not considered to have "rebelled." [Since] the brother who asks [to marry her] is not the eldest, we tell him: "If you desire to perform chalitzah and pay her [the money due her by virtue of her] marriage contract, you may.37Although, according to the Rambam, the mitzvah of yibbum takes priority over the mitzvah of chalitzah, this is the case only when yibbum can be performed immediately. In this instance, this brother is not forced to wait until his other brother returns, for having the obligation to perform yibbum or chalitzah is a detriment to a man, as stated in Halachah 16 (Rav David Arameah). If not, she wants to wait until your brother comes. Since you do not have a prior claim, [she is granted that prerogative].38Generally, the court makes an effort to have the mitzvah of yibbum or chalitzah performed as soon as possible, as reflected in Halachot 8 and 9. This, however, is a measure of consideration for the woman, so that she will not be forced to remain without a husband. In this instance, it is she who desires the delay. Hence, she is given that prerogative (Or Sameach).
If the brother [whom the yevamah desired to marry] returned and did not desire [to marry] her, we turn again to the brother who desired to perform yibbum, but was not desired by the woman. We tell the woman: "There is no one who desires to perform yibbum with you except this one, and the mitzvah of yibbum is given priority. Either perform yibbum with this one, or leave without receiving [the money due because of your] marriage contract, as is the law with regard to all women who rebel."
Whenever the law is that a woman should perform chalitzah and not yibbum, as we have mentioned,39See Chapter 1, Halachah 5. (See also Chapter 3, Halachot 4, 13-14 and Chapter 6, Halachah 7.) if she is entitled to receive [the money due her by virtue of] her marriage contract,40I.e., her first husband or his estate would have had to pay her the money due her by virtue of her marriage contract. she may collect that money in the same way as other widows.Similarly, if the yavam was a leper or he has other blemishes [for which] men [are required to divorce],41He has constant bad breath or a smell coming from his nose, or he works as a copper miner, a tanner, or a collector of dog feces, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 25:11. he must perform chalitzah for her, and she is entitled to receive [the money due her by virtue of] her marriage contract.If a yevamah suffered blemishes while she was waiting for yibbum, it is the yavam's lack of fortune.42A man is entitled to divorce his wife if he discovers that she possessed physical blemishes that mar her appeal before her marriage, and he is not required to pay her the money due her by virtue of her marriage contract, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 7:8, 25:2. Nevertheless, in this instance this law does not apply, because the connection between the yavam and the yevamah begins directly after her first husband's death. If he does not desire to perform yibbum, he must perform chalitzah and give her [the money due her by virtue of] her marriage contract.
When, during her [first] husband's lifetime, a yevamah takes a vow prohibiting her from deriving benefit from her yavam,43I.e., she took a vow not to benefit from the yavam in her husband's lifetime for other reasons, without the explicit intent that she would free herself from obligation to him. or from all Jews,44I.e., the woman took a vow not to benefit from any Jews. Although that vow did not take effect with regard to her husband, once her husband died it takes effect with regard to the yavam. [her yavam] should be compelled to perform chalitzah for her, and she is entitled to collect [the money due by virtue of] her marriage contract.45She is not allowed to marry the yavam, because she will derive benefit from him and thus break her vow. Nor is she considered to be a woman who rebels, because her vow was not taken to free her from the obligation of yibbum. (See Yevamot 112a.)If she takes such a vow after her [first] husband's death, we request46Since the vow was taken specifically to free her from the obligation of yibbum, the yavam is not obligated to respect it. [her yavam] to perform chalitzah for her.47If he agrees and performs chalitzah willingly, he is obligated to pay her the money due by virtue of her marriage contract. If he does not desire to do so, she is considered to have "rebelled."48In which case he is compelled to perform chalitzah with her, but is not required to pay her the money due by virtue of her marriage contract, as stated in Halachah 10. Similarly, even if she took such a vow in her husband's lifetime, if her intent was that he should not perform yibbum with her,49Moreover, even if we are unsure of the woman's intent when taking the vow, we assume that she desired to free herself from the obligation of yibbum. he is not compelled to perform chalitzah, unless she [accepts the status of] one who rebels and forfeits [payment of] her marriage contract.
No heed is paid to the words of a yevamah, when her yavam asks her to perform chalitzah, and she says: "I do not want to perform chalitzah, nor do I want to collect [the money due me by virtue of my] marriage contract. Instead, I will remain in my husband's house like other widows."50As stated in Hilchot Ishut 18:1-2, a widow is entitled to live in her deceased husband's home and derive her livelihood from his estate until she remarries. For she was given over to [the yavam] from heaven, and the choice [is his whether] to perform yibbum or to perform chalitzah51The Kiryat Sefer explains that just as a man can divorce his wife against her will, so too, a yavam can perform chalitzah with his yevamah against her will. Even if she desires yibbum, she can be compelled to perform chalitzah. The Maggid Mishneh cites certain authorities who differ with the Rambam and maintain that since the mitzvah of yibbum takes priority, the yevamah cannot be forced to perform chalitzah. and pay her [the money due her by virtue of her] marriage contract.Moreover, even if she says "I will provide for my sustenance from my own means, and I will remain without a husband for the rest of my life,"52I.e., she is willing to forego the obligation of her husband's estate to her. her words are not heeded. For the yavam will tell her: "As long as you are under obligation to me, no one else will want to marry me."53For as long as there is the possibility that the yavam will marry the yevamah, other women will hesitate to marry him, for no woman would like to share her husband with another woman. Even if he is already married [this argument still holds weight], for it is possible for him [to desire] to marry another wife, or that [his obligation to] the yevamah will cause strife within his marriage.54Hence, the woman is compelled to perform chalitzah.If neither the yevamah nor the yavam desires to perform chalitzah, the court is under no obligation to see that the mitzvah is performed. Although the Zohar, Volume III, page 180a, explains that chalitzah brings about benefit for the deceased's soul, neither his brother nor his wife has a binding obligation to perform this act on his behalf. If they desire to, they may, but they cannot be compelled to do so. (See the Responsa of the Chatam Sofer, Even HaEzer, Volume II, Responsum 85.)
[The following rules apply when] a yevamah had no right to the privileges of a marriage contract from her [deceased] husband, because she was forbidden to him, but she is permitted to marry the yavam, as will be explained.55See Chapter 6, Halachah 13. If the yavam desires to perform yibbum, he may. He is not obligated to the woman [for the privileges of her] marriage contract, just as her [previous] husband was not.56The Maggid Mishneh quotes the Ramban and the Rashba as saying that if the yavam desires to divorce the yevamah immediately, he is not required to pay her the money due her by virtue of her marriage contract. If, however, he desires to remain married to the woman, he must write a marriage contract for her, for it is forbidden for a man to remain married to a woman without a marriage contract, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 10:10. The Ramah (Even HaEzer 168:9) quotes this interpretation.The Maggid Mishneh notes that this interpretation does not fit the Rambam's wording. In that light, the Or Sameach offers the following interpretation: The yavam is never obligated to write a marriage contract for the yevamah. Why did our Sages require a man to write a marriage contract for his wife? So that there would be a financial responsibility attached to divorce, and hence a husband would not consider it to be a light matter. In this instance, the yavam is held responsible for the additional amount that the husband added to the marriage contract. Hence, there is financial responsibility attached to divorce, and there is no imperative for a further obligation. The laws regarding the yavam's obligation for the additional amount to be paid the woman are the same as those that applied with regard to her husband.57As mentioned in Hilchot Ishut 24:2-3, although her husband is not obligated for the fundamental requirement of the marriage contract, he is obligated for the additional amount that he promised her. This obligation is transferred to the yavam.If, however, a husband did not write his wife a marriage contract, or she sold him or waived to him the rights to her marriage contract, the yavam is obligated to write a new marriage contract for her as he would be required for another widow.58The yavam is not, however, obligated to write a marriage contract equivalent to the one that the woman's first husband gave her. It is sufficient that he write her a marriage contract for 100 zuz, as explained in Hilchot Ishut 22:14.
Before the yavam performs yibbum or chalitzah with the yevamah, she is forbidden to marry another man,59Both Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 357) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 596) include this as one of the Torah's 613 commandments. as [Deuteronomy 25:5] states: "the wife of the deceased should not be allowed to [marry] an outsider."If she marries another person,60This applies even if she married without knowing of the existence of the yavam (Shulchan Aruch, Even HaEzer 159:2). and they engage in sexual relations, they are both punished by lashes,61If, however, the couple do not engage in relations, they are not punished with lashes. and he must divorce her with a get. [This applies] even if she has borne him several children.62The children are not, however, considered illegitimate. See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 15:1-2. She is forbidden to him and to her yavam.63I.e., she is compared to a woman who engages in relations with another man while married. See Hilchot Gerushin 10:7.She becomes forbidden to both men, even though she claims not to have engaged in sexual relations with her second husband (Kessef Mishneh; Ma'aseh Rokeach; see Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 19:3). Her yavam should perform chalitzah with her; this causes her to be permitted to marry other men.
If she was consecrated by another man, she does not become forbidden to her yavam. Instead, the man who consecrated her should divorce her, and her yavam may perform either yibbum or chalitzah.64The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 159:1) states that this law applies even when the man consecrates her without knowing of the existence of the yavam. The Beit Shmuel 159:1 differs and cites the opinion of the Rashba and the Ramban, who maintain that in such an instance, if the yavam desires to perform chalitzah, the woman may remain married to her second husband.If her yavam was a priest who is forbidden to marry a divorcee, she should be divorced by the man who consecrated her, so that the sinner should not benefit, and her yavam should perform chalitzah with her.65I.e., one might think that since the yavam cannot perform yibbum with her, she should be allowed to remain married to her second husband. If so, however, the man's transgression - marrying the yevamah - will have brought him benefit. Hence, he is required to divorce her (Yevamot 92b).
If the man who consecrated [the yevamah] and then divorced her, marries her [after] her yavam performs chalitzah with her, they are not forced to separate.66The rationale is that since the prohibition is merely a disciplinary measure, if the couple marry again they may remain married (Maggid Mishneh).The Ramah (Even HaEzer 159:1) states that if the second husband knew of the existence of the yavam and consecrated the woman anyway, he is forbidden to remain married to her, even if he remarried her after chalitzah. If, by contrast, a man divorced [a yevamah] after being married to her and then remarried her again, the couple are forced to separate. For this resembles the case of a married woman who [thought that her husband had died and] remarried, who is forbidden to both her first and second husbands, as has been explained.67See Hilchot Gerushin 10:5,7).A yevamah who engages in licentious sexual relations does not become forbidden to her yavam.68The Ramah (Even HaEzer 159:3) states that she does, however, become forbidden to the man with whom she engaged in relations. Even if her yavam performs chalitzah, the two may not marry. If he desires, he may perform chalitzah; if he desires, he may perform yibbum.
[The following rules apply to] any yevamah concerning whom there is a question according to Rabbinic law whether or not she is under obligation to a yavam - e.g., a yevamah bore a child who died within thirty days, after a pregnancy that was not full term. In this instance, she is required by Rabbinic law to perform chalitzah, because of the doubt [that exists whether the birth was viable], as explained above.69This refers to an instance where the child's physical appearance indicates that the birth was viable. Therefore, the woman is not required to perform chalitzah according to Scriptural law. Nevertheless, because the pregnancy was not full term, our Sages required chalitzah, as explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 5. If such a woman was consecrated by another man before performing chalitzah, her yavam should perform chalitzah with her, and she may remain married to her husband.70I.e., we do not force the couple to divorce, as in the previous halachah.If she was consecrated by a priest - who is forbidden to be married to a woman who performed chalitzah - [her yavam] should not perform chalitzah for her.71In his gloss on the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 164:7), Rabbi Akiva Eiger states that this leniency applies only when the priest consecrated the woman without knowing of her obligation to perform chalitzah. If he knew of her obligation and consecrated her nonetheless, the couple are not permitted to remain married. [This leniency was instituted] since we do not cause a man's wife to be forbidden because of a Rabbinic decree instituted on account of doubt.72The Ramah (Even HaEzer 164:7) states that similar laws apply when a yevamah was consecrated by an Israelite, and her yavam is abroad and cannot perform chalitzah for her.If the priest divorces [the woman] or dies, she should perform chalitzah.73I.e., the leniency is granted to the priest, because it is necessary and not to other men. Afterwards, she is permitted, a priori, to marry other men.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
When a man says: "This is my son," or "I have sons," his word is accepted,1The rationale for this ruling is the principle of migo. If the husband's statements were untrue, and his intent were merely to free his wife from the obligation of yibbum, he would not have to lie. Instead, he could give her a get (Bava Batra 134b).See also the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 156:6) and commentaries, which mention other opinions regarding whether this ruling applies when the prevailing presumption is that the man is childless, when the prevailing presumption is that he has brothers, or when witnesses testify that he has brothers. and he frees his wife from [the obligation of] yibbum or chalitzah.
When2I.e., when the prevailing presumption is that he does not have a brother, and hence his wife would not be obligated to perform yibbum. a man says: "This is my brother," or "I have brothers," his word is not accepted, and his wife does not become forbidden [to others because] she is required to perform yibbum. [We assume that] his intent was to cause his wife to be forbidden [to other men] after his death.
When the prevailing presumption is that [a man] has brothers and he says at the time of his death,3Even though the statements are being made at the time of the person's death, when it is unlikely that he would lie, we still suspect that he is speaking falsely to spare his wife the difficulty of yibbum or chalitzah. "I do not have brothers," his word is not accepted.4One might assume that, as in Halachah 1, the husband's statements would have been accepted based on the principle of migo. For in this instance as well, the husband could free his wife from yibbum by giving her a get. Nevertheless, our Sages explain that the principle of migo does not have the power to counteract a prevailing presumption.Still, even if the prevailing presumption is that a person has brothers, his word is accepted if he says that he has sons. The rationale is that, in this instance, his statements are not contradicting the prevailing presumption, but rather introducing a new factor (Beit Shmuel 157:9). Similarly, if he says that a person presumed to be his brother is not his brother, his word is not accepted.If there was no prevailing presumption that he has brothers, but a rumor becomes circulated5There is a difference of opinion among the Rabbis whether or not this rumor has to be substantiated in a court. The Maggid Mishneh interprets the Rambam's opinion as being that even a rumor that is not substantiated should be taken into consideration. Needless to say, in the contemporary era, when communications have advanced and travel is easier, this question is far less significant than in previous ages. that there are witnesses who will testify that he has brothers, but these witnesses are overseas, the woman must take this factor into consideration and wait until the witnesses who were mentioned come, and are asked [concerning the matter]. [This ruling applies] even when the husband says, "I do not have a brother" at the time of his death.
[The following rules apply when] a man engaged in licentious relations with either a single woman or a married woman, she became pregnant, and he claims that he fathered the child. Even if [the mother] acknowledges his statements, and thus the son is considered his with regard to the laws of inheritance,6See Hilchot Nachalot 4:1. the matter is considered to be one of doubt with regard to the laws of yibbum. For just as the woman engaged in relations with him, she could have engaged in relations with another man.7If the woman is married, there is no question regarding the Rambam's ruling, for we presume that by and large, she engaged in relations with her husband. If she is single, the matter is more complex.In this context, the commentaries draw attention to the Rambam's ruling in Hilchot Terumot 8:14, which states that when a priest had relations with a woman and she became pregnant, she is allowed to partake of terumah for the sake of her child. This indicates that we assume that she was impregnated by that priest.As indicated by the Rambam's wording in Hilchot Terumot and in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 15:17-18, the matter depends on the woman's reputation. If she is known to be promiscuous, we consider the possibility that she was impregnated by another man. If, however, everyone presumes that she engaged in relations only with this man, he is considered to be the father of the child (Maggid Mishneh).Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 156:9) quotes the Rambam's wording without making this distinction. See the Beit Shmuel 156:15. How is it possible to know with certainty that this is his son? There is no prevailing presumption to that effect.The matter thus remains one of doubt, and the more stringent perspective should be taken. Hence, his wife [is obligated to] perform chalitzah,8Lest the child have been fathered by another man, and the deceased in fact be childless. and she [is forbidden] to perform yibbum.9Lest the child have been fathered by the deceased, in which case relations with his brother would be prohibited.
The testimony of one witness is accepted with regard to the death of a woman's husband, and she may perform yibbum on this basis. [Similarly, such testimony is acceptable if he states that] her yavam died,10Rabbenu Asher differs with the Rambam regarding this matter and maintains that the testimony of one witness is not acceptable with regard to the death of a yavam. Although the Ramah (Even HaEzer 158:3) quotes his opinion, many Ashkenazic authorities recommend leniency. (See Beit Shmuel 158:2.) or that her husband fathered a son,11The Ra'avad and Rabbenu Asher differ with the Rambam with regard to this point, for unlike the death of a person, the birth of a child is not a matter that will surely become undeniable public knowledge. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 156:8) quotes the Rambam's opinion, while the Ramah follows the other view. on which basis she would be granted permission to marry another person [without chalitzah].Even the testimony of a servant or a woman, or statements of a gentile made in the midst of conversation are acceptable with regard to the death of a yavam, as they are acceptable with regard to a married woman whose husband has died, to enable her to be permitted to remarry, as mentioned in Hilchot Gerushin.12In Hilchot Gerushin, Chapters 12 and 13, the Rambam explains that the testimony of one witness is accepted in such instances, because:When the matter can be verified definitively without the testimony of a witness, and the witness cannot justify [his statements] if they are not true - e.g., when one testifies that a person died - the Torah did not necessitate [that the requirements of formal testimony be met in these instances]. For it is unlikely that a witness will testify falsely.For this reason, our Sages [extended] the leniency with regard to this matter and accepted the testimony of a single witness that is based on the testimony of a maidservant, [testimony] from a written document, and [testimony] that was not investigated by the ordinary process of interrogation. [These leniencies were accepted] so that the daughters of Israel will not be forced to remain unmarried.
Just as the statements of five [specific] women are not accepted with regard to testimony regarding the death of a woman's husband,13See Hilchot Gerushin 12:16, which states that the statements of a woman's mother-in-law, the daughter of her mother-in-law, [her husband's] other wife, her yevamah (i.e., the wife of her husband's brother) and her husband's daughter are not accepted with regard to her husband's death, because the prevailing presumption is that they hate each other. so too, the statements of these five women are not accepted with regard to the death of her yavam.The laws of the testimony governing the death of a yavam are the same as the testimony [governing the death of the woman's husband] with regard to disparities between the statements of the witnesses and all other matters.
[The following rule applies when] two widows, [each one married to one of two brothers,]14I.e., the women are married to two brothers. Thus each one is considered the yevamah of the other. come from an overseas country, this one says: "My husband died," and this one says: "My husband died." Each one is forbidden [to remarry] because of her obligation to the husband of the other one.15I.e., the testimony of each woman is accepted with regard to the death of her own husband. With regard to the death of her yavam, by contrast, the only testimony is that of her yevamah, and that testimony is not accepted. For the testimony of a yevamah is not acceptable with regard to the death of the woman's yavam, as stated [in the previous halachah].
If one of these women has a witness who can testify that her husband died, she is still forbidden to remarry - for she is not forbidden to remarry because of [an apprehension that] her own husband [is alive], but rather because of [the apprehension that] her yavam [is alive].16And with regard to the death of her yavam, there is no testimony that is acceptable to the court.Even if the woman actually remarries, at which point it would be likely to assume that her husband is dead, her yevamah is still prohibited. Our Sages feared that a woman would risk ruin in both this world and the next, in order to cause her foe to be forbidden to her husband.The woman who does not have a witness supporting her, by contrast, is permitted [to remarry], for a witness has testified that her yavam died, and her own testimony is accepted with regard to the death of her husband.17See Hilchot Gerushin 12:15.
If one of the above-mentioned women has children, and the other is childless,18And neither has witnesses to support her testimony. the one who is childless is forbidden [to remarry],19For she is dependent on the testimony of her yevamah, as above. and the one who has children is permitted.20For her authorization to remarry does not depend on whether or not her yavam is alive.If there is another living brother to perform yibbum, he should perform yibbum21Or chalitzah. with both of them.
If [in the latter instance], the yavam who married them died, they are forbidden to marry another man as they were originally.22I.e., there were only three brothers. Since the death of the first two brothers was never verified adequately to allow these women to marry freely, the original prohibition applying to them remains in force. If, however, the yavam married them and then divorced them, they are free to marry other men.23For her marriage and divorce releases each of the women from their obligation to their missing yavam.
A woman's testimony is accepted with regard to the death of her husband, and she may marry [another man] or perform yibbum [on this basis]. Nevertheless, the testimony of a yevamah is not accepted with regard to the death of her yavam, and it is not considered to be sufficient basis for her to marry another man. The rationale is that the prohibition [against marrying another man when under obligation to a yavam] involves merely a negative commandment.24The punishment - lashes - is lesser, and the woman's children are not considered illegitimate. And therefore the woman may regard it casually.25Having relations with another man while married, by contrast, is a prohibition punishable by execution by the court, her children are considered illegitimate, and it brings severe retribution in the world to come. Because the prohibition against marrying while under obligation to a yavam is less severe, our Sages feared that the woman might lie about the yavam's death and transgress this prohibition.Similarly, the testimony of a yavam is not accepted with regard to the death of his brother, and it is not considered to be sufficient basis for him to marry his brother's wife. [We fear that] perhaps he desired her.Similarly, a woman's testimony is not accepted with regard to the death of her sister, and it is not considered to be sufficient basis for her to be permitted to marry her sister's husband.26It is forbidden for a husband to marry his wife's sister while his wife is alive. Our Sages feared that the second sister or the husband may desire to give false testimony, so that they can marry. [By the same token,] a man's testimony that his wife has died is not accepted as sufficient basis for him to marry her sister. In this instance, it is necessary that two witnesses testify that one sister has died before the other sister can enter her household. For the testimony of one witness was accepted only so that license to marry could be granted to a woman who would otherwise be forced to remain unmarried, as we have explained.27I.e., generally, the testimony of two witnesses is required with regard to matters involving marriage and divorce. As mentioned in the concluding passage of Hilchot Gerushin (cited in the notes on Halachah 6), in order to allow a woman to remarry, leniency is granted and we rely on the testimony of one witness. In this instance, however, there is no difficulty in the man's or the woman's remarrying; the only difficulty is that they cannot marry each other. In such an instance, our Sages were not willing to extend leniency.[There is a slight difficulty when comparing the Rambam's statements here to his statements at the conclusion of Hilchot Gittin. As explained by the Noda BiY'hudah (Even HaEzer, Volume I, Responsa 27 and 33), the Rambam's wording indicates that, according to Scriptural law, with regard to a point of fact that can be verified, it is not necessary for two witnesses to testify, and the statements of one witness are sufficient. The leniency granted by our Sages was to accept the testimony of women, relatives and others whose testimony would not ordinarily be accepted. Here, however, the Rambam is stating (as he does in Hilchot Edut 5:2) that the acceptance of the testimony of a single witness is a leniency of Rabbinic origin. (See the Responsa of the Rivash, Responsum 181.)]
Accordingly,28I.e., based on the premise stated in the first clause of the previous halachah. when a woman, her husband and her yavam journey overseas, and she comes and says: "My husband died, and afterwards my yavam died," or "My yavam died, and then my husband died," her word is not accepted.29For the prevailing presumption when she departed was that she would be obligated to perform yibbum if her husband dies.If, however, she and her husband depart alone, and she returns and says: "A yavam was born for me overseas, but he died," her word is accepted, regardless of whether she says "My yavam died, and then my husband died," or "My husband died, and afterwards the yavam who was born for me died." [The rationale is] the source for the statements [on which basis the woman was] forbidden [states that she is] permitted.30The prevailing presumption when she departed was that she would not be obligated to perform yibbum if her husband dies. It is only because of her own statements that we might suspect that she is required to do so. Therefore, her statements are sufficient to offset this suspicion.
[The following rules apply when] a woman journeys overseas together with her husband and her son: If she returns and says: "My husband died and then my son died," her word is accepted, for at the time she departed the prevailing presumption was that she was permitted to marry another man.If she says: "My son died, and afterwards my husband died," her word is not accepted as the basis for yibbum.31We suspect that perhaps she is lying in order to marry her brother-in-law. Nevertheless, we grant a certain degree of credence to her words,32I.e., were it not for her statement that her son died first, she would be permitted to marry without any restrictions. Because we give her statements some credence, we require her to perform chalitzah. and she should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.
[The following rules apply when] a woman journeys overseas together with her husband alone: If she says, "I "bore a son overseas, he died, and then my husband died," her word is accepted and permitted her to perform yibbum. [The rationale is that] the prevailing presumption when she departed was that she was permitted to perform yibbum.If she says: "My husband died, and then the son who was born to me died," her statements are not accepted as grounds to free her of the obligation for yibbum or chalitzah. Nevertheless, we grant a certain degree of credence to her words, and she should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.33I.e., were it not for her statement that her son died after her husband, she would be required to perform yibbum. We do not accept her word to the extent that we allow her to marry without restrictions. Nevertheless, we give her statements some credence and forbid the performance of yibbum, lest in fact there be no obligation to do so.
When does the above apply? When she was forbidden to the priesthood at the outset - e.g., she had been divorced or a chalalah34A woman who is born from a relationship that is forbidden to a priest, but not to an Israelite. beforehand,35In which case, the chalitzah does not make any difference, for the woman was forbidden to the priesthood regardless. - or she said: "We were [alone] in a cave when he died."36In which case, there is no apprehension of witnesses coming.If this is not the situation, she may not perform chalitzah, lest she perform chalitzah and then witnesses come and confirm her statements that her husband died first. Thus, it will be evident that this chalitzah was unnecessary, and she [is permitted to] marry a priest. An observer may see that she performs chalitzah and then marries a priest, and he would think that a priest is permitted to marry a woman who performed chalitzah, for he is unaware that witnesses came. Therefore, she should not perform chalitzah, nor should she perform yibbum.37For according to her testimony, she is forbidden to do so. Instead, she should remain under the obligation to perform yibbum as she was when she departed, until witnesses come [and clarify the situation].38Note the discussion of this ruling by the Beit Shmuel 156:17, and the opinion mentioned there that this ruling applies only when there were witnesses who testified that the woman's husband and son both died. Otherwise, the woman's word would be accepted based on the principle of migo - i.e., if she desired to lie, she could have said that her son was still alive.
Similar laws apply when a woman's husband and a second wife journeyed overseas, and two witnesses came and told [the first wife], "Your husband died." She should not perform chalitzah, nor should she perform yibbum until she knows whether or not her husband's second wife bore a child.39This law applies even if the second wife was not pregnant when she left. Our Sages considered the possibility of the woman becoming pregnant as a reasonable probability.Why should she not perform chalitzah nine months after the death of her husband, in which case she would be permitted to marry another man from any standpoint? If the other woman bore a child, that frees her of all obligations. And if the other woman did not bear a child, she [should be permitted, because] she performed chalitzah.[Our Sages prohibited this] as a decree, lest after the woman performed chalitzah, it become known that her husband's other wife bore a viable child. This woman will then not be [bound by the prohibitions of] a woman who performed chalitzah, and she may marry a priest despite performing chalitzah. An observer - who did not know about the witnesses [who informed her of the birth of her husband's child] - might conclude that a priest is permitted to marry a woman who performed chalitzah, and he will testify that a Rabbinic court gave her license to marry a priest. Therefore, if she was forbidden to the priesthood at the outset, she may perform chalitzah nine [months after the death of her husband and] she may marry another man.The wife who accompanied her husband when he died should wait 90 days, as other yevamot.40See Chapter 1, Halachah 19. Thus, she may perform chalitzah or yibbum. She need not worry about [the possibility of] the wife in the country [giving birth], for that woman was not in the same country as her husband.41We do not consider the possibility that the woman was impregnated by her husband before he departed on the journey and did not realize this until he had already departed.
When a woman's husband dies, and her mother-in- law is living overseas, she need not suspect that her mother-in-law bore a child [before her husband's death], and that there is a yavam for her living in another country. Our Sages did not institute a decree of this nature.42For even if we presume that the mother-in-law will become pregnant, it is more probable that she will miscarry or give birth to a girl (in which cases, the mitzvah of yibbum would not apply) than that she bear a son (Beit Shmuel 157:11). Instead, they allowed the prevailing presumption [regarding her status to continue], and she is permitted to remarry.The same concept applies when a woman's husband dies, and her son is living overseas - she need not suspect that her son died [before her husband's death]. Instead, we allow the prevailing presumption [regarding her status to continue].
If, however, the mother-in-law departed [overseas] while she was pregnant, the daughter-in-law must bear that fact in mind. She may not marry another man until she knows the fate of her mother-in-law's pregnancy. Perhaps a yavam for her was born before her husband died.
[The following laws apply when] a woman's husband and son went overseas, and [witnesses] came and told her: "Your husband died and then your son died." If she married,43For according to the testimony she was given, her husband was survived by a son, and the mitzvot of yibbum and chalitzah do not apply. and later discovered that they died in the opposite order,44In which case her husband would have died without children, and she would be obligated to perform yibbum or chalitzah. she must leave her second husband.45See Chapter 2, Halachah 18. None of the children she bore him is considered illegitimate, however.46For it is only when a child is born from forbidden relations that are punishable by karet that this status is incurred (Yevamot 49a).[More stringent rules apply if she was told: "Your son died and then your husband died," and on that basis she performed the rite of yibbum and then discovered that they died in the opposite order. She is obligated to leave her second husband. All the children she bore him - both those born before she received this notice and those born afterwards - are considered illegitimate.47For her relations with her brother-in-law were prohibited by a transgression punishable by karet. The fact that she violated this prohibition unwittingly does not change the status of her children.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
What does the mitzvah of chalitzah entail? The yevamah goes to the yavam's place of residence1Sanhedrin 31b derives this from Deuteronomy 25:8: "And the elders of his city shall call him..." - i.e., "his city" and not her city. and approaches the judges. They call the yavam and give him advice that is appropriate for him and for her.If the appropriate advice is for them to perform yibbum, they advise him2Our text is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. This version appears appropriate, for the decision to perform yibbum or chalitzah is that of the remaining brother alone. to perform yibbum.3This follows the Rambam's perspective (Chapter 1, Halachah 2) that, in general, it is preferable to perform yibbum rather than chalitzah. Even so, the judges should take counsel and see whether the couple appear appropriate for each other. If the appropriate advice is for them to perform chalitzah - e.g., she is young and he is older, or she is older and he is young4See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:26. - they advise him to perform chalitzah.
The judges should first establish the place where they will hold session,5Darchei Moshe (Even HaEzer 169) states that establishing a place for the chalitzah beforehand serves to publicize the matter. and then she should perform chalitzah there in their presence, as [Deuteronomy 25:7] states: "And his yevamah shall ascend to the gate, [where] the elders [hold court]...."If [the judges] did not speak about the matter, nor did they establish a place, and [the yevamah] and [the yavam] chanced upon them and performed chalitzah, the chalitzah is acceptable.
Both [the yevamah] and the yavam should be taught to read until they are familiar [with the words they must recite].6For, as explained in the halachot to follow, both the yavam and the yevamah must recite certain phrases within the chalitzah ceremony.The yevamah should be trained to say lo avah in one breath, [pause,] and say yabmi, so that her words cannot be interpreted to mean avah yabmi.7Lo avah yabmi means "My yavam did not desire" [Deuteronomy 25:7]. Improper emphasis could, however, cause the statement to be interpreted as: "No, my yavam desired."
If the yevamah is familiar [with the phrase] she must recite, we are not fastidious about her reading [the above phrase] in one breath. If, however, she is unable [to read], we should train her until she does so [properly].
Chalitzah must be performed during the day and not at night.8For chalitzah is considered as a "judgment," and judgments may not be made at night (Yevamot 104a). (See also Halachah 16.) [The rite] must be performed in the presence of [at least] three individuals9I.e., there is no need for these individuals to be formally ordained as judges. Nevertheless, as the Rambam states in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 12:1), and as the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:1) states, at the outset it is proper for three ordained judges to preside over the ceremony. who know how to read.10For they must read the phrases for the yavam and the yevamah, as will be stated later in the text. See Halachah 15, which states that this requirement is a factor only a priori.If one of the three individuals is a convert, [the chalitzah] is unacceptable. Even a man whose father is a convert, and his mother a native-born Jewess,11The Ramah (Even HaEzer 169:2) rules that a judge whose father is a native-born Jew and his mother is a convert may serve in this capacity. should not participate in the chalitzah ceremony. [Instead, it is necessary,] that both his father and his mother be native-born Jews.12Deuteronomy 25:10 states: "And his name will be called in Israel...." This phrase implies that only those of Jewish ancestry can serve in this capacity.It is a mitzvah for five men [to observe the rite], so that the matter will be publicized.13This serves two purposes. It is of benefit to the woman, for men will become aware that she is eligible to remarry. It also will make known the fact that she is forbidden to a priest (Rashi, Yevamot 101b). The other two may even be common people.14Who do not know how to read. For their presence is only for the sake of making the matter known.
How is the rite of chalitzah performed? A leather15The entire shoe (according to the Ramah, Even HaEzer 169:15, even its straps must be made of leather). shoe16See Yevamot 102a and the Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:16), which discuss whether a sandal or a shoe should be used. with a heel, that is not sewn with linen threads,17There are certain opinions that allow a shoe that is sewn with linen, but both the Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah (ibid. 169:15) follow the Rambam's view. is brought to [the yavam].18At the outset, the shoe should belong to the yavam. (See the Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:14). He places it on his right foot and ties its straps around his foot.19The yavam should not be wearing socks, and no mud should be stuck to his feet (Shulchan Aruch, ibid.:26).Both [the yavam] and [the yevamah] stand before the court.20The Sifre derives this concept from Deuteronomy 25:8, which states: "And he shall stand and say." After the fact, however, if the chalitzah was performed while the yavam and the yevamah were seated, it is acceptable (Ramah, ibid. 169:12). The phrase [Deuteronomy 25:7], Me'ein yevami.... ("My yavam refuses....") is read in Hebrew for the yevamah to repeat. Afterwards, the phrase [ibid.:8], Lo chafatzti lekachtah ("I do not desire to take her") is read for the yavam to repeat.He then presses his foot to the ground.21The Tur states in the name of Rabbenu Yitzchak Alfasi that if the yavam does not press his foot to the ground, the chalitzah is not acceptable. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:32) quotes this as a minority opinion. She sits [on the ground],22The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:30) differs and follows the opinion of the Tur, who states that the chalitzah should be performed while the woman is standing and bends to untie and remove the yavam's shoe. extends her hand before the court, loosens the straps of his shoe, removes it,23The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) states that the yevamah should untie and remove the shoe with her right hand alone. The Ramah states, however, that, after the fact, the chalitzah is acceptable if she uses her left hand. and throws it to the ground.24The Tur and others question the rationale for this act. Significantly, the commentaries cite the Rambam's source as the Zohar, Volume III, page 180a, which states that the removal of the shoe signifies the cutting of the woman's connection with her deceased husband. At the moment she removes the majority of the heel [of the shoe from his foot], she becomes free to marry another man.
Afterwards, she stands and spits on the earth before his face,25Although the literal meaning of Deuteronomy 25:9 is "she spits in his face," Yevamot 106b explains that in a halachic context, the phrase should be interpreted as above. in a manner that the spittle can be seen by the judges. For the mitzvah of chalitzah requires that both [the yevamah and the yavam] should stand when they recite [the phrases they must say] and when she spits. The judges must see the spittle that emerges from her mouth.26For Deuteronomy, ibid., states that she must spit "before the eyes of the elders."Afterwards, the phrase Kachah ye'aseh..., "This is what should be done to a man who does not build his brother's household. And his [family] shall be called within Israel 'the household of the one whose shoe was removed' [Deuteronomy 25:9-10] is read for the yevamah to repeat.
All [the statements mentioned] above should be made in Hebrew. This is derived from the phrase "This is what" [in the above verse, which is interpreted] to mean "with these words."All those seated27The Mishnah (Yevamot 12:6) and the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:42) mention "those standing there." in attendance recite chalutz hana'al, "the one whose shoe was removed," three times.28We find a threefold repetition of a phrase employed by the Sages as a means of publicizing the matter. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:11.The Halachot Gedolot interprets the threefold repetition as a reprimand. It is as if God told him: "Wicked man! With your body, you could have performed a mitzvah, and you refused.... The judges will proclaim: 'The one whose shoe was removed' like a mourner. 'The one whose shoe was removed' like one placed under a ban of ostracism. 'The one whose shoe was removed' like a person who rebels against [God's] commandments."The yevamah must remove his shoe with willful intent, and [the yavam] must have the intent that he performs this rite on her behalf. They must perform these acts with the intent of enabling her to marry other men.29Our translation of lishmah is based on the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:44).A blind man30I.e., one who is blind in both eyes (Hagahot Maimoniot, Ramah, loc. cit.:48). should not perform chalitzah,31As reflected by Halachah 15, this is just an a priori ruling. After the fact, the chalitzah is acceptable.The Ra'avad states that this law applies only when there is another brother who can perform chalitzah. If there is not another brother, the blind man should perform this ritual on the woman's behalf. Although the Maggid Mishneh contests the Ra'avad's decision, the Beit Shmuel 169:48 upholds it. for [Deuteronomy 25:9] states: "[She] shall spit before his face," and he cannot see her spittle.
Thus, the order of chalitzah should be as follows: First she recites: "My yavam refuses to perpetuate his brother's name within Israel. My yavam did not desire [to marry me].Afterwards, [the yavam] says: "I do not desire to take her." At which point, she removes his shoe and then spits. Afterwards, she recites: "This is what should be done to a man who does not build his brother's household. And his [family] shall be called within Israel 'the household of the one whose shoe was removed.'
This order is not, however, an absolute requirement. Instead, even though neither [the yevamah], nor [the yavam] recited [the required phrases], she spit and then removed his shoe, or she recited [the phrases] and then spit, the chalitzah is acceptable.
Why, [in the above instance,] should she not spit [again], [so that all the required activities] will be performed in the proper order? Lest people [mistakenly] think that spitting alone is of no consequence, and [they err and think] that it does not prevent [the yavam's] other brothers [from performing yibbum with the yevamah].32See Halachah 14.
[Even if] she merely removed his shoe, did not recite [the required phrases], and did not spit, the chalitzah is acceptable. Needless to say, if she removed his shoe and recited the required phrases, but did not spit, or if she removed his shoe and spat, but did not recite the required phrases, the chalitzah is acceptable.33Rabbi Eliezer maintains that the phrase (Deuteronomy 25:9 , kachah ye'aseh, "this is what should be done," implies that all the deeds and the order required by the Torah is imperative for the chalitzah to be effected. The final opinion of Rabbi Akiva does not, however, accept this view (Yevamot 104b).
When does the above apply? When [the yevamah and the yavam] are able to speak, for then they are able to recite [the appropriate phrases].34This reflects a Talmudic principle frequently applied and stated explicitly with regard to the meal offering brought in the Temple. These offerings consist of flour and oil. The flour and the oil should be mixed together. Nevertheless, as long as the quantity of flour is not too large to be mixed with the oil, the offering is acceptable, even when in actual fact the two were not mixed together (Rashi, Yevamot 104b). When, however, [the yevamah] or [the yavam] is dumb, they may not perform chalitzah, and if they do perform chalitzah, the chalitzah is not acceptable.35The difference between a chalitzah that is pasul, "not acceptable," and a chalitzah that is not significant at all is discussed in Halachah 26.[Their deeds are, nevertheless, effective to a certain degree.] They are not comparable to a chalitzah performed by [a yevamah] or [a yavam] who was a deaf-mute, in which case their deeds are of no consequence whatsoever,36As mentioned in the Maggid Mishneh, the Rambam's view is dependent on the Tosefta, while on the surface, the Mishnah (Yevamot 104b) appears to accept the position that a chalitzah performed by a deaf-mute is unacceptable, but not of no consequence. The Maggid Mishneh attempts to justify the Rambam's ruling, but notes that the Ramban and the Rashba follow the latter view. [Significantly, in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 12:4), the Rambam also appears to favor the latter view, and his decision in the Mishneh Torah represents a reversal of his thinking.] The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:44) mentions both views without appearing to favor either one. for a deaf-mute is not of sufficient mental capacity to take responsibility for his [or her] actions.
If [the yevamah] only spits, without removing [the yavam's shoe] or reciting [the appropriate phrases], or spits and recites [the appropriate phrases], without removing [the yavam's shoe], it is as if she has performed an unacceptable chalitzah.37As mentioned in Halachah 26, the chalitzah does not permit the yevamah to remarry, but prevents her from performing yibbum.There is a difference of opinion among the commentaries whether the effectiveness of spitting is a Scriptural law or a Rabbinic institution. The Maggid Mishneh states that it appears that the Rambam is deriving the concept from the exegesis of a verse, but this is not accepted by all authorities.If both [the yevamah and the yavam] recite [the appropriate phrases], but the yevamah does not remove [the yavam's shoe] or spit, they have not accomplished anything.38Yibbum is permitted, and she is not disqualified from marrying into the priesthood. [This is implied by the verse:] "This is what should be done to a man" - i.e., a deed removing the shoe or spitting has an effect. The recitation of the verses, by contrast, is not an absolute requirement, nor does it have any effect [on its own].39Yevamot 105a distinguishes between spitting and the recitation of the verses as follows: Spitting should be carried out after the removal of the yavam's shoe. Therefore, if it is performed before the removal of the shoe, it is considered a distinct act. The recitation of the verses, by contrast, should be performed before the removal of the shoe. An observer will thus realize that the fundamental aspect of the ceremony is still to be performed.
If [the yevamah] removes [the yavam's shoe], spits and recites [the appropriate phrases] while they are sitting, or lying on their sides,40Instead of the two standing when she spits and they recite the verses, and the yavam's standing, as mentioned in Halachot 6 and 7. if the straps of the [yavam's] shoe are tied on his leg below the knee,41And not on his foot itself, as mentioned in Halachah 6. or if she performed chalitzah in the presence of three common people who are not able to read the verses [which the two recite],42Instead of judges who know how to read, as stated in Halachah 5. the chalitzah is acceptable. Similarly, if [a yavam who is] blind43Although at the outset, a blind person should not perform this act as stated in Halachah 8. performs chalitzah, [the chalitzah is acceptable].
Chalitzah is unacceptable [in the following instances]:a) a woman performed chalitzah at night,44See Halachah 5.b) she performed chalitzah in the presence of two judges or in the presence of three judges, and one of them was a relative or [otherwise] disqualified [from serving in this capacity,45Since chalitzah is considered a judgment, three acceptable judges must preside over the ceremony.c) the shoe was tied above his knee,46Deuteronomy 25:9 states: "She shall remove his shoe from his foot." If the shoe is tied above the knee, it is not considered to have been removed from his foot.d) he untied the shoe and she removed it,47The entire act of removing the shoe must be performed by the woman. The Ramah (Even HaEzer 169:33) quotes Rabbenu Asher, who rules that if the man could walk wearing the shoe while it is untied, the chalitzah is acceptable even if the man untied the shoe and the woman removed it. or she untied the shoe and he removed it,e) she had the intent of performing [these acts to release herself from her obligation to her yavam] but he did not, or he had the intent of performing [these acts to release her from her obligation to her yavam] but she did not,48As stated in Halachah 8, the ceremony must be performed with this intent in mind.f) or a girl below the age of majority removed the shoe of an adult.49Since the girl is not past the age of majority, her deed is not totally effective. Nevertheless, since she can be be married at this age, her deed has a minimal effect, and she can no longer perform yibbum.Similarly, if a woman performs chalitzah in the presence of one judge, or even if chalitzah is performed at night by [the yevamah and the yavam] while they are alone, the chalitzah is unacceptable.50The Rambam's intent is that the chalitzah is unacceptable, but it at least has the effect of preventing the woman from performing yibbum in the future, as opposed to a chalitzah that is of no consequence, as explained in Halachah 26. When, however, chalitzah is performed by a deaf-mute, a mentally incapable person, or a minor,51These individuals are all considered mentally incompetent, and their deeds are not considered of consequence with regard to Torah law. As mentioned above, there are opinions that maintain that chalitzah performed by a deaf-mute is unacceptable, but not of no consequence whatsoever. and similarly, when a man performs chalitzah with a woman who is not obligated to perform chalitzah or yibbum,52E.g., a yevamah who is pregnant. the chalitzah is of no consequence.
When a yavam's right leg is cut off, he should not perform chalitzah with his left leg.53The commentaries explain that the Rambam's opinion is that such a man should not perform chalitzah at all. Other commentaries maintain that if the stump of the yavam's leg can be placed in a shoe and that shoe tied beneath his knee, the chalitzah is acceptable. Although the Rambam accepts, after the fact, chalitzah performed when the straps of the shoe are tied below the yavam's knee, that is only because it is theoretically possible to have tied them on his foot. When it is impossible to tie the shoe on to his foot, as in the instance at hand, the chalitzah should not be performed (Maggid Mishneh).The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:35) mentions both opinions, but appears to favor the Rambam's view. The Beit Yosef states that according to the Rambam, such a chalitzah is of no consequence at all. The Beit Shmuel 169:33 states that since there are authorities who maintain that such a chalitzah is acceptable, the later authorities agree that a woman may not perform yibbum after such a chalitzah. If he performs chalitzah with his left leg, the chalitzah is unacceptable.If [the yavam] is bowlegged, his foot turns to his side, or he always walks on the tips of his toes, she should not perform chalitzah, for the man performing chalitzah must press his heel to the ground, and such a person is incapable of this. If a person with such a disability in his legs performs chalitzah, the chalitzah is unacceptable.54After the fact, if a yavam does not press his heel to the ground in an ordinary instance, the chalitzah is, nevertheless, acceptable. The distinction between an ordinary chalitzah and the case at hand is that ordinarily, it is possible for the yavam to press his heel to the ground, and therefore the fact that he does not actually do so is not significant. In this instance, the yavam is incapable of doing so. Hence, the chalitzah is unacceptable.Although the Ra'avad and others differ with the Rambam on this issue, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:34) accepts the Rambam's view.
A yevamah whose hands are cut off may perform chalitzah. A priori, [it is acceptable,] even if [she must remove the shoe] with her teeth, for the verse does not say that she will remove it with her hands.If she removes a shoe made from cloth, she has not performed chalitzah.55A cloth shoe does not protect the foot at all; therefore, it is not considered a shoe (Yevamot 103a). This ruling is also applied in other contexts - e.g., on Yom Kippur, when we are forbidden to wear shoes, it is permitted to wear a cloth shoe (Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor 3:7).The Rashba and others maintain that there is no difference between a cloth slipper and a shoe made from the other substances mentioned. This is the view quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:22). If, however, she removes a shoe that does not have a heel, [a shoe] that was sewn with linen threads, a shoe made from goats' hair, the inner bark of a palm tree, cork or wood, the chalitzah is unacceptable.56These substances offer some protection, and so the chalitzah is of some consequence. Nevertheless, when the Torah uses the word נעל, the intent is always a leather shoe.[This same ruling applies if] the shoe is so large that [the yavam] could not walk in it, if it is so small that it does not cover the majority of his foot, it is torn to the extent that it does not cover the majority of his foot, or the sole is opened to the extent that it does not cover the majority of his foot.
Chalitzah is acceptable,57This applies after the fact. A priori, none of these situations is acceptable. however, in the following instances:a) a sandal was made of wood58The same rules apply with regard to a shoe made from any of the other substances mentioned in the previous halachah and covered with leather (Maggid Mishneh). and covered with leather, or its soles were leather, and its sides were made from goats' hair,b) [the yevamah] removed a left shoe from [the yavam's] right foot,c) the shoe did not belong to the [the yavam],59In the present age, when the Rabbinic court owns a special chalitzah shoe, it is customary to give it to the yavam as a present before the ceremony.d) it was oversized, but he could still walk while wearing it,e) it was small, but it covered the majority of his foot,f) it was torn, but it covered the majority of his foot, org) the sole was opened, but it covered the majority of his foot.
When it is questionable that a sandal is affected by tzara'at, or it has definitely been established that this is the case,60See Hilchot Tum'at Tzara'at, Chapter 12, which describes the process in which a garment or shoe affected by tzara'at is judged by a priest. There are two stages to this process: one in which the article is "quarantined" for a period of a week to determine whether it has actually been affected, and a second stage during which the priest declares that the article is affected and must be burned. and a sandal belonging to a false deity - i.e., one placed on the feet of an image61Rashi (Yevamot 103b) interprets this as a leather covering placed on the feet of an idol to prevent damage when it is transported from place to place. Thus, the sandal is placed in the category of "an accessory to a false deity." - should not be used for chalitzah.62For it is abhorrent to use an article associated with impurity or false deities for the purpose of a mitzvah (Yevamot 103b). If, however, it is used for that purpose, the chalitzah is acceptable, despite the fact that deriving benefit from [the sandal] is forbidden.63The rationale is that the performance of mitzvot is not considered to be a personal benefit (ibid.).[Different rules apply with regard to a sandal that was made from an animal] offered to a false deity,64Our translation is based on the gloss of the Maggid Mishneh. The Maggid Mishneh continues, stating that if a sandal itself is offered to a false deity, it does not become forbidden. See Beit Shmuel 169:23.The difference between this and the previous instance can be explained as follows: It is possible to nullify the connection between "an accessory to a false deity" and the worship of the false deity. (See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:8-9.) As such, there is a possibility that such a sandal will not have to be destroyed. An object offered to a false deity, including the hide from which a sandal was made, can never be separated from its association with the false deity (ibid.). As such, it is condemned to be destroyed, forbidden for eternity and considered as if it did not exist. Hence, it is not considered as if the yevamah removed a significant entity from the yavam's foot. one from an apostate city,65See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim, Chapter 4, which describes the laws governing such a city. All the property in the city is condemned to be burned, and thus it cannot be used for chalitzah, for the reasons described above. or one that was made to be worn by a corpse when it is buried. If [such a sandal] is used for chalitzah, the chalitzah is unacceptable. [The rationale is] that such a sandal was not made for a person to wear while walking.
If [the yevamah] tears the shoe off [the yavam's] foot or burns it, the chalitzah is unacceptable.66Yevamot 102a questions whether the Torah's intent is that the yevamah must bare the yavam's foot, in which instance these examples would be acceptable, or she must remove his shoe in the ordinary manner, in which instance they would not be acceptable. Since the question remains unresolved, the Rambam rules stringently. [The same ruling applies if the yavam] is wearing two shoes [on his right foot, one on top of the other,] and the yevamah removes [only] the upper one [in the ordinary manner]. Even if she tears off the lower one so that his foot is revealed, the chalitzah is unacceptable.
When a yevamah eats garlic, mustard,67Our translation is based on the Aruch. It is possible that it is not precise according to the Rambam's view. The intent, however, is definitely a sharp pungent herb. or other similar condiments that increase a person's spittle, and spittle was dripping from her mouth, [the spitting] is of no consequence.68The intent is that she must spit again in order for the chalitzah to be performed as required. Even if she does not spit at all, the chalitzah is acceptable after the fact, as stated in Halachah 12 (Maggid Mishneh). [Instead,] the spittle must be produced without any external cause.
If [a yevamah] spits blood,69Rabbenu Asher differs and maintains that a yevamah who spits blood need not spit again, even if she does not suck her wound. His view is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:40). or if blood is dripping from her mouth, [the spitting] is of no consequence. If she sucks [the wound] and then spits, it is acceptable, for it is impossible that there will be blood that was sucked out without some drops of spittle.70The fact that spittle is mixed with blood or another substance does not disqualify it.If she spits, and the wind blows away the spittle before it passed before his face - e.g., she is tall and he is short - [the spitting] is of no consequence. If [the wind blows] the spittle [away] after it passes before his face, but before it lands on the ground, it is acceptable.71The intent is that the spittle must pass in front of or below the yavam's face. If the yevamah was taller than the yavam and the wind moved her spittle away before it passed before his face, the spitting is not acceptable.If the judges do not see the spittle emerge from [the yevamah's] mouth,72Although a priori the judges must see the spittle, as stated in Halachah 7, after the fact their failure to do so does not render the spitting unacceptable.In Yevamot 106b, a phrase "before the eyes of the elders" (Deuteronomy 25:9  is cited as a support for this requirement. Nevertheless, the Rabbis explain that the requirement is Rabbinic and not Scriptural in origin, and the verse is merely an asmachta. See the Beit Shmuel 169:39. it is acceptable.
Chalitzah performed under mistaken premises is unacceptable.What is implied? For example, [if the yavam] was told: "Perform chalitzah for her; this is the manner in which you acquire her as a wife," "Perform chalitzah for her. It is a mitzvah, and you do not lose any rights. If you later desire to perform yibbum, you may,"73Note the Maggid Mishneh, which mentions that there is a dispute among the Rabbis about this issue. The rationale for the position that the chalitzah is acceptable is that in this instance, the yavam did intend to free the yevamah from her obligation to him. (See also Shulchan Aruch, Even HaEzer 169:52.) or the like, [the chalitzah] is unacceptable.74For as mentioned in Halachah 8, the chalitzah must be performed with the intent of releasing the woman from her obligation.The chalitzah is, however, effective, in that it prevents the man (or his brothers) from ever performing yibbum with this woman. Therefore, the man is compelled by the court to perform an acceptable chalitzah, for from this point on he has nothing to lose, and through his act he can enable the woman to remarry (Rashba, as quoted by Maggid Mishneh; Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit. 169:51).If, however, he was deceived and was told: "Perform chalitzah for her on the condition the she give you 200 zuz" - or "...under any other condition" - the chalitzah is acceptable,75This applies even if the condition is stated in a manner that meets the requirements of conditional statements (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit.:50). even though she did not give [him the money] or fulfill the condition.76If such a condition is made, the woman is, however, rightfully obligated to pay the amount she agreed to pay, unless she has a reason for which she considers the yavam as unfit to marry her that the court would accept [Shulchan Aruch (ibid.)]. [The rationale is that] he had the intent [of releasing her from her obligation] when he performed chalitzah.
When [a man] issues a protest77Based on Hilchot Gerushin 6:19, it would appear that the intent is that he tells two witnesses that he does not want to perform the chalitzah, the chalitzah should be nullified, because he is being compelled to perform it. with regard to chalitzah, the chalitzah is not acceptable.78Yevamot 106a establishes an equivalence between divorce and chalitzah with regard to these laws. On this basis, the Rivash (Responsum 482, quoted by the Kessef Mishneh in the gloss on Halachah 16) raises a difficulty, noting that when a husband issues a protest regarding a get, the get is nullified entirely. With regard to chalitzah, however, the Rambam rules that it is merely unacceptable.The Rivash offers a resolution, explaining that when a protest is issued with regard to a get, the get itself becomes nullified, and therefore the divorce is of no consequence at all. With regard to chalitzah, however, the yavam did perform all the required acts. His protest is accepted to the extent that it is considered that he performed these acts without intending to release the woman from her obligation. This, however, merely causes a chalitzah to be unacceptable, as stated in Halachah 16. It does not nullify it entirely. Therefore, it is proper for the judges to tell [the yavam] to nullify all protests [before he performs chalitzah], as they do with regard to a get.79See Hilchot Gerushin 6:20.[The following rules apply when] Jews compel [a yavam] and beat him until he performs chalitzah:80The equivalence established by Yevamot 106a applies in this context as well. The Rambam discusses the laws governing a get given under compulsion in Hilchot Gerushin 2:20. If they act according to law,81This refers to a situation analogous to those described in Chapter 2, Halachah 14, or Chapter 6, Halachah 4, in which the person should be compelled to perform chalitzah.The Ramah (Even HaEzer 169:13) states that even according to the Ashkenazic authorities who maintain that the mitzvah of chalitzah takes precedence, a yavam may be compelled to perform chalitzah only for these reasons. the chalitzah is acceptable.82For, as stated in Hilchot Gerushin, the person's actions are considered to be performed voluntarily, because:He wants to be part of the Jewish people, and he wants to perform all the mitzvot and eschew all the transgressions; it is only his evil inclination that presses him. Therefore, when he is beaten until his [evil] inclination has been weakened, and he consents, he is considered to have [acted] willfully. If they do not act according to law - e.g., they were commoners or they erred [in judgment] - the chalitzah is not acceptable.If gentiles force [a yavam to perform chalitzah] on their own initiative,83I.e., as opposed to acting as agents for a Jewish court. but the law would require that chalitzah be performed, the chalitzah is unacceptable. If they do not act according to law, the chalitzah is of no substance.
Whenever we have used the terms, "the chalitzah is of no substance," "his actions are of no consequence," or "nothing has been accomplished," the intent is that it is as if the chalitzah had not been performed at all. He does not become forbidden to her relatives,84See Chapter 1, Halachah 13. nor is she forbidden to the priesthood, and she is permitted to perform yibbum.Whenever we have used the term, "the chalitzah is unacceptable,"85As mentioned above, there is a difference of opinion among the Rabbis if the Rambam's intent is that these acts of chalitzah are acceptable according to Scriptural law or not. he becomes forbidden to her relatives, and she becomes forbidden to the priesthood. She also becomes forbidden to all the brothers, and she may not perform yibbum. She may not marry another man, however, until she performs an acceptable chalitzah.
If she transgresses and marries [another man], [the yavam] should perform an acceptable chalitzah with her. She is allowed to remain married to her husband; she is not sent away from him.86The Maggid Mishneh states that the woman should, however, be forced to separate from her second husband until she performs an acceptable chalitzah. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:55) follows this ruling.
When a yevamah grows up together with [her deceased husband's] brothers, she is permitted to perform yibbum. We do not suspect that she performed chalitzah with one of them alone and thus became forbidden to them.87As stated in Halachah 16.If, however, we see that she removed the shoe of one [of the brothers], she is disqualified [from yibbum], lest she have intended to perform chalitzah.88The Kessef Mishneh states that the Rambam's ruling alludes to the following law: If neither the yevamah nor the yavam has the intent to perform chalitzah, the fact that she removes his shoe is of no consequence, and she is permitted to perform yibbum. Note the discussion of this subject in Sefer HaKovetz. An acceptable chalitzah must, however, be performed to enable her to marry another man.
The document recording the chalitzah that we compose is merely a legal record,89This distinguishes it from a bill of divorce (a get), which is actually necessary to effect the divorce. For that reason (as implied by Hilchot Gerushin 11:9), it need not be written for the sake of the man and the woman, nor is it bound by the other details that apply to a get.Note, however, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 169:56), which states that the paper on which the document is written must be ruled with a stylus (i.e., sirtut is required), because it contains Biblical verses. so that a woman will have at hand proof that she performed chalitzah.Judges do not preside over chalitzah unless they know the identity [of the yevamah and the yavam]. Therefore, a person who observes chalitzah can write a document recording the chalitzah although he does not know90The Rambam is emphasizing that we do not suspect that perhaps the court erred and presided over a chalitzah without knowing the identity of the parties involved. that the woman is so and so's daughter, that her deceased husband was so and so, and that the person who performed chalitzah with her was [her husband's] brother. [He can assume] that the judges who presided over the chalitzah clarified these matters and afterwards had the chalitzah performed.
This is the formal text of the document recording the chalitzah that is employed at present:On this day of the week and on this day of the month, in this year from the time of creation, according to the reckoning that is followed in this and this place, we, the judges, of whom several have signed below,91For as stated in Halachah 5, at the outset five judges are necessary. Nevertheless, it is the presence of three that is considered significant. sat in a session of three in court. So and so, the widow of so and so, the daughter of so and so, approached us, as did a man named so and so, the son of so and so.And this woman told us: "So and so, the son of so and so, [is] the paternal brother of so and so, my husband. [My husband,] to whom I was married, died, leaving life to the Sages and to the entire Jewish people. He did not leave a son or a daughter to inherit him and to perpetuate his name within Israel. So and so, his brother is fit to perform yibbum with me."Rabbis, tell that man: 'If you desire to perform yibbum, do so.' If not, let him place his right foot before me, and I will remove his shoe from his foot and spit before him."We clarified the identity of so and so and that he is the paternal brother of so and so, and we told him: "If you desire to perform yibbum, do so. If not, place your right foot before us, so that she can remove your shoe from your foot and spit before you." He answered us: "I do not desire to perform yibbum."Immediately, we had this woman recite after us:92Using the Hebrew words of the verse. "My yavam refuses to raise a name for his brother within Israel. My yavam does not desire [to perform yibbum]."And then, we had the man recite after us:93Using the Hebrew words of the verse. "I do not desire to take her." He then placed his right foot forward. She removed his shoe from his foot and spit before him, emitting spittle that could be seen by us from her mouth to the ground.We then had her recite after us:94Using the Hebrew words of the verse. "This is what should be done to a man who does not build his brother's household. And his [family] shall be called within Israel 'the household of the one whose shoe was removed.' And we the judges, and all those sitting before us, answered after her: "the one whose shoe was removed," "the one whose shoe was removed," "the one whose shoe was removed," three times.When this act was performed before us, we granted license for so and so to marry whomever she desires; no man has the right to raise a protest from this day onward.So and so made a request for a legal record of this chalitzah. [Hence,] we wrote it up, signed it and gave to her as proof according to the faith of Moses and Israel.Signed so and so the son of so and so, a witness;so and so the son of so and so, a witness.95We have included these lines based on the standard printed texts of the Mishneh Torah, although it is highly likely that they are a printer's addition. They are not found in most early manuscripts and printings. Moreover, it is likely that they are a later printer's addition because the Rambam does not mention witnesses signing this document, but rather only the judges who presided over the chalitzah.
The three judges, two of the three judges, or two other individuals who witnessed the chalitzah, but who did not serve as the judges presiding over the chalitzah, may testify concerning the matter, as we have explained.96See Halachah 29.Even [the testimony of] a woman, a servant or a minor who is perceptive and understanding is accepted if they say that "This is so and so, the brother of so and so, and this is his yevamah." We may then perform chalitzah on this basis. This does not apply with regard to other forms of testimony required by the Torah - neither testimony required in questions of monetary law nor testimony required with regard to prohibitions.[The rationale for this distinction is that this is a matter that will likely be revealed, and it is possible to know the truth of the matter without relying on their testimony, as we have explained at the conclusion of Hilchot Gittin.97The Rambam concludes Hilchot Gerushin by stating:Do not wonder at the fact that our Sages released the prohibition [against a married woman], which is considered a very severe matter, on the basis of the testimony of a woman, a servant or a maid servant, statements made by a gentile in the course of conversation, a written statement, or [testimony] that was not investigated by the ordinary process of interrogation, as we have explained.[These leniencies were instituted] because the Torah required the testimony of two witnesses, and all the other details of the laws of witnesses only with regard to matters that cannot be verified definitively except via witnesses and their testimony - e.g., that one person killed another, or that one person lent money to another. When, by contrast, the matter can be verified definitively without the testimony of a witness, and the witness cannot justify [his statements] if they are not true - e.g., when one testifies that a person died, the Torah did not necessitate [that the requirements of formal testimony be met in these instances]. For it is unlikely that a witness will testify falsely.As interpreted by the Noda BiY'hudah (Even HaEzer, Volume I, Responsa 27 and 33), the Rambam's statement implies that since the matter will ultimately become public knowledge, no formal testimony is required, and the statements of an individual who witnessed the matter himself are sufficient to be accepted.If the yavam desires to perform yibbum, he should consecrate her, perform yibbum and write her a ketubah, as we have explained.98See Chapter 2, Halachah 2; Hilchot Ishut 22:14.
On this day of the week and on this day of the month, in this year according to the reckoning that is followed in this and this place, [we the undersigned testify] that so and so, the son of so and so, appeared before us and told us: "My paternal brother died, leaving life to the Sages and to all of Israel. He did not leave a son or a daughter to inherit him and to perpetuate his name within Israel. He did, however, leave a woman so and so, the daughter of so and so. According to the Torah, she is fit to perform yibbum with me, as it is written in the Torah scroll of Moses: 'A yavam will engage in relations with her.' This woman consented and performed yibbum with so and so, the son of so and so, her yavam, to perpetuate [her deceased husband's] name within Israel, as it is written: "The first-born that she bears will arise in the name of his brother who is deceased."99It appears in this context that the Rambam is referring to the literal meaning of the verse and not the halachic meaning, as stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 6.So and so, the yavam, has written [a marriage contract for] two hundred silver zuzim, as befits her, as was written in the marriage contract written to her by her first husband,100This refers to an instance where the woman was a virgin when she married her first husband. Since she did not collect her due from her first husband, she is still entitled to a marriage contract of two hundred zuz. Otherwise, she would be granted only one hundred zuz, as is granted to other widows. and he adds to this pledge from his own resources this and this amount. This is the dowry with which she entered the household... [continuing as in] the ordinary text of a ketubah.
33On this day of the week..., [we the undersigned testify] that so and so, the son of so and so, told so and so, the daughter of so and so, a virgin bride: "Become my wife according to the faith of Moses and the Jewish people. And I, with the help of God, will work to honor you, sustain you, nourish you, provide for you and clothe you according to the custom of Jewish men who faithfully honor, sustain, nurture, provide for and clothe their wives."And as a dowry fit for a virgin, I will give you 200 silver zuzim, which are equivalent to 25 zuzim of [pure] silver,102For the coins of the Talmudic era were one part silver and seven parts base metal (Hilchot Ishut 10:8). which are fit for you according to the Torah,103Based on Hilchot Ishut (ibid.), this phrase appears to be a printer's addition, for the Rambam considers the commitment to this sum to be a Rabbinic ordinance. It is lacking in many authoritative printings and manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. According to Ashkenazic custom, the phrase should be included in the ketubah. your sustenance, your clothing and your other needs, and I will give you conjugal rights."104This conveys a man's pledge to give his wife sha'arah (her sustenance), kesutah (her clothing) and onatah (her conjugal rights). These constitute a man's fundamental obligations in marriage, as stated in Exodus 21:10. (See also Sefer HaMitzvot, Negative Commandment 262; Hilchot Ishut 12:2.)So and so agreed and became the wife of so and so. He consented and added to the essential requirement of the marriage contract, reaching a total sum of such and such. This is the sum of the value of the dowry that she brought to the household, such and such. The groom received this entire amount. It entered his domain and came under his jurisdiction, and he accepted responsibility for the entire amount as a loan and a debt.Similarly, the groom has told us, "I accept responsibility for the entire [sum mentioned in] this marriage contract: the essential requirement of the marriage contract, the dowry, the additional amount, and all the stipulations of the marriage contract.105I.e., to provide his wife with her provisions and clothing."[This responsibility I accept upon myself,] my heirs and on all the valuable and desirable property and assets that I own beneath the heavens. [This includes] those that I already own and those that I will acquire and includes landed property and movable property that is acquired via the acquisition of landed property. All of them will be liable and accountable for the entire sum of this marriage contract: the essential requirement of the marriage contract, the dowry and the additions that payment be made from them in my lifetime and after my death, including even the cloak I wear on my shoulders."We have formalized all that is written and explicitly stated above with a comprehensive kinyan.106I.e., a kinyan sudar, the exchange of a handkerchief that serves to formalize the acquisition of property, or the establishment of a binding contractual agreement. It should not be considered as an asmachta107An agreement made facetiously, without the desire to keep it. or as a sample text for legal documents that is not binding. Instead, it is binding with all the power and rigor of marriage contracts that are customarily accepted among the Jewish people, as ordained by our Rabbis of blessed memory. We signed this marriage contract on the date mentioned above. Everything is clear, forceful and viable.
If the marriage contract is written for a widow, it should mention [the woman's name as] "so and so, the widow."108The essential requirement of the marriage contract of a widow is only one hundred zuzim. In order to explain this reduction, the marriage contract mentions her status. If the marriage contract is written for a divorcee, it should mention [the woman's name as] "so and so, the divorcee."109This is necessary for the reasons mentioned previously and also to identify the woman as being forbidden to the priesthood. Even if this husband leaves her a widow, she may not marry a priest, because of her previous divorce. Similarly, if she had been taken captive [by gentiles], one should write "so and so, who was taken captive," so that a priest will not err [and marry] her.110Such a woman is forbidden to the priesthood, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:17.[In these instances,] it is written: "And as a dowry, I will give you 100 silver zuzim, which are equivalent to 12 1/2 zuzim of [pure] silver, which are fit for you...."111If a woman had engaged in sexual relations previously outside the context of marriage, she should also be given a ketubah of this amount according to many authorities. Others maintain that she should be given the amount usually given to a virgin bride, so that she will not be publicly embarrassed. Others differentiate between a woman who had relations only with her prospective husband (in which case, the second ruling is followed) and one who had relations with others (in which case the first ruling is followed).
When a legal record of the chalitzah or a ketubah for a yevamah is written, the place where the verses [from the Torah] are written should be ruled with a stylus, for it is forbidden to write three words [from the Torah] without ruling [the surface on which one writes].112The commentaries note the apparent contradiction between the Rambam's ruling here [which is also reflected in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sotah 2:4)], and his ruling in Hilchot Sefer Torah 7:16, where he states that one may write three words, but not four, without ruling the writing surface. The Maggid Mishneh notes that both of these opinions have their source in Megillah 7b. He and other commentaries discuss this issue in Hilchot Sefer Torah.The contradiction was brought to the attention of the Rambam's grandson, Rabbi Yehoshua, who states that the ruling in Hilchot Sefer Torah should be followed, since there the subject is given full focus, while in Hilchot Yibbum the matter is mentioned tangentially. Significantly, however, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 284:2) differs and follows the more stringent view.A yevamah who performs chalitzah is permitted to marry on the same day on which she performed chalitzah, for she should not perform chalitzah until 90 days have passed [since her husband's death].113See Chapter 1, Halachah 19.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
When a yavam gives a yevamah a bill of divorce (a get),1This refers to a get given before the brother made a statement of intent to marry the yevamah (ma'amar). See Halachot 4 and 5. he disqualifies her and all of [his deceased brother's] other wives [from performing yibbum] with him or with any of the other brothers. It is considered as if he has performed chalitzah with her.The power of a get to affect a yevamah is Rabbinic in origin. [They instituted this decree based on the following rationale:] Since a get has the power to bring about the divorce of a married woman, and every get causes a woman to be disqualified from the priesthood, [they decreed] that it should also disqualify a yevamah from performing yibbum. [The yevamah] is not permitted to marry another man, however, until she performs chalitzah.
A statement of intent to marry (ma'amar)2See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. does not fully effect the establishment of a marriage bond for a yevamah, and it does not cause her to become a married woman in the full sense. Nevertheless, [if the yavam desires to nullify the ma'amar,] he must give [the yevamah] a get. For her to marry another man, however, chalitzah must be performed.
What is implied? When [a yavam] gives a ma'amar to his yevamah, but does not desire to engage in sexual relations with her, he must write a get for her, since she was consecrated unto him, and he must perform chalitzah with her to cause her to be permitted to others.3In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 3:5), the Rambam writes that at the outset, the get should precede the chalitzah.For a yevamah is not permitted to marry another man unless she enters into sexual relations with her yavam [and then is divorced or widowed], or if she performs chalitzah. A get disqualifies her for yibbum, but does not permit her to marry another man. A ma'amar does not effect a marriage bond in a complete sense, as sexual relations do.
When [a yavam] gives a ma'amar to his yevamah and then gives her a get [to nullify his ma'amar], he has negated what he brought about,4I.e., the get nullifies the kiddushin brought about by the ma'amar. and [the yevamah] is free [to perform yibbum]. It appears to me that she is free only [to perform yibbum] with his brothers, but she is forbidden to him.5Whenever the Rambam uses the expression "It appears to me," he is referring to a ruling that is not specifically mentioned in the Talmud. In this instance, Rashi (Yevamot 32a, 52a) agrees with the Rambam, but the Ra'avad and Tosafot differ and maintain that if the yavam who gave her the ma'amar and the get desires, he may still perform yibbum with her. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 170:15) quotes both opinions, but appears to favor that of the Rambam.
When [a yavam] gives a get [to his yevamah] [to nullify] his connection to her and not {to nullify his ma'amar}, he disqualifies her [from performing yibbum] with him and his other brothers, as stated above.6In Halachah 1. The Rambam is adding that even if the yavam had already given the yevamah a ma'amar, this ruling still applies.If the yavam gives a get without specifying the reason, we assume that his intent is to sever his connection with the yevamah and not merely to nullify his ma'amar (Rashi, Yevamot 32a; Ramah, Even HaEzer 170:15).He must give her [another] get [to negate] his ma'amar and perform chalitzah with her to permit her to marry another man.
When a ma'amar is given to a yevamah at the outset, without its having been preceded by any other activity and without its having been followed by any activity other than the sexual relations between [the yavam] who gave the ma'amar and the yevamah, the ma'amar is referred to as "an acceptable ma'amar."By contrast, a ma'amar is referred to as "an unacceptable ma'amar" when:a) before the ma'amar either this yavam or one of his brothers gave a get to this yevamah or one of the deceased brother's other wives or performed chalitzah with her,7Once a yavam has performed chalitzah, neither he nor his brothers may perform yibbum afterwards. Similarly, once a get has been given, the yavam is obligated to perform chalitzah and may not perform yibbum. Since yibbum is not relevant, the ma'amar is not acceptable.b) either he or one of his brothers engaged in sexual relations with one of the deceased brother's other wives beforehand,8For only one of the wives of the deceased brother may be married by a yavam, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 9.c) after the ma'amar, either this yavam or one of his brothers gave a get to this yevamah or one of the deceased brother's other wives or performed chalitzah with her,9Since a ma'amar does not complete the bond between the yavam and the yevamah, the connection between them can be disqualified because of undesirable actions, such as those mentioned by the Rambam.d) he or one of his brothers engaged in sexual relations with one of the deceased brother's other wives or gave a ma'amar to one of them, ore) one of his brothers gave a ma'amar or engaged in sexual relations [with the yevamah to whom he gave the ma'amar].[This term applies to] both a ma'amar that preceded these deeds as well as to a ma'amar that was given afterwards.
What is implied? If [a yavam] a) gave a get or performed chalitzah with his yevamah and afterwards he or one of his brothers gave her or another of his deceased brother's wives a ma'amar, or b) he entered into relations with his yevamah10Although the ma'amar that follows the relations is nullified, the marriage bond established by the relations remains in effect (Rav David Arameah). or gave her a ma'amar, and then he or one of his brothers gave another of his deceased brother's wives a ma'amar or entered into relations with her, the ma'amar is unacceptable. This applies both to the first ma'amar11This ma'amar is disqualified by the actions that follow it. and the second ma'amar.12This ma'amar is disqualified by the actions that preceded it.
Thus, we may conclude that whether a ma'amar was preceded by another ma'amar, a get, a chalitzah, or sexual relations, or whether any of these acts preceded a ma'amar, the ma'amar is unacceptable.13Although the ma'amar is unacceptable and yibbum is not allowed, a get is necessary (from both brothers, when two ma'amarim are involved), nevertheless, to nullify the kiddushin. Afterwards, one of the brothers should perform chalitzah to enable the woman to marry another man. The only exception is when [a yavam] gives a ma'amar and enters into sexual relations [with the yevamah] after the ma'amar; this follows the dictates of the law.
When a yavam enters into sexual relations with his yevamah at the outset14According to Rabbinic law, the yavam should give the yevamah a ma'amar before entering into relations with her. Nevertheless, after the fact, if he failed to give her such a ma'amar, their relations still establish a marriage bond between them that the Sages allowed to continue. or after giving her a ma'amar, and nothing else preceded [their relations], [their] relations are referred to as "acceptable."If a) a ma'amar from one of his brothers [was given to this yevamah],b) a get was given [to this yevamah] or to one of [the deceased brother's] other wives, orc) a ma'amar [was given by this yavam] or one of his brothers to one of [the deceased brother's] other wives, before [the yavam and the yevamah entered into relations], the relations are referred to as unacceptable.15In all these instances, the yavam must divorce the yevamah with a get, because of their relations in which they engaged, and also perform chalitzah because of his original obligation to her. Similarly, he and/or his brothers must give a get to any of his deceased brother's other wives if she was given a ma'amar in such an instance (Maggid Mishneh, based on Yevamot 50b).
When a yavam performs chalitzah with his yevamah at the outset without any other activity preceding it, the act is referred to as "a superior chalitzah."If [the chalitzah] was preceded by a get or a ma'amar, whether from this yavam or from his brothers, [which was given] either to this yevamah or to one of [the deceased brother's] other wives, the act is referred to as an "inferior chalitzah."16See Halachah 12. See also Chapter 7, Halachah 9, from which it is apparent that whenever a yavam cannot perform yibbum with his yevamah, the chalitzah he performs with her is deemed "inferior."
When there are many yevamot coming from one household,17I.e., the deceased was married to many wives. after one of them has entered into "acceptable relations" or performed a "superior chalitzah," all are permitted [to marry other men], and their obligation to the yavam is removed.If one of them entered into "unacceptable relations" or was given an "unacceptable ma'amar," all the wives are forbidden to perform yibbum.18I.e., as mentioned above, unacceptable relations and/or an unacceptable ma'amar have an effect and nullify the possibility of performing yibbum with any of the deceased's other wives. The woman who entered into relations or who received the ma'amar must be divorced with a get. [In addition,] {each} one19There is a question among the commentaries if the word "each" is included in the text of the Mishneh Torah or not. The Maggid Mishneh maintains that this word should be included in the text. According to his interpretation, even if the yavam performs chalitzah with one of the deceased's wives who did not receive a ma'amar or engage in relations with the yavam, this chalitzah does not remove the obligation from the deceased's other wives, and each of them must perform chalitzah.The Lechem Mishneh differs and maintains that the word "each" is a later addition. (And indeed most authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah substantiate this contention.) According to this view, if the yavam performs chalitzah with one of the deceased's wives who did not receive a ma'amar or engage in relations with the yavam, this chalitzah removes the obligation from the deceased's other wives, and none of them is required to perform chalitzah.Even according to this view, if the yavam performs chalitzah with the yevamah who received an unacceptable ma'amar or engaged in unacceptable relations, this chalitzah does not remove the obligation from the deceased's other wives, and each of them must perform chalitzah.The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 170:19) quotes the Maggid Mishneh's interpretation of the Rambam's ruling, but mentions that other authorities differ. of them is required to perform chalitzah to be permitted to marry another man. For "unacceptable relations" do not remove [a yevamah's] obligation to her yavam.
If one of [a deceased man's wives] performs an "inferior chalitzah," she is permitted to marry another man, but [the deceased's] other wives remain forbidden [to marry] unless they perform chalitzah or unless all the brothers perform chalitzah with [the yevamah] who performed the "inferior chalitzah." For an "inferior chalitzah" does not remove the obligation of yibbum from this household until [the yevamah who performed the "inferior chalitzah" performs chalitzah] with all the brothers, or all [the deceased's wives] perform chalitzah.
Whenever a yevamah engages in sexual relations with her yavam, [a get is required to terminate the relationship], regardless of whether or not the relations are acceptable. [This applies] even if [the yavam] engaged in relations with [the yevamah] after performing chalitzah with her.20In which instance she is forbidden to him by Rabbinic decree, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 12.[Similarly, this ruling applies] regardless of whether [a yavam] or his brothers engaged in the relations for the sake of establishing a marriage bond21I.e., consecrating the woman by engaging in sexual relations with her, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 1:2. or for the sake of yibbum. Even if [a yavam] or his brother engages in relations with another [one of the deceased's] wives after [the yavam] engages in "acceptable relations" with [his yevamah],22In which case the relations with the second yevamah violate a positive commandment of the Torah, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 12. he must divorce the woman with a get, for these relations effect the establishment of a marriage bond.23For even when the relations violate a Rabbinic prohibition or a positive commandment, a marriage bond is effected, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 4:14.Similarly, whenever a yevamah is given a ma'amar - whether an "acceptable ma'amar" or an "unacceptable ma'amar" - a get is required because of the ma'amar, as explained.24Halachah 2. Only then is the prohibition brought about by the ma'amar removed.
As mentioned, a get does not dissolve [a yavam's connection with] his yevamah entirely.25As mentioned in Halachah 1, it is only through chalitzah that the connection is completely dissolved. Similarly, a ma'amar does not acquire her [as a wife for the yavam] in a complete way. It is [only] sexual relations that establish the marriage bond in a complete manner, and it is [only] chalitzah that dissolves the connection entirely.Therefore, when a yevamah is given one get after another, or one ma'amar after another, there is an effect.26As explained in the following halachah. When, however, [another brother] engages in relations with [a yevamah with whom a yavam] engaged in relations, or performs chalitzah with [a yevamah with whom a yavam] performed chalitzah, the second relations or the second chalitzah are of no consequence.27The intent is that the relations are of no consequence with regard to the laws of yibbum. They are, however, adulterous relations, and if the yevamah engages in them willingly, she is not permitted to remain married to her husband. Similarly, a get or chalitzah that follows relations is of no consequence.
What is implied? When a yavam gives a get to a yevamah, and afterwards gives a get to another one of [the deceased's] wives, he is forbidden to marry the relatives of both women.28A person is forbidden to marry the women who are closely related to his divorcee. In this instance, although neither of these gittin is necessary, the prohibition is still applied in both cases.In this instance, both women are required to perform chalitzah in order to marry another man. See Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 170:5).Similarly, when two yevamim give two gittin to one yevamah, one after the other, she is considered to have been divorced by both of them. They are both forbidden to marry her relatives; one of them should perform chalitzah [with her].29Both brothers are not required to perform chalitzah in order for her to be permitted to marry others. Performing chalitzah with her does not, however, cause the deceased's other wives to become permitted, as explained in Halachot 11 and 12.Similarly, if [a yavam] gives a get to his yevamah, and then his brother gives a get to another one of [the deceased's] wives, each brother is forbidden to marry the relatives of the woman to whom he gave the get. Similarly, if [two brothers each] give a ma'amar, one after the other, [each must give a get], as explained.30See Halachah 13.When, however, a yavam performs chalitzah with his yevamah, and afterwards either he or his brother perform chalitzah with another of [the deceased's] wives, or two yevamim perform chalitzah with the same yevamah, the second chalitzah is of no consequence, and the brother who performed it is not forbidden to marry the woman's relatives.31As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 14, the same relatives who are forbidden to a man who divorces his wife are forbidden to a man who performs chalitzah. It is just as if he performed chalitzah with another woman who is not under obligation to him.
Similarly, when a man engages in relations with his yevamah,32This refers to "acceptable relations," as stated in Halachah 11. If the relations are "unacceptable," different laws apply (Maggid Mishneh). and then he or one of his brothers performs chalitzah with her or with one of the other wives [of his deceased brother], this chalitzah is of no consequence.Similarly, if his brother gave a get to [this yevamah or] any of the other wives [of his deceased brother], it is of no consequence. Nor is it of consequence if one of his brothers gives the woman a ma'amar or engages in relations with her.33If, however, the yevamah engages in these relations willingly, she must be divorced by her husband for committing adultery. Once the brother engaged in relations with her, he acquired her [as his wife] in a complete manner, and a married woman cannot be consecrated by another man. If, however, one of the brothers gave a ma'amar to one of the other wives [of his deceased brother], or engaged in relations with her, he must release her with a get, as we have explained.34See Halachah 13.
[The following rules apply when] two yevamim perform yibbum with two yevamot coming from the same household, and it is not known who performed yibbum first.35I.e., the deceased left two or more wives and was survived by two or more brothers. One brother decided to perform yibbum with one of the widows. Unknowingly, another brother decided to perform yibbum with another widow, and it is not known who performed yibbum first. Both should divorce [the women] with gittin.36For the marriage of one of them is sinful, transgressing a positive commandment. Since it cannot be determined whose marriage is sinful, both are required to divorce.See also the Beit Yosef (Even HaEzer 170), who quotes a responsum of the geonim that also requires that one of the brothers perform chalitzah. The rationale is that perhaps one of the brothers gave his yevamah a ma'amar, and then the other one performed yibbum. Since these are "unacceptable relations," chalitzah is also necessary, as explained above. The women are then permitted to marry other men, but are forbidden to the yevamim.Consequently, when Reuven lived in Jerusalem and he had two wives, one living in Akko and one living in Tyre, [and two brothers:] Shimon who lived in Akko and Levi who lived in Tyre, if there is a report that Reuven died, according to law it would be proper for neither brother to perform yibbum until he knows what his other brother did. For perhaps he performed yibbum first.If one of the brothers does perform yibbum, he is not forced to divorce his wife until it is determined that his other brother performed yibbum first.37For it is not known that his brother performed yibbum, and even if he did perform yibbum, perhaps he did so after this brother performed yibbum. Since there are several doubts involved (םפק םפקא), the yavam is not forced to divorce until he has determined that his brother has also performed yibbum. If one brother desired to perform chalitzah without waiting to see what his other brother did, he is not prevented from doing so.38The commentaries have questioned this ruling, based on Chapter 3, Halachah 16, which requires a woman to wait until she discovers what has taken place overseas, lest the chalitzah be unnecessary, she discover that fact and marry a priest and an onlooker not know all the details of the situation. Such a scenario could also happen in the present situation.There are commentaries that try to reconcile the Rambam's ruling. For example, Mishneh LaMelech explains that in the present instance, the doubt could be protracted indefinitely, while in the previous case, everything is dependent on a woman's giving birth, and the matter can be clarified after nine months. Nevertheless, because of these objections, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 170:20) does not mention this element of the Rambam's ruling.
When a yavam who is below the age of majority, [but more than] nine years and one day old, enters into relations [with a yevamah], [the consequence] is equivalent to [that of] a ma'amar given by an adult;39As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 15 (and Hilchot Ishut 11:3), when a boy over nine years old enters into sexual relations with a woman, his actions are considered of consequence in certain contexts.The Maggid Mishneh and Rashi (Kiddushin 19a) explain that when a minor above nine years old enters into relations with a woman, he acquires her as his wife according to Scriptural law. (Nevertheless, if another man enters into relations with her, the other man is not executed for committing adultery.) Our Sages, however, reduced the level of connection established and caused their marriage bond to have only the effectiveness of a ma'amar.[The rationale why yibbum performed by a minor is effective although a minor does not possess the intellectual maturity to take responsibility for his conduct is that we find that yibbum does not require intent at all; what is significant is the act of sexual relations. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 3.)]Tosafot differ and maintain that, in this context, the relations of a nine-year old are of no consequence according to Scriptural law. Nevertheless, the Rabbis enforced a stringency and considered these relations to be equivalent to a ma'amar. [the yevamah] is not acquired as a wife in a complete manner.40This concept is illustrated in the halachah that follows, as is another consequence of the principle that the sexual relations that this youth engages in are considered equivalent to a ma'amar given by an adult.When [a yavam who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old, gives a ma'amar at the outset, it is effective and causes [the yevamah] to be forbidden to [his brothers] who are past majority. If, however, he gives [the ma'amar after a ma'amar has been given by his brothers who are past majority, his ma'amar] is of no consequence.[Similarly,] a get that he gives or chalitzah that he performs is always of no consequence, whether it precedes [his brothers' actions] or follows them.41As mentioned in Chapter 4, Halachah 16, chalitzah performed by a minor is of no consequence, because the passage concerning chalitzah explicitly mentions an איש - i.e., a male past majority. Since chalitzah performed by a minor is of no consequence, a get given by him is of no consequence, because the disqualification caused by a get is an extension by the Rabbis of the Scriptural prohibition caused by chalitzah.Significantly, the Rambam's statements here represent a reversal of his ruling in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 10:6), in which he rules that a get given by a minor does disqualify a yevamah from performing yibbum with the minor's brothers.
What is implied? When a [yavam who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old, engages in relations with his yevamah, or gives her a ma'amar at the outset, he disqualifies her [from performing yibbum] with his other brothers. If, however, [one of the brothers] past majority gave his yevamah a ma'amar, and then [the brother who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old, gives her or another one of the wives [of the deceased brother] a ma'amar, his actions are of no consequence, and he does not cause [the yevamah] to be forbidden to his elder brother.42Had the younger brother been past the age of majority, he would have disqualified the yevamah from performing yibbum with his older brother, as stated in Halachot 7 and 14.If, however, [the brother who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old engages in relations with her or with another one of the wives of [the deceased brother], he causes [the yevamah] to be forbidden to his elder brother, as would be the case when two [brothers] past majority each gave a ma'amar one after the other, as we have explained.43See Halachot 7 and 14.
When a [yavam who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old, has engaged in relations with his yevamah, and then one of his brothers past majority entered into relations with her, performed chalitzah with her, gave her a get, or performed one of these activities with another [one of the deceased brother's] wives, he disqualified the minor [from marrying his yevamah].44Since the minor's relations possess only the strength of a ma'amar, their effectiveness can be nullified by the actions of an older brother.Similarly, if the minor has engaged in relations with another [one of the deceased brother's] wives, or another brother who is also [below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old, has engaged in relations with this woman, or with another [one of the deceased brother's] wives, [the woman with whom the first brother originally engaged in relations] is disqualified [from marrying him], as is the ruling whenever two ma'amarim are given one after the other.
When a [yavam who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old, engages in relations with his yevamah and then does not engage in relations with her again after he attains majority, [he is] required [to give her] a get and perform chalitzah. The get [is necessary] because the relations in which he engaged are considered equivalent to a ma'amar. The chalitzah [is necessary] in order to permit the woman to marry another man, for she did not engage in relations that established a complete marriage bond.If [her yavam] engaged in relations with her after he attained majority, all that is required [to enable her to marry another man] is a get.45For the relations in which they engaged after the yavam attained majority complete the marriage bond.
[The same laws that apply to a yavam who is below the age of majority, but more than] nine years and one day old [apply to a yavam who] is twenty years old and has not manifested signs of physical maturity, but has also not manifested physical signs of impotency, as explained in the beginning of this book.46As explained in Hilchot Ishut 2:11, a male who does not manifest signs of impotency is considered a minor until he attains the age of 35.
As explained,47See Hilchot Ishut 4:7-9. both the consecration of a girl below the age of majority who is fit to leave her husband through the rite of mi'un,48As explained in Hilchot Ishut 4:7 and Hilchot Gerushin 11:1, when a girl's father died and she is below the age of majority, our Sages ordained that her mother and/or brothers can arrange a marriage for her. This marriage is not binding according to Scriptural law. Accordingly, when creating this option, our Sages gave the girl the possibility of nullifying the marriage before she reaches majority merely by making a verbal statement. and [the consecration of a girl who is] a deaf-mute are Rabbinic institutions. Nevertheless, they are two different types of ordinances. [For] the consecration of a minor was ordained so that [men] will not relate to her in an unrestrained manner.49If, however, she marries, they would respect the limits of modesty and her husband would protect her (Yevamot 112b). Her consecration is thus tentative until she comes of age. Consecration was ordained for a deaf-mute [for a different reason,] so that she will not remain unmarried forever.Accordingly, if all the yevamot coming from one household are below majority or all are deaf mutes,50If, however, one is a mentally capable woman past the age of majority, yibbum or chalitzah should be performed with her - for her marriage is binding according to Scriptural law - and not with those whose marriage is binding only by virtue of a Rabbinic ordinance. entering into relations with one of them frees them all from their obligation.51For their marriage bonds all share the same status.
If [by contrast, the deceased was married to] a deaf-mute and a minor, engaging in relations with one does not free the other of her obligation.52The marriage relationship of each one possesses an advantage over the other. The marriage with the minor, had it not been interrupted, could have blossomed into a marriage bond binding according to Scriptural law. On the other hand, there is an advantage to the marriage to the deaf-mute, because the minor had the option of ending her marriage at will, while that of the deaf-mute was binding. As evident from Halachot 27 and 28, the marriage to the minor is preferable.What is the alternative? The minor should be instructed to [nullify her marriage through] mi'un,53For just as she can dissolve her relationship with her husband while he is alive, she can nullify it afterwards, freeing herself from any obligation to the yavam (Hilchot Gerushin 11:3).The Ra'avad differs and maintains that a minor is permitted to free herself from an obligation to the yavam through mi'un only when this facilitates the establishment of a marriage bond that is binding according to Scriptural law. (See Halachah 30 and Chapter 7, Halachah 15.) In this instance, however, she is not given the privilege. Instead, she must wait until she attains majority and then perform chalitzah. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 171:1) quotes the Rambam's view. and [a yavam] should marry the deaf-mute.54Since the deaf-mute is not considered responsible for her actions, she cannot perform chalitzah. She must either perform yibbum or remain unmarried for the remainder of her life.If the yavam performs yibbum with the minor, he may not perform yibbum with the deaf-mute, for he is permitted to perform yibbum only with one of his deceased brother's wives. If he desires to divorce her, he may write a get for her after they engage in relations.55The deaf-mute is not considered responsible for her actions. Nevertheless, since according to Scriptural and Talmudic law a get may be given without the woman's consent, the divorce is binding (Hilchot Gerushin 10:23). She is then permitted [to marry] another man.
If one [of the deceased's wives] was mentally competent, and one was a deaf-mute, engaging in relations with the mentally competent woman, or performing chalitzah with her frees the deaf-mute of her obligation. Engaging in relations with the deaf-mute, by contrast, does not free the mentally competent woman [from her obligation]. For the consecration of the deaf-mute is merely a Rabbinic institution.56And performing yibbum with a woman who is consecrated only according to Rabbinic law does not free a woman who is consecrated according to Scriptural law from her obligation.Similar [laws apply when one of the deceased wives was] above majority, and one was a minor. Engaging in relations with the woman past majority, or performing chalitzah with her frees the minor of her obligation. Engaging in relations with the minor, by contrast, does not free the woman past majority [from her obligation].
[The following rules apply if] both [the deceased's wives] were minors who are entitled to absolve their marriages through mi'un. If the yavam engages in relations with one of them, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the other, this does not disqualify the marriage to the first.57For, as mentioned in Halachah 14, after a yavam engages in relations with his yevamah, their relationship cannot be disqualified. Nevertheless, we should instruct [the second one] to dissolve her marriage through] mi'un.58If the second wife does not perform mi'un, her consecration is also binding. Nevertheless, it involves the violation of a positive commandment. Moreover, a get is required for nullifying this marriage, and she becomes forbidden to the priesthood. If, however, she dissolves her marriage through mi'un, a get is not required. He should then maintain [his marriage] with the minor yevamah with whom he engaged in relations first.
Similar laws apply if [the deceased was married to] a minor and a deaf-mute. If the yavam first enters into relations with the minor, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the deaf-mute, this does not disqualify the marriage to the minor. The deaf-mute, however, must be divorced via a get.59For relations with her are forbidden, and yet her consecration is binding.[The rationale is that] the relations with the minor are considered superior to relations with the deaf-mute, for ultimately the minor will be fit [to enter into a marriage bond that is binding according to Scriptural law]. Therefore, he should maintain his relationship with the minor with whom he engaged in relations first.60Although the Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that it is forbidden to remain married to the minor, the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 171:7) follows the Rambam's ruling.
[In the above situation,] if the yavam first enters into relations with the deaf-mute, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the minor, this disqualifies the marriage to the deaf-mute.61For the marriage to the minor is preferable to that of the deaf-mute. We should instruct the minor to dissolve her marriage through] mi'un;62Since the yavam entered into relations with the deaf-mute first, he is not able to remain married to the minor. She should therefore dissolve her obligation to him through mi'un. The Sages preferred this option rather than having her wait until she attains majority and receives a get and chalitzah, because of the impression that the latter process might create (Or Sameach). Moreover, far fewer legal details are involved (Kin'at Eliyahu).Note the Tur (Even HaEzer 171), which interprets the Ra'avad's comments on this halachah as implying that the yavam should remain married to the minor. The Tur does not accept this view. the deaf-mute must be divorced with a get.63Once the minor has performed mi'un, it appears that there is no obligation for the deaf-mute to be divorced, for the minor has uprooted her connection to her deceased husband, and as such, the relations with her seemingly should not affect the status of the deaf-mute. Nevertheless, our Sages ruled that the deaf-mute must be divorced, as a penalty, because the yavam should have waited to engage in relations with her until the minor performed mi'un (Or Sameach).The Tur (loc. cit) differs and maintains that the yavam may remain married to the deaf-mute. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 171:8) quotes the Rambam's view, while the Ramah mentions that of the Tur.
[The following rules apply if the deceased was married to] a mentally competent woman and a deaf-mute. If the yavam engaged in relations with the mentally competent woman, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the deaf-mute, this does not disqualify the marriage to the mentally competent woman.64For her marriage was established through "acceptable relations." Even if the other wife of the deceased was mentally competent, relations with her would not disqualify the yavam's marriage to the first yevamah. The deaf-mute, however, must be divorced via a get.65Because the relations with her consecrated her. Nevertheless, continuing this marriage involves a prohibition.If the yavam first enters into relations with the deaf-mute, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the mentally competent woman, this disqualifies the marriage to the deaf-mute.66Since the marriage to the mentally competent woman is binding according to Scriptural law, it supersedes the marriage to the deaf-mute. The deaf-mute must be divorced with a get, and the mentally competent woman should receive both a get and chalitzah.67She must be divorced, because the relations with the deaf-mute cause relations with her to be considered as "unacceptable relations." Therefore, she must receive a get to nullify the consecration brought about by the relations, and chalitzah to nullify her obligation to her yavam.
[The following rules apply if the deceased was married to] a woman past the age of majority and one below the age of majority. [If the yavam] first enters into relations with the woman past majority, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the minor, this does not disqualify the marriage to the woman past majority.68For these are "acceptable relations." We should, however, instruct the minor to dissolve her marriage through mi'un.69Since the yavam entered into relations with the woman past majority first, he is not able to remain married to the minor. She should therefore dissolve her obligation to him through mi'un, rather than having her receive a get, because in this manner she is not disqualified from the priesthood.If he first enters into relations with the minor, and then he or one of his brothers engages in relations with the woman past majority, we should instruct the minor to dissolve her marriage through mi'un,70In this way, the minor dissolves all connection to the yavam, and there is no prohibition against his remaining married to the woman past majority. This option is preferred so that the yavam will have performed an act of yibbum that is binding according to Scriptural law. and he should remain married to the woman past majority. [The rationale is that] relations with her establish a fully binding marriage bond.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
There are brothers who are fit to perform either the rite of yibbum or the rite of chalitzah. There are brothers who are not fit to perform either the rite of yibbum or the rite of chalitzah. [The deceased's wives] are under no obligation to them at all; they may marry another man. There are brothers who are fit to perform the rite of chalitzah but not the rite of yibbum, and there are brothers who are fit to perform the rite of yibbum but not the rite of chalitzah.1These categories are all defined in the following three halachot.
With regard to the following, [the deceased's wives] have no obligation at all: a saris chamah2A man who never displayed any male physical characteristics and who is sexually impotent. The Aruch interprets the term as meaning "one who became impotent as a result of fever." Yevamot 80a interprets it as meaning "one who never saw the light of the sun while potent." and an androgynous,3A person with both male and female sexual organs. for they are not fit to father children, nor had they been at any time.4Since the entire purpose of yibbum is to perpetuate the deceased brother's name (Deuteronomy 25:7 , when this is not possible there is no obligation for this rite.The Tur (Even HaEzer 172) quotes opinions that maintain that an androgynous is considered a normal male and may perform either yibbum or chalitzah, as he desires. Although the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 172:8) also mentions this view, the Rambam's opinion appears to be favored.
These are [the brothers] who are fit to perform the rite of yibbum,5The intent is not that they should be encouraged to perform yibbum, but that if they perform yibbum, they acquire the yevamah as a wife. The rationale is that the act of yibbum does not require intent, as stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 3. but not the rite of chalitzah: a deaf-mute, a mentally incompetent man and a minor. [The rationale is that] they lack the mental competence to perform chalitzah.When a deaf-mute performs yibbum, he may never divorce [his yevamah]. For by entering into relations with her, he establishes a marriage bond that is completely binding, and he is incapable of divorcing a woman in a completely effective manner.6In the Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Karo emphasizes that this ruling applies only when the yevamah's deceased husband was mentally competent. If the deceased also was a deaf-mute, the deaf-mute yavam may divorce her by signaling with hand motions. Rav Yosef Karo reiterates this decision in the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 172:12).[When a yavam who is below the age of majority but more than] nine years and one day old performs yibbum, [he acquires his yevamah as a wife]. He may not, however, divorce [her] until he attains majority, as we have explained.7See Chapter 5, Halachah 18. Note Chapter 5, Halachah 21, which states that if he did not enter into relations with his yevamah after he attained majority, he must also perform the rite of chalitzah.
These are [the brothers] who are fit to perform the rite of chalitzah, but not the rite of yibbum: those whose status is in doubt - e.g., there is a doubt whether a yevamah is forbidden to [the deceased's] brother,8A person consecrated one of two sisters, and it is not known which one he consecrated. He is not allowed to marry, because he does not know which of the women is his wife and which is forbidden to him. If he dies, his brother may not perform yibbum, because the same doubt applies with regard to him. (See Chapter 8, Halachah 1.) a man with crushed testicles, or a crushed member, or who has been castrated in any other way,9See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapter 16, for a detailed treatment of this subject. and an elderly man whose virility has been weakened and he is incapable.If [a yavam] who has been castrated enters into relations [with his yevamah], he acquires [her as a wife], for there was a time when he was sexually potent. He must, however, divorce her with a get, because he is forbidden to marry [a native-born Jewess].A tumtum10A person whose genital area is covered by flesh and determination of his sex is not possible , as stated in Hilchot Ishut 2:25.The Tur (Even HaEzer 172) quotes opinions that maintain that there is doubt whether a tumtum may perform yibbum. Therefore, he must perform chalitzah. Although the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 172:9) also mentions this view, the Rambam's opinion appears to be favored. should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum, because his status is one of doubt. If an operation is performed, and it is revealed that he is a male, he may perform either chalitzah or yibbum, as he desires.11Once the operation is performed and it is determined that he is a male, there is no difference between him and other males.Brothers [of the deceased who are not in any of the categories listed above] may perform either chalitzah or yibbum.
There are yevamot who are fit to perform either the rite of chalitzah or the rite of yibbum. There are yevamot who are not fit to perform either the rite of yibbum or the rite of chalitzah. They are under no obligation to [the deceased's brothers] at all, and they may marry another man. There are yevamot who are fit to perform the rite of chalitzah, but not the rite of yibbum, and there are yevamot who are fit to perform the rite of yibbum but not the rite of chalitzah.12These categories are all defined in the following three halachot.
These are [the yevamot] who may perform the rite of yibbum, but not the rite of chalitzah: a deaf-mute, a mentally incompetent woman and a minor.13With regard to a minor, see Chapter 4, Halachah 16.[The rationale why they cannot perform chalitzah is that] they lack the mental competence to read and to understand. If the yavam desires to divorce the deaf-mute with a get after he engages in relations with her, he may.14For according to Scriptural and Talmudic law, neither a woman's understanding nor her consent is necessary for a divorce to be effective.
These are [the yevamot] who may perform the rite of chalitzah, but not the rite of yibbum: [Women who are] forbidden [to the yavam] because of a negative commandment, [because of a Rabbinic ordinance - i.e.,] sh'niyot, or because of a positive commandment, as will be explained.15See Halachah 10. (See also a delineation of the women included in these three categories in Hilchot Ishut 1:6-8.)Whenever there is a doubt whether or not a woman was divorced [by the deceased], she should perform chalitzah and not yibbum, lest the yavam violate a prohibition. For a brother's wife who was divorced is forbidden as an ervah.16A severe prohibition punishable by karet. See Hilchot Ishut 1:5; Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 2:1. If, however, there was a doubt regarding whether a woman was consecrated to one's [deceased] brother, her status is like that of another yevamah, and she may perform either chalitzah or yibbum. For there is no possibility of [a prohibition being involved].17I.e., if the brother's consecration was effective, then the yavam is performing a mitzvah, and if it was not effective, he has no ties to the woman at all, and he may consecrate her as he consecrates any other woman (Yevamot 41b).Similarly, the wife of a deaf-mute,18Although the marriage of a deaf-mute is not binding according to Scriptural law, his brother may still perform yibbum. an elderly woman or a woman who has become barren are like other yevamot. The yavam may perform either chalitzah or yibbum, as he desires. [The rationale is that] the elderly woman and the woman who has become barren were once fit [to bear children].
The following are not obligated to perform either chalitzah or yibbum: the wife of a saris chamah or the wife of an androgynous, the wife of a mentally incompetent person or the wife of a minor, an aylonit, or a woman forbidden [to her yavam] as one of the arayot.[The rationale for these laws is as follows. Deuteronomy 25:6 states that yibbum was instituted:] "So that the name of [the deceased] not be obliterated within Israel."19Note the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 2:3), where he cites a different proof-text for this concept, one that is not mentioned in other Rabbinic sources. This excludes the wife of a saris chamah or the wife of an androgynous, for their names are "obliterated" by nature. Since they are inherently unfit to father children, they are considered to be a separate category.[The verse continues:] "And the firstborn that she bears." This excludes an aylonit, who is, by nature, incapable of bearing a child.It is written [ibid:5]: "The wife of the deceased...." This excludes the wife of a mentally incompetent person or the wife of a minor - for with regard to them, there is no concept of marriage at all.[The verse continues:] "And he will take her as a wife." This excludes a woman forbidden [to her yavam] as one of the arayot, for she cannot be taken as a wife.20For a positive commandment does not supersede the observance of a negative commandment punishable by karet. Although it is not necessary to mention a proof-text for this concept, the Rambam does so, because it represents the simple meaning of the passage from the Torah (Maggid Mishneh; Kin'at Eliyahu).
How is it possible for a woman to be forbidden [to her yavam] as one of the arayot?21And yet to be permitted to her deceased husband, so that her original marriage was binding (in contrast to the instances mentioned in Halachah 12). For example, [the yevamah] was the sister, the mother, or the daughter of [the yavam's] wife. Such a woman is not obligated to perform either chalitzah or yibbum at all and is under no obligation to [the yavam], as implied by the verse: "And he shall take her as a wife, thus performing yibbum." Only a woman who is fit to be married, and whose consecration [by the yavam] is binding is obligated to perform yibbum.
If the yevamah was forbidden to her yavam because of a negative commandment or a positive commandment, or she was one of the sh'niyot, she should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.Why is she obligated to perform chalitzah? Because she is fit to be married, and her consecration [by the yavam] would be binding.22Nevertheless, after engaging in relations once to fulfill the mitzvah of yibbum, the yavam would be obligated to divorce the yevamah, as evident from Hilchot Ishut 4:14. Therefore, she is under obligation to the yavam. And according to law, she should perform yibbum, for yibbum is a positive commandment, and whenever the observance of a positive commandment conflicts with the observance of a negative commandment, the positive commandment takes precedence.23Note the statements of the Beit Shmuel 174:3, who connects this concept with the difference of opinion between the Sephardic and Ashkenazic authorities with regard to which takes precedence: yibbum or chalitzah. (See the notes on Chapter 1, Halachah 2.) Nevertheless, our Sages decreed that neither woman with whom relations are prohibited by a negative commandment, nor sh'niyot24The commentaries raise the question of why, in this clause, the Rambam omits the mention of women with whom relations are forbidden by virtue of a positive commandment. They explain that his omission holds the key to the comprehension of a more general question.Although the observance of a positive commandment supersedes the observance of a negative commandment, the observance of one positive commandment does not supersede the observance of another positive commandment. And therefore, the question arises: Why does yibbum establish a binding marriage bond when the transgression of a positive commandment is involved? Such a transgression is not mandated by law.The commentaries explain that indeed the yavam should not - even according to Scriptural law - perform yibbum in such a situation, and therefore the Rambam omits mention of those forbidden by a positive commandment in this clause. If, however, the yavam does violate the positive commandment, the marriage bond created is binding. For just as the positive commandment of yibbum is not greater than the positive commandment involving the prohibition, the positive commandment involving the prohibition is not greater than the positive commandment of yibbum. See the conclusion of the Responsa of the Noda Biy'hudah on Choshen Mishpat and the commentary of the Or Sameach on this halachah. should perform yibbum, lest [the yavam] engage in relations with her a second time. [At that time,] relations with her are forbidden, and there is no mitzvah, for the positive commandment [of yibbum] applies only with regard to the first time [the couple] engage in relations.Therefore, if [the yavam] transgresses and engages in relations with a yevamah who is forbidden to him because of a negative commandment or because of a positive commandment, he acquires her [as his wife] in definitive manner and must divorce her with a get. Needless to say, [this ruling applies] with regard to a sh'niyah.25In which instance the prohibition against further relations is merely Rabbinic in origin. [After the divorce, the yevamah] and all the other wives [of the deceased] are permitted to marry other men, for they have been released of their obligation.
When a yevamah has been widowed after her marriage [to the deceased] had been consummated, and a High Priest performs yibbum with her, the other wives [of the deceased] are not released from their obligation. [The rationale is that a positive commandment does not supersede a negative commandment and a positive commandment.26I.e., the positive commandment of yibbum does not supersede both the prohibition against a High Priest's marrying a widow, and the positive commandment that he must marry a virgin. For this reason, this halachah mentions an instance when the woman's marriage was consummated. If she became a widow when she had merely been consecrated, only a negative commandment is involved, and the laws mentioned in the previous halachah apply. [Therefore,] he does not acquire [the yevamah as a wife] in a definitive manner, and as such, another wife [of the deceased]27The commentaries infer that the Rambam's wording implies that if the High Priest divorces the woman, she herself may marry others; she does not require chalitzah. See the conclusion of the gloss of the Beit Shmuel 174:3. is not permitted to marry another man until she performs chalitzah [herself].
[The following principle applies when] a yevamah was forbidden to her [deceased] husband as one of the arayot - e.g., he transgressed or he erred and married his paternal sister, and she is now under obligation to his brother.28Who is also her brother. She is not considered to be [the deceased's] wife, for his consecration of her is not binding. [As such,] she is neither obligated to perform yibbum nor chalitzah.If [the deceased] had another wife, the other wife must perform either chalitzah or yibbum. If the woman who was forbidden to her [deceased] husband as one of the arayot is permitted to the yavam,29E.g., the deceased brother married his maternal sister. She has no family connection whatsoever to the surviving brother, and he is permitted to marry her. and the yavam desires to marry her and also to perform yibbum with another wife [of the deceased], he has that option.30It is not as if he married two yevamot from the same household, because the woman who was forbidden to the deceased is not considered part of his household.
When a yevamah is forbidden to her husband because of a negative commandment or a positive commandment,31An example of a negative commandment incumbent on the deceased, but not on the yavam, would be a High Priest who married a widow. His brother, an ordinary priest, is not bound by that prohibition. An example of a positive commandment incumbent on the deceased, but not on the yavam, would be a High Priest who married a woman who had engaged in relations previously. His brother, an ordinary priest, is not bound by that prohibition. or she is a sh'niyah with regard to him,32For example, the deceased married his maternal grandmother, who is forbidden to him as a sh'niyah. If the deceased has a paternal brother who had a different mother, that brother is a yavam and there is no prohibition against his marrying his brother's grandmother. but is not forbidden to the yavam for these reasons, she is permitted to perform yibbum. There is one exception - when the deceased remarried his divorcee after she had married another man. She should perform chalitzah and not yibbum.Similarly, when there is a doubt whether a yevamah was forbidden to her [deceased] husband as one of the arayot, or33Note the Kessef Mishneh, which suggests altering the text of the Mishneh Torah and substituting the word "and" for "or." For, as it explains, if the yevamah is not forbidden to the yavam, the fact that she was forbidden - or that there was a doubt whether she was forbidden - to her deceased husband does not prevent the yavam from marrying her, as stated in the previous halachah. there is a doubt whether she is forbidden to her yavam for that reason, she should perform chalitzah and not yibbum.On this basis, [the following rules apply when] a man [attempted to] consecrate a woman, but there was a doubt regarding the status of the kiddushin, and afterwards, his brother, who had been married to the sister [of the woman he intended to consecrate], died. He should perform chalitzah and not yibbum with the wife [of the deceased].34For it is possible that his original kiddushin were binding, and by marrying the yevamah he will be transgressing the prohibition against marrying two sisters. And because of the doubt, he must divorce his wife with a get.Both women are forbidden to him: his yevamah because there is a doubt whether she is an ervah, and the woman he consecrated because there is a doubt whether her status is that of one related to a woman with whom he performed chalitzah, who is forbidden as a sh'niyah is, as explained above.35Chapter 1, Halachah 13. (See also Chapter 7, Halachah 8.)If the kiddushin the yavam gave were definitely binding, the chalitzah would be of no consequence, because the yevamah would not be obligated to him at all. Nevertheless, since that has not been established definitively, the chalitzah is necessary, and as a consequence, the yavam must divorce the woman whom he originally desired to marry.
[The following principle applies when a man's] brother dies [childless] leaving two wives: one forbidden to [the yavam] as an ervah,36But not to the deceased - e.g., the yavam's daughter. and one who is not forbidden in this manner. Just as the woman who is forbidden is not under the obligation to perform chalitzah or yibbum, so too, [the deceased's] other wives are not obligated.This household is not under any obligation [to the yavam], as our Sages derived from [Deuteronomy 25:9]: "...Who did not build his brother's house": [Women from] a household from which he can take [any wife] he desires is under obligation [to the yavam]. But if he cannot "build" a portion of the household - i.e., he is forbidden to marry the woman - he should not "build" even the portion that is permitted to him.Thus, [when one of the wives of the deceased] is forbidden to [the yavam] as an ervah, the other wife also remains forbidden to him as an ervah. [She is still forbidden as] his brother's wife, for she is not under any obligation at all to him.
Accordingly, [the following rules apply when] Reuven dies [childless], leaving two wives, one of whom is forbidden as an ervah to [his brother] Shimon, and both are fit to marry [his brother] Levi.37E.g., Reuven married Shimon's daughter. She is thus forbidden to Shimon and permitted to Levi. [The wives of] this household are under no obligation at all to Shimon, and both are under obligation to Levi.[The following rule applies if] Levi performed yibbum with the woman who was married [to Reuven] but who was not an ervah to Shimon, [Levi] had another wife, and then he died [childless], and both women fell before to Shimon. They are both free of the obligation to perform either chalitzah or yibbum with Shimon.38If Levi had another brother, they would, however, be under obligation to him. [Levi's yevamah] is forbidden because she was married to the same man as was a woman forbidden [to Shimon] as an ervah, and the other wife is forbidden because she was married to the same man [as the yevamah].This principle applies whenever a woman is married to the same man as a woman who was the other wife [of a woman forbidden to the yavam] and to any further extension of this principle.39I.e., if Reuven, Shimon, and Levi had another brother and he performed yibbum with the woman who was not previously married to Reuven, that brother had another wife, and then he died without children - his wives are also under no obligation to Shimon. Since one of the wives was once freed from an obligation to him, even if she remarries she can never be obligated to him. Moreover, she frees all the other wives of her second husband from an obligation to him. As long as a woman is under no obligation [to her yavam], she remains forbidden to him as his brother's wife.
Similarly, the wife of a brother who died before [his younger brother was born is forbidden to him]. She is under no obligation to him, as implied by [Deuteronomy 25:5]: "When brothers dwell together," interpreted to mean: when they live at the same time. She remains forbidden to him forever, and she frees all of her husband's other wives from an obligation to him.
What is implied? Reuven died [childless], leaving a wife who fell before Shimon [his brother]. After Reuven died, whether before Shimon performed yibbum with Reuven's wife or afterwards, Levi [another brother] was born.Reuven's wife remains forbidden to Levi as an ervah forever. Therefore, if Shimon dies [childless], and this woman and another woman [who was married to Shimon] fall before Levi, neither are obligated to perform chalitzah or yibbum.
[Moreover,] if Shimon [merely] gave a ma'amar to his yevamah, Reuven's wife, and died before he consummated his relationship with her, Levi should perform chalitzah with [Shimon's] other wife, but not yibbum. [The rationale is] that a ma'amar does not establish a completely binding relationship with a yevamah, as we have explained.40Chapter 5, Halachot 2-3.Through the ma'amar, Shimon established a connection with his yevamah. Therefore, our Sages ordained that Levi should not perform yibbum with Shimon's wife. Nevertheless, since Shimon did not establish a marriage that was binding according to Scriptural law with his yevamah, Levi is required to perform chalitzah with Shimon's wife.The Kessef Mishneh (in its gloss on Halachah 10), notes that - as reflected in Halachah 25 - even if Shimon did not give a ma'amar to Reuven's wife, the very fact that she is under obligation to him is sufficient cause for Levi to be prohibited from performing yibbum with her. The Rambam did not mention this concept in this halachah, because: a) he was quoting the Mishnah (Yevamot, Chapter 1), and b) he wanted to emphasize that even if Shimon gave Reuven's wife a ma'amar, Levi is still obligated to perform chalitzah with Shimon's wife. The ma'amar does not free her of obligation entirely.
When a woman willingly commits adultery while married to her husband, and [her act is observed by] witnesses [he is required to divorce her].41See Hilchot Ishut 24:18. If he died [childless] before he divorced her, and she fell before a yavam, she is not obligated to perform chalitzah or yibbum. Moreover, [her deceased husband's] other wives are also [not obligated to perform chalitzah or yibbum], as if she were forbidden to the yavam as an ervah. For just as impurity is mentioned with regard to the arayot,42As Leviticus 18:24 states: "Do not become impure through any of these [forbidden relationships]." so too, that term is mentioned with regard to such a woman, as [Numbers 5:13] states: "And she became impure."43The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam regarding this matter and maintains that just as the woman's husband would have to give her a get to terminate their relationship, so too, her yavam must perform chalitzah with her. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 173:11) follows the Rambam's ruling, while the Ramah mentions that of the Ra'avad.When, however, the husband of a sotah dies [childless] before he has caused her to her drink the bitter waters,44A sotah is not given the bitter waters to drink after her husband's death, as stated in Hilchot Sotah 2:7. or if the woman must be divorced instead of drinking the bitter waters,45As explained in Hilchot Sotah 2:2, there are some women whose fidelity should be tested by the bitter waters. Nevertheless, because of certain incidental factors, she is not given these waters to drink and instead must be divorced by her husband. she should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.46According to the Rambam, the difference between these two instances is that the infidelity of the sotah has not been proven, while in the former case, the woman's infidelity is an established fact. Similarly, if [her deceased husband] had another wife, that woman is permitted [to the yavam] and may perform chalitzah or yibbum.
Similar rules [apply] if two yevamot come from one household and one of them was a sh'niyah to the yavam, [forbidden to him because of] a negative commandment or a positive commandment, or an aylonit - another wife of [her deceased husband] is permitted [to the yavam] and may perform chalitzah or yibbum.[Different rules apply, however, when a yavam] performed chalitzah with his yevamah, and then the sister, the mother, or another [close relative] of the woman with whom he performed chalitzah married another one of his brothers, that brother has another wife, and [the brother] dies [childless].47Although Rashi offers a different interpretation for this concept, the halachic authorities follow the Rambam's view. Just as the close relative of the woman with whom he performed chalitzah is forbidden to him, so too, is the other wife forbidden to him. Their status is like sh'niyot, and they should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.Why did the Sages forbid [marriage] to a close relative of a woman with whom one performed chalitzah? Because it is difficult to distinguish her from a woman married to the same man as a woman with whom one performed chalitzah.48If the relatives of a woman who performed chalitzah were permitted, one might think that another woman who was married to the deceased husband of the woman who performed chalitzah would also be permitted.
When two yevamot come from one household and one of them was forbidden to the yavam as an ervah, but she was also an aylonit, the other wife of [the deceased husband] is permitted [to the yavam] and may perform chalitzah or yibbum. [The rationale is that] since the laws of yibbum and chalitzah do not apply with regard to an aylonit, it is as if she did not exist, and the obligation [of yibbum] falls on the other wife alone.Similarly, if [the deceased] brother divorced the woman forbidden as an ervah or she dissolved their marriage through] mi'un before he died, or she died during the lifetime of the deceased brother, and then he died, his other wife is permitted and should perform either chalitzah or yibbum. We do not say that since she was married to the same man as an ervah once, she remains forbidden forever. For a woman married to the same man as an ervah does not become forbidden [to the yavam] unless they were [both married to the same man at the time of his death, when] the obligation of yibbum takes effect.
[In the situation mentioned in Halachah 14,] if there was a doubt regarding the status of the kiddushin of [the woman] who was forbidden to the yavam as an ervah or there was a doubt that she was divorced, the other wife [of the deceased brother] should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.49Since it is possible that the ervah was never married to the deceased, or that her marriage was already terminated, the yavam must perform chalitzah to enable the other wife to remarry. He may not, however, perform yibbum, for it is possible that the marriage of the ervah was effected by the kiddushin or not terminated by the divorce, in which instance, the yavam would be forbidden to have relations with the other wife of his deceased brother, as stated in Halachah 15.[The same ruling applies if the woman who was forbidden] was a minor who is fit to absolve her marriage through mi'un, if she did not dissolve her marriage [to the deceased] brother during his lifetime, even though she did dissolve her obligation to] the yavam through mi'un,50The minor nullifies her marriage retroactively through mi'un, and it is as if she had never been married at all. As such, the obligation of yibbum falls on the other wife. Nevertheless, since this halachic concept might not be known to all, our Sages forbade the other wife of the deceased from performing yibbum, lest the impression be created that a woman married to the same man as an ervah is also permitted (Yevamot 13a, 107b). another woman married to her husband must perform chalitzah; she may not perform yibbum.
[In the situation mentioned in Halachah 14,] if the other woman [married to the deceased brother] married another man, and then it was discovered that [the woman forbidden to the yavam as] an ervah was an aylonit,51The other wife of the deceased was under the impression that she did not require chalitzah to be released, as stated in Halachah 15. Afterwards, it was discovered that the woman forbidden to the yavam as an ervah was an aylonit, in which instance the obligation of yibbum falls solely on the other wife, as stated in Halachah 21. Thus, her second marriage involves a transgression and must be terminated. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 18.) Nevertheless, a child fathered by her second husband is not considered illegitimate, because the negative commandment violated is not punishable by karet. the woman who married must be released by both her [second] husband and her yavam. Her [second] husband must divorce her with a get, while her yavam must perform chalitzah with her. [In this way,] she is permitted to marry another man.
[In the above situation], if the yavam performed yibbum with the other wife of the deceased, because he thought that the woman forbidden to him as an ervah was an aylonit, and it was discovered that she was not an aylonit, the yavam must divorce [the woman with whom he performed yibbum] with a get.52The Or Sameach explains that ordinarily, when a woman is prohibited as an ervah, a get is not necessary. Nevertheless, an exception is made in this instance, lest people think that the deceased divorced his other wife before his death, and the act of yibbum was binding.The Tur (Even HaEzer 173) maintains that a get is not required, and indeed suggests that this is also the Rambam's intent, but the text of the Mishneh Torah was flawed by a printer's error. The Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 173:9) does not require a get. Any child [she bears him] is illegitimate.53As stated in Halachah 14, the prohibition against relations with a brother's wife applies in such an instance. This prohibition is punishable by karet. Hence, any child born to this couple - whether before or after he discovers that the ervah was an aylonit - is illegitimate.
[In the following situation, chalitzah and not yibbum is required.] There were three brothers. Two were married to two sisters, and one was married to a woman who did not share a family connection. If the brother married to the woman who was not related died [childless], and then one of the brothers married to one of the sisters died [childless], [the remaining brother] should perform chalitzah but not yibbum, with the woman who did not share a family connection54His wife's sister, by contrast, need not perform yibbum or chalitzah. She is free to marry any man.. [The rationale is that] she was obligated to the second brother, and his other wife was the sister [of the surviving yavam's] wife.55With regard to yibbum, the obligation to perform yibbum is powerful enough to have the woman considered the wife of a man whose other wife is an ervah to the yavam. Nevertheless, this comparison is not complete. For since the deceased brother never actually married her, she is obligated to perform chalitzah.Moreover, even if one of the brothers who married one of the sisters divorced his wife after the brother married to the woman who was not related died [childless], and then he himself dies [childless], [the remaining brother] should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum, with the woman who did not share a family connection. Since there was even one moment when this woman was obligated to the second brother while his other wife was the sister [of the surviving yavam's] wife [this prohibition was enforced].56The Ra'avad and others differ with the Rambam regarding this issue, maintaining that the prohibition is not applied when the second brother divorces his first wife. For if [he] were [allowed to] perform yibbum with her, it is possible that [in such a situation, a brother] might perform yibbum with such a woman even when the second brother who died did not divorce his wife.
Why was this decree not applied when a marriage was involved? For example, if [a brother is married to two women,] one of them is forbidden [to his brother] as an ervah and one is not. If he divorces the wife who is forbidden and then dies childless, [the surviving brother] may perform yibbum with the wife [of the deceased brother], as we have explained.57See Halachah 21.[The distinction is that] the prohibition against [performing yibbum] with a wife [of one's deceased brother] when one of his wives is forbidden [to the yavam] as ervah is known by all.58And, as reflected in Halachah 14, it is of Scriptural origin. Thus, if [the deceased brother] did not divorce the woman forbidden [to the yavam], no one would allow him [to perform yibbum with his brother's] other wife. The prohibition against [performing yibbum with] a woman who was obligated to [a man whose] other wife is forbidden [to the yavam] is not known to all, and it is possible that [in such a situation, a brother] might be allowed to [perform yibbum with] such a woman even when [the second brother who died] did not divorce the forbidden woman.
[In the following situation, chalitzah and not yibbum is required.] There were three brothers, all married to women who did not share any family connection. One of the brothers died [childless]. Another gave his yevamah a ma'amar, but died [childless] before he consummated his marriage to her. Thus, this woman and the wife of the second brother fell before the third brother.These women should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum, because the woman who was given the ma'amar has two obligations for yibbum incumbent on her.59I.e., since she did not perform yibbum with the brother who gave her the ma'amar, she is still obligated to perform yibbum because of her first husband, and since a ma'amar is considered equivalent to consecration, she is also obligated to perform yibbum because of the second brother who died. As such, it is as if she had been married to two men. Our Sages interpreted the phrase [Deuteronomy 25:5] "the wife of the deceased," as a restriction. [One may perform yibbum with the wife of one deceased man,] but not [the wife of] two deceased men.60If, however, the second brother performed yibbum before dying, this restriction does not apply.Therefore, whenever a woman has two obligations for yibbum incumbent on her, she should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum. The same applies to the woman married to [the second brother who died]. The prohibition [against performing yibbum with these women] is Rabbinic in origin.61It was stated above that the prohibition against marrying a woman who is obligated to perform yibbum because of two men is derived from a verse. Nevertheless, as reflected by the fact that chalitzah is required (Yevamot 31b), that verse is only an asmachta, a support. The source of the prohibition is Rabbinic in origin. (Note Tosafot, who differ and maintain that the prohibition is of Scriptural origin.)
Why does [the yavam] not merely perform chalitzah with the woman who was given the ma'amar and is thus obligated to perform yibbum because of two men, and then perform yibbum with the [first] wife of [the deceased brother]? This is a decree instituted so that people will not say that when there are two yevamot coming from one household, one should perform chalitzah and the other yibbum.62See Chapter 1, Halachah 12, which states that once a yavam has foregone the privilege of yibbum by performing chalitzah, neither he nor his brothers may perform yibbum with any of the wives of that brother. For this reason, [the Sages] forbade [performing yibbum with the deceased's first] wife.
[In the above instance, if the second brother] gave his yevamah a ma'amar and then gave her a get [to nullify] the ma'amar, [different rules apply] if he dies. [The woman] becomes permitted [to the third brother], for the ma'amar that caused her to be forbidden was nullified. He may perform either chalitzah or yibbum with her.63For the only obligation incumbent on her is due to the brother who died first. The third brother must also perform either yibbum or chalitzah with the wife of the second brother.
[In the following situation, chalitzah and not yibbum is required. A yavam] who is below the age of majority, [but more than] nine years and one day old, enters into relations with his yevamah and dies before he attains majority. She then becomes obligated for yibbum to the minor's older brother for a second time. She should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum. As we have explained,64Chapter 5, Halachah 18. relations in which a minor engages are considered equivalent to a ma'amar given by [a brother] past majority. Hence, the woman has two obligations for yibbum incumbent on her.
[The following rule applies when] a woman who was half [a Canaanite] maid-servant and half a freed woman65E.g., a Canaanite maid-servant who was owned by two partners, and one partner set her free, but the other did not. was consecrated by Reuven. She was then given her freedom and was consecrated by [Reuven's brother,] Shimon. Afterwards, both [brothers] died. Levi, [a third brother, may] perform yibbum with [this woman]; she is not considered to be "the wife of two deceased men." For if her consecration by Reuven is effective, her consecration by Shimon is of no consequence.66The consecration of such a woman is discussed in Hilchot Ishut 4:16. And if her consecration by Shimon is effective, her consecration by Reuven is of no consequence.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
When two brothers were married to two sisters, [the brothers] both died, and it is impossible to know who died first,1The laws that apply when we do know which brother died first are stated in Halachot 3 and 4. [a third brother who remains alive] may not perform yibbum with both of them.2According to Scriptural law, it is forbidden to marry two sisters. As an extension of this prohibition, when one is obligated to perform yibbum with two sisters according to Rabbinic law, one is not allowed to marry either of them and must perform chalitzah with both. Since they are both obligated to him, they both must perform chalitzah and not yibbum.[The above ruling applies even] when one [of the yevamot] was forbidden to the yavam as a sh'niyah, or because of a positive commandment or a negative commandment.3For according to Scriptural law, the obligation of yibbum applies in all these instances, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 10. If, however, one [of the yevamot] was forbidden to the yavam as an ervah - e.g., she was his wife's mother or daughter - the sister is permitted [to the yavam]; he may perform either yibbum or chalitzah, as he desires. For both of the sisters were not obligated to him, since an ervah is not bound by this obligation.
When in the above situation there were four brothers,] and one [of the yevamot] was forbidden to one of the yevamim as an ervah, and the other yevamah was forbidden to the other yavam as an ervah, [the yevamah] who is forbidden to one [yavam] is permitted to his brother, and [the yevamah] who is forbidden to the other [yavam] is permitted to his brother. For [in both instances] only [the yevamah] who is permitted to him is obligated [to each brother]. [Each one] may perform either yibbum or chalitzah with [the yevamah] permitted to him, as he desires.
[In the above situation,] if one of the brothers died [and his identity was known], and his wife became obligated to perform yibbum, and then the other brother died, his wife - the sister of the first wife - became obligated to perform yibbum; [as long as] both remain alive, they both must perform chalitzah and not yibbum, as we have explained.4In Halachah 1.
If [the wife of] the second [brother] dies, the [wife of the] first becomes permitted again. She may perform either chalitzah or yibbum.If [the wife of] the first [brother] dies, the [wife of the] second remains forbidden. She must perform chalitzah and may not perform yibbum. [The rationale is that she was not fit to perform yibbum at the time she came before [her yavam].Similarly, if one of the brothers performed chalitzah with the [wife of the] second [brother] first,5The Kessef Mishneh (and the Beit Shmuel 175:2) explain that this ruling applies only after the fact - i.e., he performed chalitzah with the second yevamah without asking Rabbinical guidance. Had he in fact asked the Rabbis, they would have prohibited it, lest he err and perform chalitzah with the other sister. Once, however, the chalitzah is performed, we do not fear that a mistake will be made by others on a subsequent occasion. the [wife of the] first becomes permitted to the other brothers. For the obligation that caused her to become forbidden was removed by his brother by performing chalitzah.
Similarly, if [the wife of] the first [brother] was forbidden to one of the brothers as an ervah, and he performed yibbum with [the wife of] the second [brother] who was permitted to him,6Since he was never permitted to marry the wife of the first brother who died, the wife of the second never became forbidden to him. the [wife of the] first becomes permitted to the other brothers. For the woman who caused her to be forbidden to them performed yibbum with a brother to whom she was permitted.If, however, [the wife of] the second [brother] was forbidden to one of the brothers as an ervah, he should perform yibbum with [the wife of] the first [brother],7Since he is not permitted to marry the wife of the second brother, the wife of the first never became forbidden to him. Hence, he should perform yibbum. but the other brothers are forbidden to perform yibbum with both of them.8The Rambam mentions both yevamot to teach that even if the brother who marries the first yevamah dies, she remains forbidden to his brothers. They must perform chalitzah instead, as we have explained.9See the previous halachah.If [in the situation mentioned in the final clause of Halachah 3] each one of the brothers marries one of the sisters [without asking Rabbinical guidance first], they must be forced to separate.10This applies to both couples. The first yavam who marries a yevamah is forced to separate because he has transgressed a Rabbinic prohibition. Even though he did not transgress in marrying his yevamah, the second yavam is forced to separate from her, because his marriage to her was made possible by a forbidden act, the first yavam's marriage.Significantly, this represents a reversal of the Rambam's opinion from his rulings in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 3:1; Eduyot 5:5), where he rules that the couples may remain married. The Tur (Even HaEzer 175) subscribes to that view. Although the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 175:3) also mentions it, it appears that the Rambam's ruling in the Mishneh Torah is favored.
[Our Sages delivered these rulings in the following situation:] There were three brothers. Two were married to two sisters. One of the brothers married to the sisters died [childless]. The third [brother] gave a ma'amar to his yevamah, and then the husband of the second sister died, and the second sister also became obligated to the third brother. The third brother should divorce with a get [the sister] to whom he gave a ma'amar, and perform chalitzah with her.11This law is fundamentally the same as Halachah 3. The yavam is forbidden to perform yibbum with either of the sisters. There is one added element: the fact that a ma'amar was given.As explained in Chapter 5, Halachot 2-3, a ma'amar does not establish a complete marriage bond. If it established such a bond, the third brother would not be required to divorce his yevamah (and he would not be required to perform chalitzah with her sister). But since it does not, he cannot consummate his relationship with his yevamah. He must, however, divorce her, because of the connection established by the ma'amar. And he should perform chalitzah with the other sister, to enable her to marry another man.
[In the above situation,] if the brother who gave the ma'amar [to the first brother's wife] died [childless], and he had another wife, both she and [the wife of the first brother] fall before [the brother] married to the sister of [the wife of the first brother]. The woman who was given the ma'amar is free from the obligations of chalitzah and yibbum, for she is the sister of [her yavam's] wife. The other woman should perform chalitzah and not yibbum, because the ma'amar does not fully acquire a woman [as a wife]12As reflected in Chapter 6, Halachah 25, even if the yavam who died had not given a ma'amar to the other yevamah, this woman would not have been able to perform yibbum. The new dimension contributed by this halachah is that the ma'amar does not free her from the obligation of chalitzah. to the extent that another wife would be freed of the obligations [of yibbum].13I.e., had the ma'amar established a full marriage bond, she would not have been obligated at all. Since it does not, she must perform chalitzah.
When a brother consecrates the sister of his yevamah,14This law applies if he consecrates her after his brother has died, and the obligation of yibbum is already incumbent upon him. If he consecrated her before his brother dies, and then he dies, he may marry her (Shulchan Aruch, Even HaEzer 159:6). we tell him: "Wait; do not divorce her and do not marry her15At present, the woman he consecrates is forbidden to him, because he is obligated to perform yibbum with her sister. Nevertheless, he is not required to divorce her, because it is possible that the prohibition will be lifted. until your brother performs yibbum or chalitzah with the woman who is under obligation."If his brother performs yibbum or chalitzah with the yevamah, or if she dies, the brother may marry the woman he has consecrated. If all his brothers die,16Or he has no other brothers. he must divorce with a get the woman he has consecrated, and perform chalitzah with his yevamah.If the woman he has consecrated died, regardless of whether she died before the brothers died or after the brothers died, the yevamah becomes permitted. He may perform either yibbum or chalitzah.17The fact that he was forbidden to marry her while her sister was alive does not prevent him from marrying her after her sister's death (Beit Shmuel 159:13).
[The above laws become even more complicated if the brothers have more than one wife. For example,] there were three brothers. Two were married to two sisters, and each also had another wife. [The brothers] married to the sisters died [childless], and the sisters and the other wives fell before the yavam.If he performs chalitzah with the other wives, the sisters are also freed of their obligation. If, however, he performs chalitzah with the sisters, the other wives are not freed of their obligations until they themselves perform chalitzah. [The rationale is that] the chalitzah performed by the sisters is not "superior,"18From Yevamot 41a, it appears that whenever a yavam cannot perform yibbum with his yevamah, the chalitzah he performs with her is deemed "inferior." and, as we have explained,19Chapter 5, Halachah 12. a chalitzah that is not "superior" does not free another wife [of the deceased] from her obligation.
It appears to me20This expression is employed by the Rambam in reference to a law that has no direct source in the Rabbinic works of the previous generations. The Rambam's rationale is that just as the Rabbinic prohibition against performing yibbum with the sister of a woman to whom one is obligated is sufficient to cause a chalitzah to be considered "inferior," so too, the prohibitions mentioned in this halachah should have a similar effect.There are several early halachic authorities who rule differently from the Rambam on this issue. The Rambam's decision is, however, accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 174:1). that this law also applies with regard to two yevamot coming from one household, when one is forbidden to her yavam as a sh'niyah, or because of a positive or negative prohibition. If the yavam performs chalitzah with the woman who is prohibited, [the deceased's] other wife is not freed of her obligation. If he performs chalitzah with the other wife, the woman who is prohibited is freed of her obligation.
[There is no need for yibbum or chalitzah in the following situation:] There were three brothers. Two were married to two sisters, and the third was married to a woman who did not share a family connection with them. One of the brothers married to the sisters died [childless] and the brother married to the other woman performed yibbum with [the brother's] wife. Afterwards, the wife of the second brother, [i.e., the sister of the yevamah] died, and then the third brother [the one who performed yibbum, died childless]. Thus, his two wives fall before the second brother, who is [now] unmarried.These women are free of the obligation to perform either chalitzah or yibbum. One, the sister of [the yavam's deceased] wife [is forbidden], because she was the sister of his wife at the time his brother died. [At that time,] she became forbidden to him forever, as the wife of a brother who was not alive at the time of his [older] brother's [death]. The other woman [is forbidden], because she is the other wife [of her deceased husband].21This represents a reversal of the Rambam's opinion in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yevamot 3:7), where he states that the deceased's other wife should perform chalitzah, because there is a doubt whether or not an obligation falls upon her.
Similarly, when two brothers are married to two sisters and one of [the brothers] dies [childless], and then the wife of the other brother dies, [the wife of the first brother] remains forbidden [to the second brother] forever, since she was forbidden to him at the time [the obligation of yibbum first takes effect].When, however, a man divorces his wife, remarries her and then dies [childless], she is permitted to the yavam. Although she was forbidden to him during his brother's lifetime at the time he divorced her, she became permitted [when he remarried her]. And at the time his brother died, she was permitted.
[The following rules apply when] a girl below the age of majority was given in marriage by her father, and her husband divorced her, remarried her and then died [childless] while she was still below the age of majority.She is forbidden to her yavam,22For the prohibition forbidding a woman divorced by her husband to her yavam is of Scriptural origin, while her remarriage is binding according to Rabbinic law alone.The Ra'avad and Rabbenu Asher rule that the minor must perform chalitzah when she attains majority. The Ma'aseh Rokeach states this might also be the Rambam's intent (as reflected by the fact that he states that "she is forbidden to her yavam," and in the next halachah he adds that she "should not perform either chalitzah or yibbum"). Most commentaries do not, however, accept this interpretation. for the divorce was a fully binding divorce, since she was married off by her father.23The Rambam's wording is somewhat imprecise. The kiddushin the husband gives the father are binding according to Scriptural law, because the Torah granted him the right to consecrate her, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 3:11. If the girl is able to distinguish between a get and another object, she can be divorced according to Scriptural law, as stated in Hilchot Gerushin 2:19. The remarriage, by contrast, is not fully binding, because the consecration of a minor is not a completely binding consecration, as explained.24Until she reaches the age of twelve and manifests signs of physical maturity, she is not able to effect kiddushin that are binding according to Scriptural law. (Moreover, the girl's father also does not have the potential to consecrate her again according to Scriptural law once she has been divorced, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 3:12.)
The same law applies when a man divorces a woman who is mentally competent, she becomes a deaf-mute, he remarries her and dies [childless] while she is a deaf-mute. She is forbidden to the yavam and should not perform either chalitzah or yibbum.25In this instance as well, the divorce is binding according to Scriptural law, while the remarriage is merely a Rabbinic institution.Another woman married [to the deceased husband of] the minor or the deaf-mute may perform chalitzah, or yibbum.26Since the remarriage of the minor or the deaf-mute is only a Rabbinic institution, while the marriage of the deceased's other wife is based on Scriptural law, the remarriage of the minor or the deaf-mute has no effect on the other wife's obligation to her yavam. See Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 173:23).If [the deceased] remarried her while she was a minor or a deaf-mute, but she attained majority or regained her control of her faculties while married to him, and then he died [childless], she is permitted to her yavam.27If her husband engaged in marital relations with her after she attained majority or regained control of her faculties, he acquires her as a wife according to Scriptural law. (See Hilchot Gerushin 11:6.) Therefore, there is no difference between her and another woman who was married, divorced and remarried.
When two brothers were married to two sisters, who were both below the age of majority and fit to dissolve their marriages through mi'un, or they were deaf-mutes, and one [of the brothers] dies [childless], his wife is not obligated to perform either chalitzah or yibbum, because she is the sister [of the yavam's] wife.28Since both sisters share the same status, we allow the marriage of the sister whose husband is alive to continue. There is no mandate for him to perform yibbum, for the marriage to his yevamah would still be Rabbinical in origin.If one [of the sisters] was above the age of majority and one was below, and the husband of the younger one died [childless], his wife is not obligated to perform either chalitzah or yibbum, because she is the sister [of the yavam's] wife.29Since the marriage of the older sister is binding according to Scriptural law, the younger sister has no obligation to the yavam. If the husband of the older [sister] died [childless], we instruct the younger one to absolve [her marriage to] her husband through mi'un, allowing the older [sister] to perform yibbum.30The yibbum of the older sister is given priority over the marriage of the younger sister, because the older sister's first marriage is binding according to Scriptural law, and the obligation of yibbum is mandated by that authority. The marriage of the younger sister, by contrast, is binding only according to Rabbinic law.Therefore, the younger sister is advised to perform mi'un, thus dissolving her marriage as if it had never existed. At this point, there is nothing preventing her husband from marrying her sister, his yavam. (See Chapter 4, Halachah 30.)
[The following law applies when two brothers who are both deaf-mutes are married to two sisters, and one [of the brothers] dies [childless]. His wife is not obligated to perform either chalitzah or yibbum, because she is the sister [of the yavam's] wife. [This law applies] regardless of whether both of the sisters were deaf-mutes, both were mentally competent, or one was a deaf-mute and one was mentally competent.Similarly, [the same law applies when] two sisters are both deaf-mutes and are married to two brothers, regardless of whether both of the brothers were deaf-mutes, both were mentally competent, or one was a deaf-mute and one was mentally competent.[These rulings were given] because none of the marriages is fully binding.31As long as one of the parties involved is a deaf-mute, a marriage is binding only according to Rabbinic law. For this reason, there is no advantage for the yibbum of the deceased's wife over the existing marriage.
[The following law applies when two brothers - one mentally competent and one a deaf-mute - are married to two sisters, either both mentally competent or one mentally competent and one a deaf-mute, and the mentally competent [sister] is married to the mentally competent [brother]. If the deaf-mute [brother] dies [childless], his wife is not obligated to perform either chalitzah or yibbum, because she is the sister [of the yavam's] wife.32Since both the husband and wife are mentally competent, their marriage is binding according to Scriptural law. The deceased's wife is, therefore, freed of all obligations.If the mentally competent [brother] dies [childless], the deaf-mute should divorce his wife with a get, because her sister is obligated to him.33And it is forbidden to marry the sister of a woman with whom one is obligated to perform yibbum. [The rationale for this ruling is] that the marriage of the deceased mentally competent brother was fully binding, [and thus] the obligation to the deaf-mute is also fully binding. [In contrast,] the marriage of the deaf-mute is not fully binding.The wife of the mentally competent brother is forbidden [to marry again] forever. For the deaf-mute cannot marry her because of her sister,34For it is forbidden to marry the sister of one's divorcee. nor can he perform chalitzah, because he is a deaf-mute.35See Chapter 4, Halachah 13.
Why did our Sages decree that a deaf-mute man must divorce his deaf-mute wife [in the above situation]? They are not obligated to observe the mitzvot; their situation resembles that of a child who eats non-kosher meat - in which instance, the court is not obligated to prevent them.36I.e., the court, the agent of the Jewish people as a whole, does not have the responsibility to admonish a child who violates the Torah's laws. The child's parents, by contrast, do and must train him in the observance of the Torah's ways. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 17:27-28.Our Sages said: If the [deaf-mute's] wife will remain married to him, her sister will marry another man, [and this will be excused, for people] will say: "She was freed [from the obligations of yibbum and chalitzah] because she was the sister of [the yavam's] wife." [To prevent this impression from arising,] the deaf-mute must divorce his wife with a get, and her sister will be forbidden [to him] forever.
Similarly, when two brothers who are mentally competent are married to two sisters, one mentally competent and one a deaf-mute, and the husband of the deaf-mute dies, [his wife] is free [of the obligation of yibbum], because she is the sister of [the yavam's] wife.37Since both partners are mentally competent, their marriage is binding according to Scriptural law.If the husband of the mentally competent [sister] dies, [his brother] should divorce his wife [the deaf-mute] with a get,38Since his marriage to the deaf-mute is only a Rabbinic institution, his obligation to the wife of his deceased brother, a requirement of Scriptural law, takes priority. Nevertheless, since he must divorce his deaf-mute wife with a get, he may not perform yibbum, for the yevamah is the sister of his divorcee. and should perform chalitzah to free the wife of his [deceased] brother [to marry]. Since he is mentally competent, he can perform chalitzah.39In contrast to the deaf-mute yavam mentioned in Halachah 18.
[Neither yibbum nor chalitzah is required in the following situation.] There were two brothers, one mentally competent and one a deaf-mute. The deaf-mute was married to two mentally competent women, one of whom was forbidden to the mentally competent brother as an ervah.If the deaf-mute brother dies [childless], both his wives are free from the obligations [of yibbum and chalitzah, based on the following rationale].40I.e., one might think that although the mitzvot of yibbum and chalitzah do not apply with regard to the woman forbidden as an ervah, they do apply with regard to her deceased husband's other wife.Generally, when a woman is forbidden as an ervah, her husband's other wives are not obligated, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 14. Nevertheless, since the deaf-mute's marriage is only a Rabbinic institution, one might think that the marriage to the woman forbidden as an ervah is not powerful enough to negate the obligation of yibbum. The Rambam's explanations that follow above are intended to counter this supposition. If the marriage of the woman forbidden [to the yavam] as an ervah is considered a marriage, the second woman is considered to be the other wife [of her husband] and is also freed of obligation. If the marriage of the woman forbidden [to the yavam] as an ervah is not considered a marriage, the marriage of the other woman is also not considered a marriage.
If a man's daughter or the like41I.e., any other woman permitted to his brother, but forbidden to him as an ervah. This includes the brother's mother-in-law and his daughter-in-law, after they were widowed or divorced from their first husbands. was a deaf-mute, and she was married to his brother who was mentally competent [and the mentally competent brother dies childless], his other wife must perform chalitzah, but not yibbum. [The rationale is that] the marriage of the deaf-mute is not a fully binding marriage.42If it were a fully binding marriage, the deceased's other wife would be freed of the obligation of chalitzah as well, as mentioned in note 40. Nevertheless, because the marriage is effective according to Rabbinic law, yibbum is not permitted.
Whenever we have mentioned "two sisters" in these laws, the intent is also a woman and her daughter, or her granddaughter and the like; i.e., two woman [for whom marriage to one causes] the other to be considered an ervah.Similarly, whenever we have mentioned "the sister of [the yavam's] wife" or "the sister of his yevamah," the intent is also her mother or her daughter - i.e., any close relative who becomes forbidden [to the yavam] because of her [marriage].

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
[The following rules apply when a man] consecrates one of two sisters, but does not know which one he has consecrated1Note the Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 176:1), which states that this law applies even if the deceased brother never knew which sister he consecrated, and thus it was forbidden for him to consummate the marriage. Nevertheless, chalitzah is required. and then dies [childless]. If he has one brother, [the brother] should perform chalitzah with both of them to enable them to marry other men.If he has two brothers, one of them should first perform chalitzah with one of [the sisters], and the other should perform yibbum with the other one2This and the laws that follow are based on the Rambam's conception (see Chapter 1, Halachah 2) that when possible, the mitzvah of yibbum takes precedence over the mitzvah of chalitzah. According to the Ashkenazic authorities, different laws apply. [because of the following rationale]: If this was the woman consecrated by his brother, he performed yibbum with her. If she is not his brother's wife, he has married a woman [permitted to him] like any other woman, and chalitzah has already been performed for her sister, his brother's wife.One should not perform yibbum with one of the women first, for perhaps the other was in fact his brother's wife, and he will have married a relative of the woman who is obligated [to perform yibbum with] him.3This is a Rabbinic prohibition. If, without asking Rabbinic advice,4Our translation is based on the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.). If a Rabbinical opinion was sought and then ignored, the yevamim are required to divorce their wives. each of the brothers married one of the sisters, they are not forced to dissolve the marriage.5Although one of them surely violated a Rabbinic prohibition, since we are unable to determine which of them it was, they are both allowed to remain married. This follows the principle sefeka d'rabbanan l'kula, "When a doubt arises regarding the violation of a Rabbinic prohibition, the more lenient perspective is followed."
[The following rule applies when] two [men who are not related,] each having one brother, consecrate two sisters, neither of the men knows which [sister] he consecrated, and they both die [childless]. Each [brother] should perform chalitzah with each of the sisters.6Even after the brother of one of the deceased performs chalitzah with both women, the brother of the other deceased may not perform yibbum with one of the sisters, because she is the sister of the woman with whom he is obligated to perform yibbum (or with whom he performed chalitzah).[In the above situation, if] one of the deceased has one brother, and the other has two brothers, the one brother should perform chalitzah with both women first, and then one of the two brothers should perform chalitzah [with one woman] first, and the second one [should perform yibbum with the other].7This and the clause that follows are restatements of the principles mentioned in the previous halachah. If, [without asking Rabbinic advice, each of the brothers] married [one of the sisters], they are not forced to dissolve the marriage.[The above applies] even if the brothers were priests. [Although] there is a Rabbinic prohibition against a priest marrying a woman who performed chalitzah, the chalitzah performed by this woman was performed because of doubt, and [our Sages] did not enforce a decree with regard to a chalitzah performed because of doubt.8In most instances, if there is a doubt with regard to a Rabbinic prohibition, one may a priori perform the act in question. In this instance, it is only after the fact that yibbum is permitted. The reason for this stringency is that chalitzah is performed in public, and when people see that a woman who performed chalitzah married a priest, they may not appreciate the details of the particular instance and come to the false conclusion that there is no prohibition in doing so (Maggid Mishneh).
In the above instance,] if both of the deceased had two brothers, one of one pair of brothers should perform chalitzah with one of the sisters, and one of the other pair of brothers should perform chalitzah with the other sister. Afterwards, the other brother from the first pair should perform yibbum with the sister with whom the brother from the other pair performed chalitzah, and the other brother from the second pair should perform yibbum with the sister with whom the brother from the first pair performed chalitzah.9This also is basically a restatement of the principles mentioned in the first halachah.If both [brothers from one pair each] performed chalitzah with [one of the sisters] first, the brothers from the other pair should not both perform yibbum.10Although the woman may be his yevamah, she may also be the sister of the woman with whom he is obligated to perform yibbum, and whom he is therefore forbidden to marry. Instead, one should perform chalitzah [with one of the sisters] first, and then his brother should perform yibbum with the other. If, without asking Rabbinic advice, each of the brothers married one of the sisters, they are not forced to dissolve the marriage.
[The following situation gives rise to several halachic questions:] A woman had sons, and one of her daughters-in-law also had sons. Both the woman and her daughter-in-law became pregnant and they gave birth in the same hiding place. [There was a disturbance] and the identity of the two children became confused [and it was not known who was the son of the mother, and who, the son of the daughter-in-law].The two sons grew up and married and then died [childless]. How are their wives freed to marry others?11For it is unknown who should perform either yibbum or chalitzah, the sons of the mother or the sons of the daughter-in-law.First, [one of] the sons of the daughter-in-law should perform chalitzah with [both women]; he should not perform yibbum. [The rationale is that] there is a doubt regarding the identity of each of the women. It is possible that she is the wife of his brother and thus permitted to him, but it is also possible that she is the wife of his father's brother and thus forbidden to him as an ervah.Afterwards,] the sons of the elder woman may perform either chalitzah or yibbum. [With regard to each of the women, the same question applies:] If she is his brother's wife, he is performing yibbum. And if she is the wife of his brother's son, she is permitted to marry him, because she has already performed chalitzah.
[In the above situation, the following procedure should be carried out if] the sons of the elder woman and her daughter-in-law whose identities had been established died [childless], and the two sons whose identities were confused were alive.The sons whose identities were confused should perform chalitzah with the wives of the elder woman's sons; they may not perform yibbum. [The rationale is that] there is a doubt whether [each woman] is the wife of his father's brother and thus forbidden to him as an ervah, or the wife of his brother and thus permitted to her yavam.With regard to the wives of the sons of the daughter-in-law: First, one should perform chalitzah and the other should perform yibbum. The rationale is that if the son of the daughter-in-law was the one who performed chalitzah first, he performed chalitzah with his brother's wife. The second one of those whose identities were confused was the son of the elder woman. He is permitted to marry the wife of his brother's son after her yavam performed chalitzah with her.If it was the son of the elder woman who performed chalitzah first, he performed chalitzah with the wife of his brother's son, and his deed is of no consequence. The second one of those whose identities were confused was the son of the daughter-in-law, and he performed yibbum with his brother's wife.
[The following rules apply with regard to] a woman who did not wait three months after the death of her husband [before] remarrying].12See Hilchot Gerushin 11:18, which states that a woman should wait three months after her husband's death, so that it will be possible to determine who fathered her child. She remarried and gave birth, and it is not known whether the child she bore was fathered by the first husband and was born after a full term pregnancy, or whether it was fathered by the second husband and was born after a seven-month pregnancy.13For example, the woman remarried two months after her first husband's death and gave birth seven months after her second marriage. Thus, it is unknown whether her child was fathered by her first husband or her second.If the woman bore other children to both her first and second husbands, and then this son whose [father's identity] is in doubt dies [childless], both the sons of the first husband and the sons of the second husband should perform chalitzah with [the deceased's] wife, but they should not perform yibbum.[The rationale is that the obligation for] each of them to perform yibbum is doubtful, for perhaps he is not the paternal brother [of the deceased]. And he is definitely a maternal brother [of the deceased], and the wife of a maternal brother is always forbidden as an ervah. For this same [reason], the son whose [father's identity] is in doubt should perform chalitzah with any of the wives of [his other brothers], but should not perform yibbum.
If both this woman's first and second husbands had fathered another son14The law that follows applies when the woman's husbands have each fathered only one other son with another wife. with another wife, and one of these other sons died [childless], the son whose [father's identity] is in doubt may perform either chalitzah or yibbum with the wife of the deceased. [The rationale is] that if [the deceased] was his paternal brother, then he has performed yibbum. And if he was not his paternal brother, then they have no family connection at all, and he is permitted to marry [the deceased's] wife.
[In the above situation,] if the son whose [father's identity] is in doubt dies [childless], one of the two sons whose [father's identity] is known should first perform chalitzah with his wife, and afterwards the second should perform yibbum.15It is, however, forbidden for one of the sons to perform yibbum first, because it is possible that the deceased's wife is obligated to the other brother and must perform chalitzah.[The rationale is that if the deceased] was his brother, then he has performed yibbum. And if he is not his brother, but rather the son of the other father, his wife has already performed chalitzah with her husband's brother [and is permitted to remarry].
[The following rules apply when] a woman's husband traveled to another country, his wife heard that he died and [on this basis] married another man, and then her first husband returned. If both husbands die [childless],16Even if only one of the husbands dies childless, his brother still must perform chalitzah and may not perform yibbum. and they both have brothers, one of each husband's brothers should perform chalitzah, but not yibbum.17Yibbum is prohibited because, as stated in Hilchot Gerushin 10:5, such a woman is forbidden to both her husbands and must be divorced by both of them.The chalitzah performed by the brother of the first husband is required by Scriptural law, while the chalitzah performed by the brother of the second husband is mandated by Rabbinic decree.
[The following rules apply when there were] five women who each had a son whose identity had been established, and then the five women all gave birth together in a hiding place to five other sons, and the identities of the second group of sons became confused to the extent that it was not known who gave birth to whom. The sons whose identity became confused matured and married, and then these five men died [childless] and their five wives fell before the wives of the sons whose identity was known, but none of these sons knows who is the wife of his brother.What must be done [so that these women can remarry]? Four [of the sons whose identity was known] perform chalitzah for one of the wives first, and the fifth son should marry her after she has performed chalitzah four times.
What is implied? If the woman was his brother's wife, he has performed yibbum. And if she is not his brother's wife, she is the wife of the brother of one of the other four, and they all performed chalitzah with her first.Similarly, the second woman should have four [of the sons whose identity was known] - including the one who married the first [of the widows]18I.e., each of the sons whose identity is known should marry one of the widows instead of having one marry more than one. When one son marries more than one widow, we are certain that he did not perform yibbum twice. Either - or neither - of the women he married could have been his brother's widow, but there was only one widow, not two. Our Sages preferred having each of the sons marry one woman and thus take the chance that they were all fulfilling yibbum, rather than have one marry more than one. See Yevamot 98b. - perform chalitzah with her, and the fifth one should marry her. [This process should be continued] until the five sons have married the five [widows] after each one performed chalitzah four times earlier.
When dealing with questionable situations of this nature, one should always have these principles at hand: When there is a doubt whether a woman is required to perform chalitzah with a particular man or not, she is not permitted to marry another man until that [first] man performs chalitzah with her.Whenever there is a doubt whether a woman is forbidden to engage in relations with a man - whether because of a Scriptural prohibition or a Rabbinic prohibition - she should not perform yibbum with him.Whenever a woman has performed a "superior chalitzah"19See Chapter 5, Halachah 10. or "acceptable relations,"20See Chapter 5, Halachah 9. another woman who was married to the same husband is permitted to marry another man.
Following the above patterns, you will be able to understand and rule with regard to any questionable situations that will arise with regard to yibbum and chalitzah. For we have explained all the fundamental principles on which one should rely. You will know who should perform chalitzah, who should perform yibbum, who is not obligated to perform chalitzah or yibbum and who is fit to perform yibbum.With God's help, this concludes "The Laws of Yibbum and Chalitzah."
