=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment to offer two lambs as burnt-offerings every day.1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 39) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 401) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. The Ramban (at the conclusion to his Hosafos to the negative commandments) argues that they should be considered as two separate mitzvot. They are called the continuous offering. One [should be brought] in the morning and one in the afternoon as [Numbers 28:3] states: "Two each day, a continuous offering."
When is the time at which they should be slaughtered? The morning one should be slaughtered before sunrise,2For "the eager hurry [to perform] mitzvot" (Pesachim 4a). when the entire eastern horizon becomes illuminated.3I.e., when the rays of the sun are already visible, but the orb of the sun has not appeared. Once there was a pressing situation for the community in [the era of] the Second Temple4In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ediot 6:1, based on the Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 1:4), the Rambam explains that once during the Greek occupation of the Holy Land, the Temple was besieged. Each day, the priests would exchange two baskets of gold coins for two lambs. One day, however, the Greeks refused to make the exchange. The people were forlorn. Later that morning, they miraculously found two lambs in the Chamber of the Lambs and R. Yuda bar Bava ruled that the morning sacrifice could be offered if the fourth hour of the day had not passed. and they offered the daily morning sacrifice at four hours after daybreak.5The Radbaz derives two points from the Rambam's statements: a) only in a pressing situation may the offering of the sacrifice be delayed until after daybreak; b) even in a pressing situation, the sacrifice may not be offered after four hours of the day have passed.
[The lamb for] the continuous offering of the afternoon should be slaughtered when the shadows have been extended6At noon, the sun is directly overhead and does not cast a shadow. By 12:30, the sun will have already passed to the western portion of the sky and will thus cast a shadow to the east. and it is obvious to all that they have been extended.7I.e., the sacrifice could have been offered directly after noon. Nevertheless, since the time of noon is not obvious to everyone, it was delayed slightly. This is from six and a half hours of the day until the day's end. Every day, they would not slaughter it until eight and a half hours of the day and they would offer it at nine and a half hours.Why would they delay [its slaughter] for two hours after the beginning of the time? Because of the sacrifices of individuals and those of the community.8I.e., to allow all of the other sacrifices to be offered, as the Rambam proceeds to explain. For it is forbidden to offer any sacrifice before the continuous offering of the morning and no sacrifice is offered after the continuous sacrifice of the afternoon9The Radbaz asks: Why isn't its sacrifice delayed any longer? He responds that the Sages did not desire for there to be any time pressure at all regarding its offering. Also, they wanted - at least partially - to fulfill the charge (Pesachim 4a): "The eager hurry [to perform] mitzvot." with the exception of the Paschal sacrifice. [That leniency was granted, because] it is impossible for all of Israel to offer their Paschal sacrifices in two hours.
The Paschal sacrifice is slaughtered only after the continuous offering of the afternoon.10See Hilchot Korban Pesach 1:4 for more details. Similarly, those individuals requiring atonement11As stated in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah, ch. 1, this term refers to certain individuals - a zav, a zavah, a person afflicted with tzara'at, and a woman after childbirth - who are not permitted to partake of sacrifices until they offer certain sacrifices. may offer their atonement offerings after the continuous offering of the afternoon on the fourteenth [of Nisan] so that they will be ritually pure and [and able] to partake of their Paschal offerings in the evening.12This leniency is granted because a person who does not offer the Paschal sacrifices is liable for karet (Pesachim 59a).
When the day before Pesach falls during the week or on the Sabbath, the Afternoon Sacrifice would be slaughtered after seven and a half hours and offered after eight and a half hours so that [the people] would have time to slaughter their Paschal sacrifices.13For every member of the Jewish people would have to partake of a Paschal sacrifice. Thus there would be a multitude of animals to slaughter and have their blood offered. If the day before Pesach falls on Friday, [the Afternoon Sacrifice] would be slaughtered at six and a half hours, the beginning of the time allotted for it and offered at seven and a half hours, so that they would have ample time to roast [their sacrifices] before the commencement of the Sabath.14At all other times, the Paschal sacrifices could be roasted at night. Hence, as long as they were slaughtered before nightfall, there was no difficulty. The roasting of the Paschal sacrifices did not, however, supersede the prohibition against cooking on the Sabbath. Hence, the slaughter had to be performed earlier so that they could be roasted on time.
Even though [no sacrificial animals] are slaughtered after the continuous offering of the afternoon,15This represents the division of the halachot in the authentic manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. A printing error appears to have crept into the standard published text. any entity that is fit to be offered on the altar's pyre is offered the entire day. And the limbs of the burnt-offerings and the eimorim16The fats and inner organs of the animal that are offered on the altar. may be offered until midnight, as we explained in [Hilchot] Ma'aseh HaKorbanot.17As stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 4:2, this is a Rabbinic safeguard.The limbs and the eimorim - whether from the continuous offerings or from other sacrifices - that were not consumed [by the fire], may be turned over18So that they will be consumed by the fires faster and more completely. throughout the entire night until the morning,19Although our Sages decreed that the limbs not be offered on the altar after midnight as mentioned above, if they were offered before midnight, they may be turned over the entire night. as [Leviticus 6:2] states: "The entire night until the morning."
[The offering of] the limbs of the continuous offering on the altar's pyre [at night] supersedes [the prohibitions of] ritual impurity,20I.e., communal sacrifices may be offered in a state of ritual impurity. If the offering itself was offered in this manner, the limbs may be offered in this manner at night. but does not supersede the Sabbath [prohibitions]. Instead, all of the limbs of the continuous offerings offered on Friday are offered on the altar's pyre on Friday alone.21I.e., during the day and not during the night. For the initial [offering] of the continuous offering supersedes the Sabbath [prohibitions],22I.e., an animal sacrificed as a communal offering may be slaughtered and offered on the altar on the Sabbath. but its concluding aspects23The offering of the limbs and fats which were not offered on the pyre on Friday. do not.24If there was no opportunity to offer the fats and the limbs on Friday, they should be brought up to the top of the altar on Friday night, but not offered on the pyre. On the top of the altar, they are not disqualified because of the passage of the night and they should be offered on Saturday night (Kessef Mishneh in the name of the Ritba). The fats of [the communal sacrifices offered on] the Sabbath are offered on a festival, at night, if the festival falls on Saturday night. [These fats] may not, however, be offered on the night of Yom Kippur [if it falls on Saturday night].25According to the fixed calendar followed at present, Yom Kippur can never fall on a Saturday night. Moreover, even when the new moon was sanctified based on the testimony of witnesses, an effort was made not to have Yom Kippur fall directly after the Sabbath (Rosh HaShanah 20a). Nevertheless, it is possible for the two holy days to follow in succession. See Hilchot Eruvin 8:10. [These concepts are derived from Numbers 28:10 which] states: "The burnt-offering of a Sabbath on its Sabbath." [This excludes the offering of] a burnt-offering of a Sabbath on another Sabbath.26And Yom Kippur is also called "a Sabbath." Nor may the burnt-offering of a weekday be offered on a festival.
When the fourteenth [of Nisan] falls on Sabbath, the fats of the Paschal sacrifice27Which is offered on the Sabbath. may be offered on the night of the festival,28I.e., on Saturday night which is the first night of the festival. for they are considered as the fats of the Sabbath.29I.e., even though they were not offered because of the Sabbath, since their blood was offered on the Sabbath, the offering of their fats supersedes the festival prohibitions (Radbaz).
There never should be less than six lambs that have been inspected30To make sure that they are free of physical blemishes [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arachin 2:5)]. in the Chamber of the Lambs.31This was one of the sub-chambers in the Chamber of the Hearth (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:10). They should be prepared four days before their sacrifice.32In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that the source for this practice was the Paschal sacrifice brought by the Jews in Egypt. They were commanded to take the lambs four days before they were offered. Even though they would be inspected beforehand, they would not slaughter the continuous offering until they inspect it again, before its slaughter by the light of the torches.33The torches were necessary, because the offering was slaughtered before daybreak and more light was necessary for a careful inspection. It was given water to drink from a golden cup34This was a sign of the wealth and prosperity of the Jewish people, as appropriate for the Temple [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 3:4)]. so that it would be easier to skin.35The commentaries note that the rationale the Rambam gives here is different from that which he initially gave in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Beitzah 5:6). Afterwards, he emended that text to include the rationale mentioned here (Rav Kappach's notes to that mishnah).
The continuous offering of the afternoon is offered in the same manner as the continuous offering of the morning. Everything follows the regimen for the offering of the burnt offering, as written in [Hilchot] Ma'aseh HaKorbanot.36Chapters 6 and 9. The lamb was not bound before its slaughter so as not to copy the practice of the heretics.37Rashi, Tamid 31b, states that this refers to pagan idolaters who would bind all four feet of their sacrifices. Instead, they would hold its forefeet and its hindfeet by hand.38Tamid 31b states that the sacrifice would be bound like the binding of Isaac the son of Abraham. Although some commentaries explain that this means that one of the animals forefeet and one of its hindfeet would be bound, the Rambam does not accept that interpretation and maintains that none of the legs were bound. the Tosafot Yom Tov (Tamid 4:1) brings support for this interpretation, noting that our Sages state that the priest who would offer the limbs on the altar would hold them during the slaughter. Thus each of the limbs was held by a different priest. It would be held in the following manner: Its head would be to the south and its face to the west.39In this way, if it defecated, its rear would not be facing the altar or the Temple Building.
The continuous offering of the morning would be slaughtered in the northwest corner of the butchering area,40The area on the northern side of the Temple Courtyard where the sacrificial animals were slaughtered and cut up. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:13-14. on the second ring,41There were rings implanted into the floor of the Temple Courtyard into which were inserted the legs of the sacrificial animals to hold them in place during the slaughter. See ibid.:14; the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 4:1). Others maintain that the animal's head was inserted into the rings. and that of the afternoon would be slaughtered in the northeast corner on the second ring. [In this way,] they would be opposite the sun.42The sun rises in the east. Hence if the sacrifice was slaughtered on the eastern corner in the morning, it is possible that the wall of the Temple Courtyard would block its rays. Conversely, since it sets in the west, the afternoon sacrifice was slaughtered in the east so that the sun's rays would not be blocked. The Received Tradition states that [these sacrificial animals] should be slaughtered opposite the sun.
If they erred and inadvertently - or even intentionally - failed to offer the continuous offering of the morning, that of the afternoon should be offered.When does the above apply? After the altar has been dedicated. If, however, it is a new altar on which no sacrifices have been offered, the continuous offering of the afternoon should not be offered on it first. For the altar for burnt-offerings should be dedicated solely by [sacrificing] the continuous offering of the morning.43Note the contrast to the Golden Altar, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 1.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
It is a positive commandment for there to be fire continuously burning on the altar,1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 29) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 132) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot.The Radbaz explains that this mitzvah has four components: a) to have a fire continuously burning on the altar; b) to bring ordinary fire with each sacrifice; c) to arrange the array of wood on the altar; and d) to offer two logs with the continuous offering. Although these different actions are each associated with a separate verse, since they all share one objective: to have fire burn on the altar, they are considered as one mitzvah. as [Leviticus 6:6] states: "A continuous fire shall burn on the altar."2There was a special pyre kept burning on the altar for this purpose, as stated in Halachah 4. Although a fire descended from heaven,3As Leviticus 9:24 states: "And fire emerged from before God and it... consumed the burnt-offering." This fire remained on the altar throughout the entire existence of the Sanctuary. Yoma 21b relates that in the First and Second Temples, fire also descended from heaven and burned on the altar. it is a mitzvah to bring from ordinary fire, as [ibid. 1:7] states: "And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall place fire on the altar."
In the morning, the wood was arranged.4See Chapter 4, Halachah 5, which states that the priest who would remove the ashes from the altar would prepare the arrangement of wood and he would bring the logs together with the daily offering. They would prepare a large array of fire at the top of the altar, as [ibid. 6:5] states: "And the priest shall burn on it wood each morning."5Yoma 26b derives this concept from a different prooftext. It is questionable why the Rambam deviates from that source, since by doing so, he is forced to derive two different concepts from the same verse. Similarly, it is a mitzvah to bring two logs of wood6Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:3 states that the logs used for the offering were "a cubit long and a cubit wide. Their thickness was like that of the leveling rod for an overflowing se'ah." [to the altar] together with the continuous offering of the morning, besides the wood of the arrangement. [This is also intimated by the same verse.]Similarly, two logs of wood were added together with the continuous offering of the afternoon, as [implied by ibid. 1:7]: "And they shall arrange wood on the fire." According to the Oral Tradition,7See Sifra to the above verse; Yoma 26b. it was taught that the verse is speaking about the continuous offering of the afternoon.
The two logs brought in the afternoon are brought up [to the altar] by two priests, each one holding one log in his hand.8The Radbaz maintains that the priest who would bring the logs in the morning (see note 4) would also bring a log in the afternoon and he would invite a friend to join him and bring the other log. This is derived from the fact that the term "and they shall arrange" used by the above prooftext is plural. Those of the morning, by contrast, are brought by one priest.9For the term used in that prooftext is singular.
Three arrays of fire would be prepared on the top of the altar each day:10See Hilchot Avodat Yom Kippurim 4:5. The first was the large arrangement upon which were offered the continuous offering and the other sacrifices. The second was a small [arrangement] to its side from which fire was taken in a fire-pan to offer the incense offering each day.11See Chapter 3, Halachah 5. The third was not associated with any other purpose except to fulfill the mitzvah of burning fire, as [ibid. 6:6] states: "A continuous fire shall burn."12As stated in Halachah 1.
According to the Oral Tradition,13Yoma 45a. it was derived that [ibid.:2] which states: "On the pyre, on the altar" - refers to the large arrangement. "The fire of the altar shall burn upon it" [ibid.] - refers to the second arrangement for the incense offering. And "The fire of the altar shall burn upon it" [ibid.:5] - refers to the third arrangement for the maintenance of the fire. The limbs and the fats that were not consumed during the evening are placed on the side of the large arrangement.14I.e., when the altar was arranged in the morning, these limbs and fats were placed there until the large arrangement could be prepared and kindled.
One who extinguished the fire of the altar is liable for lashes,15Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 81) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 133) count this prohibition as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. as [ibid.:6] states:16We have cited this reference because it is the one the Rambam refers to in Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit. Others cite Leviticus 6:5. And in his commentary on the Torah, Rashi states that there are two negative commandments involved. "It shall not be extinguished." Even one coal - even if it was removed from the altar - if one extinguishes it, he is liable for lashes.17Despite the fact that the fire of the altar as a whole continues to burn. If, however, one extinguishes the fire of a fire-pan18See Halachah 4. or the fire designated to kindle the Menorah19See Chapter 3, Halachah 13. that was kindled on the altar, even if he extinguishes it on the top of the altar, he is exempt. [The rationale is that] this fire has been allocated for another mitzvah and it is no longer called "the fire of the altar."
When one arrays the wood of the large arrangement, he should arrange it on the eastern portion of the altar. It should be made [in a manner that makes it apparent]20Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 2:4). that he began to arrange it from the east. There should be open space between the logs21So that there would be enough air for the fire to burn effectively (Radbaz). and the ends of the inner logs should touch the ashes that are in the center of the altar. It is called the ash-heap.22See Halachah 13. From the Rambam's statements here and in his Commentary to the Mishnah (op. cit.:2), it would appear that the top surface of the altar was flat and the name tapuach (literally, "bulging") was given because of the ash-pile made there. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that there was a bulge in the center of the surface of the altar itself. See also the Meiri in his commentary to Tamid who maintains that the term refers to a concave curve on the altar's surface. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's interpretation.
After the large arrangement is arrayed, logs of high-quality fig wood23See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:3. are selected and a second arrangement is made for [the fire for] the incense offering near the southwest corner,24I.e., the corner closest to both the Temple Building and the ramp. four cubits to the north of the corner.25For in this way, he will be fulfilling the directive of Leviticus 16:12: "And he shall take... flaming coals from the altar, before God." Yoma 45b explains that this refers to the outer altar which has a portion that is "before God," opposite the Holy of Holies. The second arrangement of fire was arrayed exactly in this position. Although the above verse speaks about the incense offering of Yom Kippur, our Sages also applied the concept to the incense offering brought each day. It would contain five se'ah26A se'ah is slightly more than 8 liter in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah. Other commentaries consider it larger. of coals. On the Sabbath, it would contain about eight se'ah of coals, because on every Sabbath, the two bowls of frankincense from the showbread27See Chapter 4, Halachah 11; Chapter 6, Halachah 11. would be offered on it.
The third arrangement for the sake of the maintenance of the fire can be made on any place on the altar.28Har HaMoriah states that this can be inferred from the fact that our Sages did not mention any specific place for this arrangement.The fire should be kindled on [the altar]. One should not kindle the fire on the ground and bring it up to the altar. Instead, it should be kindled on the altar itself, as [implied by] the verse: "The fire of the altar shall burn." This29I.e., its description as "the fire of the altar. The Radbaz notes that Yoma 45b derives this concept from a different verse and explains that this is a characteristic practice of the Rambam in the Mishneh Torah: to interpret the Torah's verses according to their simple meaning even though different interpretations are offered in prior Rabbinic sources. teaches that the kindling should be on the altar itself.
It is a positive commandment to remove the ashes from the altar each day,30Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 30) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 131) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. as [Leviticus 6:3] states: "And he shall remove the ashes." This is one of the services performed by the priests.31It may not be performed by an Israelite (see Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:8).The priestly garments32All four priestly garments, even though only two are mentioned explicitly in the Torah in this context [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 5:3)]. [worn] when removing the ashes33In contrast to other commentaries, according to the Rambam, these clothes are worn when removing the ashes from the altar and not when taking them out of the Temple Courtyard, for, as he states in Halachah 15, taking them out of the Temple Courtyard is not considered as priestly service. should be less valuable than those [worn] when performing the other aspects of Temple service, as [ibid.] continues: "He shall remove his garments and put on other garments and remove the ashes." The term "other" does not imply ordinary34I.e., garments that have not been consecrated. garments, but rather [priestly garments] that are less valuable than the first. [The rationale is that]35In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam explains that the reason they prepared clothes of lesser value is not because they did not wish to undertake the expense, because in the Temple, no such considerations were made. As our Sages state (Tamid 3:4), "Poverty is inappropriate in a place of wealth." it is not proper conduct to serve a cup [of wine] to one's master in the same clothes as one cooked food for him.36Removing the ashes is comparable to cooking food, for both are acts of preparation. Serving wine and offering sacrifices are also analogous, for both involving presenting something.
When should the ashes be removed from the altar each day? At dawn.37The time when the first rays of the sun become visible on the eastern horizon. According to the various opinions, this is between 72 minutes and two hours before sunrise. On the festivals, it should be carried out from the beginning of the middle third of the night.38Since there are many sacrifices offered during the festivals, all of the activity in the Temple is begun earlier so that there will be ample opportunity. And on Yom Kippur, from midnight.39On Yom Kippur, all of the elements of the Temple service were performed by the High Priest. Lest he become tired, the different elements of the Temple service were spaced out as far as possible. Hence, this activity was performed earlier in the night.
How are [the ashes] removed? [The priest] who merited40See Chapter 4, Halachot 1-5, for a description of the process in which this priest was chosen. to remove the ashes would immerse [in the mikveh]41From Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:4 and Tamid 26a, it appears that the intent is that a person who enters the lottery for the right to remove the ashes would immerse beforehand. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:9. and put on the clothes for the removal of the ashes.42Chapter 4, Halachah 1, states that the priests would come to the lottery wearing their priestly garments. Thus the one who was chosen would remove his ordinary priestly garments and put on the garments for the removal of the ashes. He would sanctify his hands and feet [from the basin].43As the Rambam writes in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 1:4), a priest should not approach the altar for any aspect of the Temple service, without first sanctifying himself, as implied by Exodus 30:20. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:1. They would tell him:44This warning was administered by the head of the clan that would serve in the Temple that day (Tifferet Yisrael, Tamid 1:4). "Be careful lest you touch a sacred utensil before sanctify your hands and feet."Afterwards, he would take a fire-pan - it was silver and would be placed in the corner between the ramp and the altar - to the west of the ramp.45I.e., the side near the entrance to the Temple Building. He would take the fire-pan and ascend to the top of the altar and scatter the coals, this way and that. [With the fire-pan,] he would lift up some of the coals46The Kessef Mishneh quotes authorities who mention that these coals must be from the limbs of the sacrifices that were consumed by the fire. which were consumed by the heart of the fire, and descend to the ground. He would turn his face to the north47For when descending the altar, he would be facing the south. and walk on the ground at the east of the altar48The side closer to the entrance to the courtyard. approximately ten cubits to the north.49Thus he is 20 cubits from the altar, for the ramp was 30 cubits long. He would gather the coals that he lifted up [from the altar, placing them] on the floor [of the Temple Courtyard], three handbreadths away from the ramp,50Thus they are placed "near the altar," as stated in Leviticus 6:3. in the place where they would place the innards of a fowl [brought as an offering],51See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 6:21. the ashes of the inner altar and the Menorah.52Which are described in Chapter 3, Halachot 4 and 12 respectively.Picking up these coals with the fire-pan and bringing them to the floor near the altar is a commandment that must be performed each day.
After the person who [initially] removed ashes from the altar descended, his priestly brethren53As opposed to the other services in the Temple, there was no lottery made for this service. In his gloss, the Radbaz first explains that since many priests were required, there was no need to make a selection. Anyone who desired could participate. The Radbaz appreciates the apparent question that arises from the comparison to the following halachah and hence offers another explanation: that the priest who was selected to remove the ashes initially was responsible for gathering several of his priestly brethren to help complete the task. would run and sanctify their hands and feet quickly.54They would hurry so that they would not remain in the Temple Courtyard without having sanctified their hands and feet (Tifferet Yisrael, Tamid 2:1). They would take rakes and spits55Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 2:1). and ascend to the top of the altar. They would place all of the limbs of the burnt-offerings and the eimorim of the sacrifices that were not consumed [by the pyre] throughout the night, on the side of the altar.56If they would be removed from the altar, they would be disqualified for having remained overnight. Nevertheless, while limbs and fats were on the altar themselves, they would never be disqualified. If the sides of the altar could not contain [all the limbs], they would be arranged on the ramp57For the ramp is considered as equivalent to the altar and the limbs are also not disqualified there. opposite [the altar's] surrounding ledge.58See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:7, 10.Afterwards, they would use the rakes to rake the ashes from all the corners of the altar and make a pile on the ash-heap.59See note 22.The mishnah (Tamid 2:1) states that this pile would at times reach 300 kor (every kor being 2 letechim, see below). Although the Rambam states that this is an exaggeration, we can be certain that the size of the ash-heap was significant. This pile [of ashes] would be cleared away with a pasachiter.60See Chapter 3, Halachah 6, for more details regarding this utensil. This is a large container that contains a letech.61A Talmudic measure equal to 9 kor which is equivalent to approximately 121 liters (approximately 27 gallons) according to Shiurei Torah and approximately 211 liters (48 gallons) according to Chazon Ish. It is taken down [to the floor of the Temple Courtyard]. On the festivals, they would not bring it down, but instead would leave a high pile in the center of the altar, because this beautifies the altar.
Any one of the priests who desired would collect the ashes that were brought down [from the altar] and take them outside the city to the ash depository.62Leviticus 6:4 speaks of taking the ashes "outside the camp." For future generations, that was interpreted as meaning "outside of Jerusalem." In the same place, the bull brought by the High Priest as a sin-offering would be burnt as required by Leviticus 4:12. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 7:4. Taking the ashes outside [the Temple Mount] did not require a lottery. Instead, whoever desired [was allowed to do so]. None of the priests were ever lethargic about removing the ashes.63Even though it was not considered part of the Temple service, as the Rambam proceeds to state.
Although removing [the ashes] outside [the Temple Mount] is not considered as service,64And thus does not require immersion or wearing the priestly garments. it should not be performed by priests with disqualifying physical blemishes.When it is removed outside the city, it is deposited in a place where the wind will not blow it powerfully, nor [rivers] would not flow into it.65Our translation follows the first printings and authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah and also follows the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Temurah 7:6). It should not be scattered there, as [Leviticus 6:3] states: "And you shall deposit it."66The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's statements, noting that the prooftext he cites refers to the removal of the ashes from the altar and not depositing them outside of Jerusalem. As the Radbaz explains, the Rambam does not differentiate between the two. [Implied is] that it should be placed down gently. It is forbidden to benefit from it.67See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:13 which mentions this prohibition. The Radbaz maintains that not only is a prohibition is involved, a person is liable for meilah, unauthorized use of sacred property, as stated in Hilchot Meilah 2:14.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
It is a positive commandment to offer the incense1See the description of the way in which the incense offering was prepared in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash, ch. 2. offering2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 28) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 103) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. Preparing the incense for the offering is not considered as a mitzvah (Sefer HaMitzvot, General Principle 10). Significantly, the Ramban (Hosafot to the negative commandments) maintains that the morning incense offering and the afternoon one should be considered as separate mitzvot. on the Golden Altar3See the description of the Golden Altar in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:17. in the Sanctuary, twice each day, in the morning and in the afternoon, as [Exodus 30:7] states: "And Aaron shall burn on it the incense of fragrant spices."If one did not offer it in the morning, he should offer it in the afternoon even if [the omission] was intentional.4In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 4:4), the Rambam writes that it was rare that the priests willfully omitted offering the incense offering, because offering it brought blessings for prosperity. The Golden Altar may be dedicated only with the incense offering of the afternoon.5Note the contrast to the daily offering (Chapter 1, Halachah 12).
How much [incense] was offered every day? [An amount that] weighed 100 dinarim,6A dinar is approximately 4 grams in modern measure. 50 in the morning and 50 in the afternoon.If the altar was removed from its place, the incense offering should, nevertheless, be offered there.7For the altar itself need not be there for the offering to be acceptable. Note the parallel in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 19:15. When incense - even a grain of it - flies off the altar, it should not be returned.8From the exegesis of Leviticus 6:3, Yoma 45b derives that the limbs of a sacrifice that fly off the altar should be returned to it, but not the grains of incense. The grain should be entombed (Radbaz).
When the incense is offered in the Sanctuary every day,9The Kessef Mishneh states that this phrase is making a distinction between the incense offering brought each day and that brought on Yom Kippur. Since the latter offering is brought into the Holy of Holies, it is necessary to depart only from the Temple Building. One may remain in the area between the Entrance Hall and the altar. See Hilchot Avodat Yom Kippurim 4:2. all of the people depart from the Sanctuary and from [the area] between the Entrance Hall and the altar. No one should be there until [the priest] who offers the incense offering departs. Similarly, at the time when [a priest] enters [to sprinkle] the blood of a sin-offering that is offered inside [the Temple],10This refers to the bull brought by a High Priest as a sin-offering, the bull brought as atonement for a law forgotten by the High Court, and the goats that are brought to atone for idolatry (see Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:13). everyone departs from from [the area] between the Entrance Hall and the altar until he departs, as [Leviticus 16:17] states: "And no person should be in the Tent of Meeting when he enters to atone in the holy place." [This is] a general principle11This translates the Talmudic term binyan av. Note the Radbaz who explains that although Yoma 44a appears to derive this concept through the exegetical method referred to as a gezeirah sheveh (a textual association), the intent is really a binyan av. [applying] to all atonement [made] in the holy place: No [other] person should be there.
What is the order of the offering of the incense offering each day? [The priest] who merited12I.e., who was chosen in the lottery, as described in Chapter 4, Halachah 6. to remove the ashes from the inner altar enters [the Sanctuary] [holding a] consecrated vessel called a teni.13The term is used in several contexts in the Talmudic literature to refer to a metal container. In his gloss to Tamid 3:6, Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura states that it has the same root as the word tene used by Deuteronomy 26:2 to refer to the container used to carry the first fruits. It was gold14As a sign of wealth and prosperity. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 1:19. and would contain two and a half kabbin.15A kab is 1376 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 2400 cc according to Chazon Ish. He would place the teni on the ground in front of him and scoop up the ashes and the coals on the altar with his hands16They were already burnt out and there was no danger of him being burnt. and deposit them in the teni. At the end, he would sweep off the remainder into it. He would leave [the teni] in the Sanctuary and depart.17Yoma 21a states this was done so because of the miracle that occurred. To explain: Our Sages relate the ashes from the Menorah and from the Golden Altar would be miraculously swallowed up in their place each day. In order not to require God to perform this miracle twice each day, the ashes from the Golden Altar would be put aside until those from the Menorah were collected. See Halachah 12.The one who merited to bring the incense offering18See Chapter 4, Halachah 7; Chapter 6, Halachah 4. would take a vessel filled to overflowing with incense. [The vessel] had a cover and was called a bezech.19In his translation of the Torah, Onkelos translates the word kaf, generally translated as "spoon," as bezech. Both the kaf and the bezech were utensils resembling ladles, i.e., they had a receptacle and a long arm leading to it. He would place the bezech in another vessel that was called a kaf. He would cover the kaf with a small cloth and hold the kaf in his hand. [Another priest]20The one who merited to remove the ashes from the altar, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 5. would enter [the Sanctuary] with him holding a fire-pan with fire.21I.e., with burning coals, as explained in the following halachah.
How does he collect the coals with the fire-pan? He takes a silver fire-pan22In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 5:5), the Rambam writes that this fire-pan would hold four kabbim. and ascends to the top of the altar and moves the coals to the side,23The Rambam's statements are based on his text of the Mishnah (Tamid 5:5). Apparently, the Ra'avad had a slightly different version. taking the coals that have been consumed by the fire in the second array24See Chapter 2, Halachot 4 and 8. and descends and places them into a golden fire-pan.25This fire-pan would hold three kabbim [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. Yoma 45a explains that gathering the coals would damage the fire-pan slightly and over time, it would have to be replaced. Hence rather than damage a golden one, the Sages took the financial needs of the Jewish people into consideration and did not require that a golden one be used each day. If a kab or less of the coals have become scattered [on the ground],26Since the golden fire-pan was smaller than the silver one, it was natural that this would occur (ibid.). he should sweep them into the channel [for the outflow].27As stated in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:11, there was a channel for outflow that ran through the Temple Courtyard. The priest would sweep the coals there [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. The Radbaz questions why the priest would be allowed to intentionally extinguish the coals. Perhaps his question can be answered on the basis of Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 8:9 which states that these coals no longer have any holiness. On the Sabbath, he should cover them with the pisachter.28In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam explains that in his Targum (Exodus 27:3 , Onkelos uses the term pisachter for the Hebrew sir, meaning "pot." If more than a kab become scattered, he should collect more with the fire-pan.
The pisachter would serve three functions: It was used to cover coals and a [dead] crawling animal on the Sabbath29See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 3:20. and it was used to remove the ashes from the altar.30See Chapter 2, Halachah 13.
[The priest] who removed the ashes from the inner altar31Tamid 6:1 states that he would be accompanied by the priest who would clean the Menorah. The Rambam does not mention this point, because it is not germane to the discussion at hand. would proceed before them, he would take the teni that contained the ashes from the altar,32Which he had left previously in the Temple Sanctuary, as stated in Halachah 4. prostrate himself33As appropriate for one who completed his Temple service and depart. and depart. [The priest] holding the fire pan would array the coals on the surface of the inner altar, spreading them out with the bottom of the fire-pan. [He would then] prostrate himself and depart.The one holding the kaf would remove the bezech from the kaf and give it to a friend or relative.34I.e., thus four priests would enter: a) one to clean the altar; b) one to place the coal on it; c) one to pour incense into the hands of the priest who would offer it; and d) one to offer the incense on the coals (Radbaz). He checks if some of the incense spilled out [from the bezech] into the kaf. His friend or relative places the incense that spilled and that which is in the bezech in his hands. [He then] prostrates himself and departs.
The one who offers the incense is warned:35As mentioned in Chapter 4, Halachah 7, the incense offering would be given to a priest who never offered it previously. Hence he would not be experienced and required these warnings (Radbaz). "Be careful. Do not begin [releasing the incense] in front of you, lest you become burned."36I.e., the person offering the incense stands to the east of the altar. He should begin pouring the incense on the western side of the altar. Otherwise, he will have to lean over the altar while the incense is burning and he could be burned in this manner. He begins to pour the incense on the fire gently, like one who sifts flour until it is spread over the entire fire.
The priest who offers the incense does not offer it until the overseer37Rashi (Yoma 28a) maintains that this term refers to the segen, the High Priest's assistant. Tosafot maintains that it refers to the priest who apportions the Temple service by lottery. From Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:16, it is obvious that the Rambam accepts Rashi's view. tells him: "Offer the incense." If the High Priest is the one offering the incense, the overseer says: "My sir, High Priest,38I.e., as expression of deference. offer the incense." After he says this, all of the people depart [from the area in front of the Temple Building].39As stated in Halachah 3. He then offers the incense, prostrates himself and departs.
The removal of the ashes from the lamps of the Menorah and their kindling40See Halachah 12 which describes what this service entails. in the morning41The Rambam's view that the Menorah was kindled both in the afternoon and the morning is not accepted by all authorities. Many maintain that it was kindled only in the afternoon. And there is an intermediate view that one (or two) lamps also burned during the day. and the afternoon is a positive commandment,42Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 25) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 98) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. as [Exodus 27:21] states: "Aaron and his sons shall arrange it." The kindling of the lamps supersedes [the prohibitions of forbidden labor] on the Sabbath43Although kindling light is usually forbidden on the Sabbath, in this instance it is permitted. and [the restrictions of] ritual impurity,44If the majority of priests or sacred utensils are impure, the Menorah may still be kindled. as do the [other] sacrifices that [are offered at] a fixed time,45See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:10. as [ibid.:20] states: "To raise up a continuously [burning] lamp."
How much oil should be put in each lamp? Half a log.46172 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 300 cc according to Chazon Ish. [This is implied by the phrase (ibid.:21):] "From the evening until the morning," Implied is that one must use a measure of oil that will enable it to burn from the afternoon until the morning.47The Jerusalem Talmud (Yoma 2:2) maintains that since the winter nights are longer than the summer nights, the priests would compensate for that by using thicker wicks in the winter and thinner ones in the summer. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 9:3), however, the Rambam writes that a medium sized wick was used at all times. The Radbaz explains that position, stating that if some oil was left over, it was not significant, for the Temple sacrifices should be offered in a spirit of wealth and prosperity. The Menorah may be dedicated only with the kindling of the seven lamps in the afternoon.
What is meant by the expression "the removal of the ashes of the Menorah"?48Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Me'ilah 3:4) where the Rambam writes that deshen means "ash" and the remainder of the wicks and the coals produced are considered as ash. Every lamp that has burnt out should have its wick and its [remaining] oil removed and it should be cleaned. The priest should place another wick and other oil in it, using the half log measure. [The wick and oil he removed] should be placed in the ash-heap near the [outer] altar together with the ashes removed from the inner alter and the outer altar.49See Chapter 2, Halachah 12. He should kindle [any] lamp that was extinguished. Kindling the lamps is what is meant by the term hatavah.50Other authorities interpret hatavah as referring to the cleaning of the lamps. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 3:9), the Rambam explains that this term means "the cleaning of the lamps, rekindling what was extinguished, and changing their wicks." See also Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 3:7 where it appears that the Rambam interprets this term as meaning cleaning and preparing the Menorah.As the Kessef Mishneh mentions, many other commentaries follow the approach of Rashba (Responsa 79 and 309) who maintains that the term hatavah means only the cleaning and preparing of the Menachot. This difference of opinion regarding the definition of this term is dependent on a larger issue. Were all the lamps kindled in the morning or not? As mentioned in Halachah 10, the Rambam maintains that they were. The Rashba and those who follow his approach differ. Accordingly, they differ in their interpretation of Exodus 30:7 "when he performs hatavah for the lamps, he shall offer the incense." According to the Rambam, this refers to the kindling of the lamps, while according to the Rashba, this refers only to cleaning them.Exodus 30:8 uses a different term for kindling the lamps at night (as the Rashba states in support of his approach). Perhaps hatavah can refer only to the rekindling of the lamps in the morning as indicated by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah cited above. See the gloss of the Lechem Mishneh. When one discovers a lamp that has not been extinguished, he should restore it.51I.e., add oil so that it will burn until nightfall.
When the western lamp52As mentioned in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:8, the Rambam maintains that the Menorah was positioned from north to south. Accordingly, this refers to the center lamp that was positioned opposite the Holy of Holies. Others differ, maintaining that the Menorah is positioned from east to west and the term "western lamp" refers to the second lamp from the east which is "western" in relation to the more eastern one. becomes extinguished, after the ash is removed, it should be rekindled only [from fire] from the outer altar.53Yoma 45b derives this concept from Leviticus 6:6 which reads "A continuous fire shall burn on the altar." Using the rules of Biblical exegesis, our Sages explain that the verse can be interpreted. Whenever a continuous fire will burn - and the Menorah is also referred to as a continuous fire - it shall be kindled from the altar.The Ra'avad differs with this ruling and maintains that when possible, even the western lamp should be kindled from the other lamps of the Menorah. Only when there is no alternative, it should be kindled from the altar. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, give support for the Rambam's view. When any of the other lamps are extinguished, by contrast, they may be rekindled from each other.54Indeed, as stated in the following halachah, it is desirable to do so rather than use another candle.
How are [the lamps of the Menorah] kindled? One should pull its wick out55With tweezers. This was possible, because the wicks were long. until he kindles it [from another one of the lamps].56The Radbaz suggests that each lamp would be kindled from the lamp next to it. Thus one would not have to stretch any of the wicks that far. He must extend the wicks,] because the lamps are permanently affixed within the Menorah.57See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:6-7. And he may not use another lamp, because that would be disrespectful.58Even if one would light the ordinary lamp from the lamp of the Menorah, it would be unacceptable, because it is not respectful to light an ordinary lamp from the lamp of the Menorah (Kessef Mishneh, based on Maggid Mishneh, Hilchot Chanukah 3:9).
All of the substances that are forbidden to be used as wicks on the Sabbath59See Hilchot Shabbat 5:5. The substances mentioned there are unacceptable, because they do not allow for a steadily burning flame. Instead, the flames they produce sputter. are forbidden to be used [as wicks] in the Temple for the Menorah.60They may, however, be used for other purposes, e.g., as wicks for the lanterns used to illuminate the Temple Courtyard during the Simchat Beit HaShoevah celebrations (Shabbos 21b). [This is derived from Exodus 27:20 which] states: "To raise up a continuously [burning] lamp." The flame must rise up on its own.61This excludes substances which will prevent the fire from ascending smoothly on its own.
[The priest] would not kindle all the lamps at once. Instead, he would kindle five lamps and make an interruption. In the interim, another service was performed.62The limbs of the sacrifices would be brought up to the altar and the incense offering was brought, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachot 3-4. Afterwards, he would reenter and kindle the other two in order to attract the attention of everyone in the Temple Courtyard.63By extending the duration of time in which this service is performed, it will be noticed by all those present [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 3:9)].
Whenever one of the lamps of the Menorah was extinguished, we kindle it from another lamp as we explained.64Halachah 13.What is the order in which they were kindled? [The priest] who merited to remove the ashes of the Menorah enters the Sanctuary65The lottery through which this priest is selected is described in Chapter 4, Halachah 6. As mentioned in Chapter 6, Halachah 1, this priest would enter the Sanctuary together with the priest who removed the ashes from the inner altar. The Rambam does not mention that fact here, because it is not a point of present concern. carrying a vessel referred to as a kuz. It was made of gold and resembled a large pitcher. He would place the wicks that were extinguished and the oil that remained in the lamp in it.66The wicks and oil were placed in the ash-pile near the outer altar as stated in Halachah 12. The commentaries have questioned the intent of the gloss of the Radbaz. He would then kindle five lamps and leave the kuz on the second step of the three steps positioned before [the Menorah]67As stated in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:11, there was a stone positioned before the Menorah into which three steps were carved. The priest would stand on it while cleaning and kindling the Menorah. and depart. Afterwards,68I.e., after the limbs were brought up to the altar as stated above. he would reenter and kindle two lamps, take the kuz in his hand, prostrate himself, and depart.
It is a positive commandment to offer the chavitin69This offering resembled flat cakes. The Rambam describes their preparation in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:2-4. offering of the High Priest each day,70Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 40) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 136) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. half in the morning together with the continuous offering of the morning and half in the afternoon together with the continuous offering of the afternoon. Kneading [these cakes] and baking them supersede [the prohibitions of forbidden labor] on the Sabbath and [the restrictions of] ritual impurity, as do the [other] sacrifices that [are offered at] a fixed time,71See the notes to Halachah 10, for details concerning the above. as [implied by Leviticus 6:14 which] states [that these cakes must be] tufinei [which allows for the interpretation that they must be] naeh, "attractive," i.e., and thus not baked on the preceding day.72For day-old cakes are not attractive.The Radbaz asks: Since the chavitin offering is considered one of the communal offerings, why is it necessary to add this and the subsequent rationale. He explains that they are valuable for the lessons that they teach independent of the concept they are quoted to support. Moreover, were they to have been baked on the preceding day, they would have been disqualified by the passage of the night,73For an article kept in a sacred vessel overnight is disqualified. for the deep frying pan74The Lechem Mishneh questions why the Rambam speaks of the deep frying pan when in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:3, he states that the High Priest's offering was prepared using the flat frying pan. is one of the sacred utensils, as we explained.75Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:23. Both the flat and deep frying pans are mentioned there.
Grinding the flour for them and sifting it, [which is performed] outside [the Temple Courtyard],76See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, op. cit. does not supersede [the prohibitions of forbidden labor] on the Sabbath.77But instead, must be performed on Friday.
When a [High] Priest offered half [of the cakes] in the morning and then died, or became impure,78Although Halachah 18 stated that the offering of the chavitin supersedes the restrictions of ritual impurity, that refers to an instance when the majority of the Jewish community, the majority of the priests, or the majority of the Temple utensils are impure. In this instance, only the High Priest is impure and that difficulty can be remedied by temporarily appointing another in his place (Radbaz). or contracted a disqualifying physical blemish79These latter two instances are not mentioned in Menachot 50b, the source for the Rambam's ruling. Nevertheless, the concept follows logically, because in these states, the High Priest cannot serve (Radbaz). and another [High] Priest was appointed in his stead,80In the latter two instances, if and when the first High Priest regains ritual purity or is healed from his blemish, he is restored to his position (ibid.). [the latter] should not bring half an isaron81I.e., half the measure required to make the flat-cakes for the entire day, the measure required for the afternoon offering. [of flat cakes] from home [in the afternoon]. Nor should he bring the half an isaron [remaining] from [the offering of] the first [High Priest]. Instead, he should bring a complete isaron.82From his own property. Half is offered and half is destroyed.83As explained in the following halachah.
Thus two half [esronim] will be offered and two will be destroyed. The two halves that will be destroyed should be left until their form is no longer recognizable84This term is interpreted to mean that they should be left until they become disqualified because they remained overnight. They cannot, however, be destroyed immediately, because since the disqualifying factor is not integral to the sacrificial food itself, destroying them would be an act of disrespect. and then be taken out to the place of burning. The same laws apply if the half [of a High Priest's offering that was set aside until] the afternoon was lost or became impure.85I.e., the High Priest must bring a complete isaron and half is offered and half is destroyed.Where should they be burnt? In the Temple Courtyard.86To the east of the altar, as stated in the notes to Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 7:3.
If the High Priest died in the morning after he offered the half of an isaron and another [High] Priest was not appointed, the heirs of the first should bring an entire isaron as atonement for the first. It was also offered complete.87Menachot 51b derives this concept from Leviticus 6:15: "The priest... from his sons should offer it," i.e., his heirs should offer it, the entire offering, bringing it in his place.If the High Priest died in the morning before offering [the chavitin] and another [High] Priest was not appointed in his stead, [his heirs] should offer a complete isaron in the morning and a complete isaron in the afternoon.88Menachot, op. cit., derives this concept from the fact that the prooftext states "It shall be offered on the pyre in its entirety." [The amount of] oil and the frankincense offered with it should not be doubled even though [the amount of] flour is doubled.89For there is a verse requiring the doubling of the flour and no such verse with regard to the oil and the frankincense (Menachot, op. cit.). Instead, three lugim of oil and a handful of frankincense is set aside for them, a log and half of oil and half a handful of frankincense for the isaron of the morning90See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:2,4. and a log and half of oil and half a handful of frankincense for the isaron of the afternoon.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
All of these services that were performed [in the Temple] every day were performed on the basis of a lottery.1This refers to the offering of the communal offerings. The priests to offer individual sacrifices were not chosen on the basis of a lottery (Rashi, Yoma 26b). See also the gloss of the Mishneh LiMelech to Halachah 9 which discusses this issue.Yoma 22a explains that the lotteries were initiated, because originally the priests would race to carry out the Temple functions. Once as the priests were running up the ramp, one pushed another and he fell and broke his leg. When the Sages realized that danger could result, they instituted these lotteries. How would they conduct themselves? All of the priests of the clan of that day2See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash, ch. 4, which explains that the priests were divided into 24 watches. Each watch would serve in the Temple for one week at a time. Each of those watches were divided into seven clans which would carry out the services for that particular day. enter the Chamber of Hewn Stone3A large chamber on the northern side of the Temple Courtyard. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:17. This chamber was chosen because a portion of it is outside the Temple Courtyard and it was in that portion the priests would stand. The rationale is that, as will be explained, the hat of one of the priests would be removed and it is inappropriate to stand bareheaded in the Temple Courtyard even briefly. after dawn,4The first glowing of the sun's rays, well before sunrise. At this time, the dust was removed from the altar, as stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 11. See also Chapter 6, Halachah 1. while garbed in the priestly garments. The [priest] appointed [to supervise] the lotteries [stands] with them and they stand in a semicircle. The supervisor takes a hat from one of the priests and returns it to him.5Immediately, so that the priest would not be bareheaded. This is the person from whom they will begin to count and thus determine the lottery, as will be explained.6In Halachah 3.
The men [selected to perform] the services proceed to them. The remainder of the priests are taken to the attendants who remove the sacred garments from them, leaving them only with the leggings7For reasons of modesty. until they put on their ordinary garments. They then remove the sacred leggings. The attendants then return the garments to the lockers.8See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 8:8-9.
How would the lottery be carried out? [The priests] would stand in a semicircle. They would decide on a number, e.g., 80, 100, 1000, or any other number that they would choose. Afterwards, the supervisor says: "Stick out your fingers" and they stick out one or two fingers.9In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Yoma 2:1), the Rambam writes that a priest would stick out one finger if he was weak or several if he was healthy. If one would stick out three, the three are counted.10The commentaries note that the Rambam's interpretation of Yoma, loc. cit., is different from that of most other authorities with regard to this point. See the gloss of the Radbaz who elaborates on this matter. A thumb should not be stuck out in the Temple because of the deceivers. For a thumb is small and it is easy to stick out and then bend over.11And thus he could manipulate the counting to favor himself [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). Here also, the Rambam's interpretation differs from that of other authorities. If one sticks out a thumb, it is not counted.The supervisor begins counting from [the priest] who was identified by the removal of his hat. They count on their fingers12Proceeding to the right along the semicircle. and then repeat13Counting each finger a second time. until they reach the number they agreed upon. The person upon whose finger the counting was completed is the one who is chosen in the first lottery for the Temple service.
Why do they count the number they have agreed upon by the fingers they stuck out instead of counting the people themselves? Because it is forbidden to count Jews14Even for a mitzvah (Yoma 22b). except via another entity, as [I Samuel 15:4] states: "And he counted them with lambs."15This refers to Saul's census of the army before entering into battle against Amalek. Conversely, we find that when David took a census and actually counted people, a severe plague resulted.
Four lotteries were carried out each day in the morning.16With regard to the afternoon, see Halachah 8. The first lottery was for who would remove the ashes from the altar.17As described in Chapter 2, Halachah 12. The lottery was conducted and the one who merited was chosen to remove the ashes. He also arranges the wood on the altar, and he brings the two logs of wood to the altar, and brings in a fire-pan full of flaming [coals]18The Radbaz elaborates in questioning the Rambam's ruling, for it appears to run contrary to the statements of Yoma 25b-26a. Indeed, he maintains that there is a printing error in the text and that this phrase should be included in the following halachah. Others, however, explain that it appears that there is support for the Rambam's position based on the Mishnayot of Tamid 5:5, 6:2. from the outer altar to the golden altar to offer the incense upon it.
Thirteen [priests] are chosen in the second lottery19As Yoma 26b relates, on Sabbaths and festivals even more priests are selected in this lottery. As indicated by Chapter 6, Halachah 1, according to the Rambam, the first two lotteries were conducted in direct proximity to each other. according to the order in which they stand.What is implied? The supervisor tells them to stick out their fingers and counts as explained.20In Halachah 3. The one who is chosen first by lottery slaughters the continuous offering of the morning. The second priest standing next to him21On his right. receives the blood of the continuous offering and he casts it [on the altar]. The third, [who stands] next to the second, removes the ashes from the inner altar, the altar of the incense offering. The fourth on his side removes the ashes from the Menorah and kindles the lamps. The fifth brings up the head of the continuous offering and its [right] hindleg to the ramp.22See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, ch. 6, for details concerning how the offering was divided into portions and brought to the altar. The sixth brings up the two forefeet. The seventh brings up the tail and the [left] hindleg. The eighth brings up the breast and the neck. The ninth brings up the two flanks. The tenth brings up the inner organs. The eleventh brings up the flour for the additional offerings. The twelfth brings up the chavitin23See Chapter 3, Halachah 18; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:4, 6:16. and the thirteenth brings up the wine of the additional offerings.
For the third lottery, the supervisor announces to all the members of the clan of that day: "Whoever has never brought an incense offering24The laws that apply had they all brought an incense offering once are mentioned in the following halachah. should come and enter the lottery."25Bringing the incense offering was a medium to drawn down Divine blessings for prosperity. Hence the opportunity is given to priests who had never brought that offering previously (Yoma 26a). The one chosen first in this lottery merited to offer the incense offering.
For the fourth lottery, all the priests gathered.26I.e., in contrast to the previous lottery where those who had brought the incense offering previously did not participate (ibid.). The lottery is held to know who will bring the limbs up from the ramp to the altar. The lottery was held and the one who was chosen27I.e., one priest would bring up all the limbs (Tosafot, Yoma 26a). merited.A different lottery was not held for the continuous offering of the afternoon. Instead, all of the priests who were chosen to perform any of the tasks in the morning should also perform them in the afternoon.28The Kessef Mishneh notes that although the wood for the altar was brought by two priests in the afternoon as opposed to the one in the morning, there was no need for a second lottery. Instead, the priest who was selected in the morning would bring one of his friends to assist him in the afternoon. An exception was the incense offering. Another lottery was made for [the right to offer] it in the afternoon. All those who never brought an incense offering from that clan could come and enter the lottery. If they had all offered incense previously, they are all able to enter the third lottery in the morning and the one who was selected in the morning offers the incense in the afternoon as well.
On the Sabbath, when [besides] the continuous offerings, the additional offerings and the two bowls of frankincense were offered, how would they conduct themselves?In the morning, the lottery was held among the men of clan of the watch that was leaving.29I.e., completes their week of Temple service. For the watches changed after the offering of the sacrifices on the morning of the Sabbath (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:3). They would offer the continuous offering of the morning and the two sheep brought as burnt-offerings for the additional offering.30Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 41) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 402) count the offering of the two sheep as the additional offering of the Sabbath as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. The ones selected to perform the tasks for the continuous offering of the morning would [perform those tasks] for the two sheep [brought as] additional offerings.31This conclusion is reached from the fact that the Talmud does not speak of a separate lottery for the additional offerings. The watch that enters32I.e., begins their week of Temple service. on the Sabbath would conduct other lotteries for the continuous offering of the afternoon. Both watches would [participate in] the division of the showbread.33As described in Halachah 12.
The [show]bread is not eaten until the two bowls of frankincense are offered on the pyre. The frankincense requires salt like the other sacrifices.34Hilchot Issurei HaMizbeiach 5:11-13; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 16:14.
These two bowls are offered after the additional offerings.35See Chapter 6, Halachah 11. Two priests offer these two bowls.36They are the fourteenth and fifteenth priests in the second lottery (Kessef Mishneh in the name of the Ritbah). The Radbaz maintains that these priests came from the watch that entered the Temple service that week.
How is the showbread divided on the Sabbaths of the year in general? The watch that enters receives six loaves and the watch that leaves receives six loaves. Those that enter divide [the bread] among themselves in the north, for they are prepared to carry out the Temple service.37This is the portion of the Temple Courtyard where the communal sacrifices are slaughtered. Dividing the bread there distinguishes them as the watch that will perform the service in the Temple that week [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sukkah 5:6)]. Those who depart divide it in the south.38This would show that they have completed their service (Sukkah 56b).When the holiday of one of the three pilgrimage festivals39I.e., the first and last days of Pesach and Sukkot and the holiday of Shavuot. falls on the Sabbath or on Sabbath in the midst of the holiday,40I.e., during Chol HaMoed. all of the watches share equally in the division41This refers to the division of the bread itself, but not to the division of the tasks involved in offering it. Those are performed only by the priests of the watch who serve in the Temple that week (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:6). of the showbread.42See ibid.:4-5 which explains the derivation of this concept. Similarly, if the first holiday of a festival falls on Sunday, all of the watches share equally in the division of the showbread on the day preceding the festival which is the Sabbath because they came early to the Temple service.43Indeed, they were given the right to share in the division of the showbread to motivate them to come early.Similarly, if the final day of the festival falls on Friday, all of the watches share equally in the division of the showbread on the Sabbath which is the day following the festival. This practice is an ordinance of our Sages [who instituted it] so that the priests should delay [their departure from Jerusalem so that they share] in the division of the showbread.44The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statements, explaining that since the festival ended on the day before the Sabbath, the priests had no choice but to stay. The Radbaz explains that it is possible that the priests will be staying in the surroundings of Jerusalem, but will not come to the Temple Mount. Giving them a share in the showbread would encourage them to come to the Temple Mount. [In this way,] if one of the members of the watch [of the coming week] would be delayed and not come [on time], another priest will be found [to take his place].
If there is one day intervening between the Sabbath and the festival, e.g., the first day of the festival fell on Monday or the last day fell on Thursday, or Shavuot fell on Monday or Thursday, the watch whose time was fixed that week receives ten loaves and the watch which enters receives two.45This applies if the last day of the holiday fell on Thursday. Conversely, if the first day fell on Monday, few priests will come, so the watch which departs receives ten loaves and the watch which comes two. See the Rambam' Commentary to the Mishnah (Sukkah 5:6). The rationale is that only one day is left for them to serve alone,46For the priests of all the watches will come to serve during the festival. either Friday or Sunday, and they are indolent and only a few come [to the Temple].47The Ra'avad and Rashi have a different understanding of the passage from Sukkah. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer support for the Rambam's view.
The High Priest always receives from each watch, half of the loaves that they receive, as [implied by Leviticus 24:9]: "And it shall be for Aaron and his sons," i.e., half for Aaron and half for his sons. A High Priest never receives a portion of a loaf, because that is not respectful.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
It is a positive commandment to arrange the showbread on the [golden] table before God in the Sanctuary, every Sabbath day,1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 27) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 97) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. Significantly, in his listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of the section, the Rambam defines the mitzvah as making the showbread. See also the notes of the Ra'avad to the Rambam's listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of the Mishneh Torah, where he questions why placing the incense on the breads and partaking of the breads, are not considered as separate mitzvot. as [Leviticus 24:8] states: "On the Sabbath day, on the Sabbath day, the priest shall arrange it."
It is clearly evident from the Torah that there were twelve loaves. Each loaf required two esronim [of flour]. [The loaves] were arranged in two sets, six loaves in each set, one loaf on the other. There were three rods2See the description of the table and its utensils in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:13-15. of gold placed between the loaves so that the wind could blow through them.3I.e., in this way, the loaves were lifted up so that air could pass through them. The rods were hollow for this purpose (Menachot 97a).The commentaries note that there was an ongoing miracle with regard to the showbread and it remained fresh from week to week (Yoma 21b). Nevertheless, the Torah advises us to take this precaution, because one should not rely on a miracle. Each set was supported by two side-frames. At the side of each set,4I.e., a space of two handbreadths was left in the center of the table for this purpose. there is placed a vessel containing a handful of frankincense, as [ibid.:7] states: "And you shall place pure frankincense next to5The Kessef Mishneh states that although, generally, the word al is translated as "on," it can also mean "next to," as in the term elev, "Next to it" (Numbers 2:20 . the arrangement." This vessel is called a bezech (dish).6In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 2:2), the Rambam notes that bezech is Onkelos' translation of the Hebrew kaposav. Thus there were two handfuls of frankincense in two dishes. These dishes had flat bases so that they could be placed on the table.
The two sets of showbread are fundamental necessities for each other.7I.e., if one had only one set, it should not be offered. [Similarly,] the two dishes [of frankincense] are fundamental necessities for each other and the sets and the dishes are necessities for each other.8Thus if there is anything lacking in either the breads or the frankincense, nothing should be offered. The [golden] table should not be dedicated except by placing the showbread on it on the Sabbath.9One should wait until the Sabbath, because the prooftext cited above states: "On the Sabbath day, on the Sabbath day, the priest shall arrange it."From one Sabbath to another, the bread that was placed on the table on the previous Sabbath is removed and new bread is arranged there. The bread that is removed is the bread that is divided between the two watches - that which enters and that which departs10See Chapter 4, Halachot 12-13. - and the High Priest11See ibid. 14. and they partake of it.12In the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 2:2), he writes that the showbread may be eaten only on the Sabbath on which it was removed from the table. Nevertheless, when Yom Kippur falls on the Sabbath, they are eaten on Saturday night.
How are the sets of the showbread arranged? Four priests enter [the Sanctuary], two are holding the two sets13From the Rambam's wording here, it appears that the breads were already folded over (as stated in Halachah 9) and placed one on top of the other. See also Halachah 11. [of bread]14Each holding one. and two, the two dishes [of frankincense]. Four priests enter before them to remove the two sets of bread and the two dishes [of frankincense] that were on the table. The priests that enter15I.e., who bring in the new showbread. stand in the north,16The table itself was on the north side of the Sanctuary, extending lengthwise from east to west. facing the south and those that depart17I.e., who remove the showbread from the previous week. stand in the south, facing the north. These remove [the showbread from the previous week] and these place down [the new breads]. One should be within a handbreadth of another,18I.e., immediately after removing one, the other should be placed down. for [Exodus 25:30] states: "[You shall place showbread] before Me continually."19I.e., there should be no time when there is not bread on the table.
When they departed, they would place the bread on a second golden table that would be placed in the Entrance Hall.20See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:16. They would offer [the incense in] the dishes on the pyre21On the outer altar. See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 2:11. and afterwards, the breads were divided. If Yom Kippur fell on the Sabbath, [the breads] are divided in the evening.22For the obligation to partake of them does not supersede the mitzvah of fasting on Yom Kippur.
How is the showbread prepared? 24 se'ah23The minimum size the contemporary authorities give for a se'ah is approximately 8.5 liters. of wheat that is fit [to be made into flour] for meal-offerings are brought.24See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:4 with regard to the special stringencies taken with regard to the preparation of the grain for such offerings. [The kernels] are struck25In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 6:5) the Ramban interprets this as striking the wheat powerfully with one's hand so that the dust will be removed from them. and tread upon26Crushing them with his feet to crack the shells (ibid.). like the other kernels of wheat for the meal offerings.27Which are struck 300 times and tread upon 500 times (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, loc. cit.). They are then ground and sifted with eleven sifters to produce 24 esronim of fine flour.28This was of course a far smaller measure than the 24 se'ah. The remainder of the flour had to be redeemed and then it could be used for ordinary purposes. See Hilchot Bikkurim 6:3. Twelve loaves of unleavened bread are made from it.If one did not sift [the flour] with eleven sifters or did not use 24 se'ah of grain to produce the flour, [the loaves] are acceptable, since fine flour was produced regardless. These measures were mentioned only as [the optimum manner] for the mitzvah.
The kneading and the fashioning [of the loaves] was performed outside [the Temple Courtyard, but] they are baked in the Courtyard29In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 11:2), the Rambam writes that it is permitted to knead the loaves outside the Temple Courtyard, but that it is not permitted to bake them outside. He states that the rationale for this distinction was not mentioned in the Talmud. like the other meal-offerings.30See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:21-23. The intent is that the other meal-offerings are baked in the Temple Courtyard. They are, however, also kneaded in the Temple Courtyard. See Kessef Mishneh. They should be kneaded one by one31Menachot 94a derives this from the exegesis of Leviticus 24:5: "Each loaf will be two esronim." Implied is that each loaf is treated individually. and baked two by two.
They had three molds of gold for them:32This refers to the ka'arot mentioned in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:14. one in which the loaf was placed while it was dough, the second in which it was baked,33Significantly, Rashi in his gloss to Exodus 25:29 states that the loaves were baked in iron molds. and the third in which it was placed when it was removed from the oven so that its [form] would not be impaired.34Since the loaves were thin, it is possible that their shape would be impaired.
All of these loaves were rectangular, as [Exodus 35:13] states: Lechem Hapanim, [literally,] "the bread of faces," i.e., it had many surfaces.35In his Commetary to the Mishnah (Menachot 11:4), the Rambam writes that each loaf had six surfaces: two on either side, one from the front and one from the bottom. This follows the opinion (Menachot 94b) that the showbread was like an open drawer. See the diagram accompanying Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:14. The length of each loaf was ten handbreadths,36A handbreadth is 8 centimeters in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah. its width, five handbreadths, and its height, seven fingerbreadths.37A fingerbreadth is 2 centimeters in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah. The length of the table was twelve handbreadths and its width, six handbreadths. [The priest] should place the length of the loaf across the width of the table. Thus the loaf would extend an extra two handbreadths at either side. He should fold up the portions that extend [beyond the table] on either side,38Rashi (Menachot 94a) states that the loaves were baked while folded over. When the breads folded over some of the dough would jut out. That dough was left there as support for the sides. Menachot 96a refers to these as karanot, "corners."In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 11:4), the Rambam writes that the height of the bread was four fingerbreadths. In order that there be no contradiction between those statements and the statements here, Minchat Yehudah suggests that the bread itself was four fingerbreadths high. Together with these karanot, the height was seven fingerbreadths. The Kessef Mishneh, however, suggests that the bread was much thinner. leaving space in the middle [of the loaf] between the two ends.39Hence producing the form "like an open drawer."All of the above follows the popular conception of the form of the showbread as it is usually depicted and as is explained by the Ralbag quoted by the Kessef Mishneh. The Radbaz, however, maintains that this is not the Rambam's intent. Instead, the simple meaning of his words is that the breads were baked as elongated rectangles and folded over only when they were put on the table itself. The folds lay on top of the bread rather than standing perpendicular to it. This form could still be considered "as an open drawer," because of the space between the two folds. Similarly, he should place one loaf on another loaf until he arranged six loaves. Similarly, on the other side, he should make a second arrangement of six loaves.
The baking of the showbread does not supersede [the prohibitions of forbidden labor]40Baking is one of the labors forbidden on the Sabbath. Although the performance of the Temple service generally supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions, an exception is made in this instance, because the bread could be baked before the Sabbath and it would not spoil due to the passage of one day (Menachot 97a). on the Sabbath and festivals.41Although it is permitted to bake on the festivals, that leniency is granted only with regard to bread to be eaten that day and the showbread would not be eaten until more than a week afterwards [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 11:9)]. Instead, on Friday, it was baked42The commentaries question why the showbread was not disqualified even though it remained overnight on Friday, for any article that had been placed in a sacred utensil is disqualified if it remains overnight. Minchat Yehudah explains that just as the bread is not disqualified while it is left on the golden table on the altar, it is similarly not disqualified when it is left on the marble table in the Entrance Hall (see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:16). and it was arranged on the following day. If the two days of Rosh HaShanah fell on Thursday and Friday,43We are speaking about the era when the Temple existed and then Rosh HaShanah was observed for only one day. Nevertheless, there was a possibility that there would be no witnesses who saw the new moon. In such a situation, the people would regard the 30th of Elul as holy regardless and not perform any work on it. If witnesses came, it was declared as Rosh HaShanah. If they would not come, the following day was declared as Rosh HaShanah, as explained in Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 5:8. Taking that possibility into mind, the priests would bake the showbread on Wednesday. it would be baked on Wednesday.
Neither the arrangement of the rods [between the breads], nor their removal, supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions.44Rashi (Menachot 97a) explains that by placing the rods between the breads, one looks like he is building. Tosafot explains that the problem is that the rods are muktzeh, articles forbidden to be moved on the Sabbath. Instead, on Friday, [a priest] would enter, remove them, and place them along the table's length. And on Sunday, [another priest] would enter and insert them between the loaves.
If one arranged the bread as commanded, but did not place with it the bowls of frankincense until the next day45Instead of placing them on the table together with the bread, as stated in Halachah 4. and on the following Sabbath he offered [the contents of] the bowls [of frankincense] on the pyres,46The key to the understanding of this and the following halachah is that for the breads to be acceptable, they and the frankincense must have been placed on the table before the conclusion of the Sabbath, remain there for an entire week, and thus be on the table from the beginning of the next Sabbath. the bread is disqualified47Because the bread is not acceptable until the frankincense was offered properly and in this instance, it was not, because it was never on the table at the conclusion of the Sabbath.The Radbaz (see also Rashi, Menachot 100a) explains that in this instance, it is not acceptable to leave the bread and the frankincense on the altar for another week, for the bread was arranged in the proper manner and hence, becomes disqualified if left on the table beyond the following Sabbath. In this instance, it is not possible to leave the bread on the table, because it was not arranged together with the frankincense (Radbaz to Halachah 14). and is not sanctified.48Therefore the prohibitions of notar, piggul and consuming the bread in a state of ritual impurity are not relevant to it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 11:8)]. Similarly, if he arranged the bread and the bowls on Sunday and offered [the contents of] the bowls on the pyre after the following Sabbath, the bread is not sanctified and is disqualified.49For the frankincense should be offered on the Sabbath. Since it was offered improperly, the bread is not consecrated. If he offered [the contents of] the bowls on the pyre on the Sabbath, the bread is not disqualified.50Our translation is based on authentic manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard published text has a different - and somewhat difficult to understand - version. See the glosses of the Kessef Mishneh and Lechem Mishneh which discuss this point. According to our version, the intent is that since the frankincense should not have been offered on this Sabbath (but on the next, as stated in the following halachah), the bread is disqualified.
What should be done with the bread and the bowls [of frankincense] that were arranged after the Sabbath? They should be left on the table until the Sabbath day passes while they are arranged.51I.e., if they were placed on the table on Sunday, new showbread should not be prepared that week. Instead, the bread and the frankincense should be left on the table over the next Sabbath and should not be removed until the next Sabbath.The Radbaz questions: Seemingly, since they were not arranged in the proper manner, the arrangement should not be acceptable. He explains that since they were placed down properly, when the time comes, retroactively, their having been arranged is considered effective. Afterwards, he should offer [the contents of] the bowls [of frankincense] on the Sabbath that followed the Sabbath that passed after they were arranged. [This does not present a difficulty,] because even if the showbread and the bowls [of frankincense] were on the table for several weeks, this does not present a problem.
If one arranged the bread and the bowls [of frankincense] on the Sabbath as required52They became sanctified, because they were arranged in the proper manner (Radbaz). and offered [the contents of] the bowls [of frankincense] after the Sabbath53I.e., during the week; thus doing so in an improper manner.- whether after this Sabbath or the following Sabbath - the bread is disqualified.54Because the frankincense which enables it to be permitted to be eaten was offered in an improper manner. Its status is that of sacred articles that have been disqualified in which instance the prohibitions of notar, piggul and consuming the bread in a state of ritual impurity55See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 17:1; 18:9-10, 13, for an explanation of these prohibitions. apply, as will be explained.56The Chazon Ish states that the text should be amended to read "is not liable for" and cites as support Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:16 which states: "Whenever sacrificial food is permitted because [of the performance of] a particular act, one is not liable for the violation any of the prohibitions against partaking of piggul, notar, or impure sacrificial food unless the act which permits partaking of the food was performed according to law." This approach is not, however, accepted by all authorities.
[The following rules apply if] one of the loaves became broken. If it was broken before the bread was removed from the table, the bread is disqualified,57Menachot 12b derives this concept from the fact that, with regard to all twelve loaves, Leviticus 24:9 states: "It is of the most sacred order of holiness." By referring to all twelve loaves as a single collective, the Torah implies that they are granted this status only when they are all whole. and the [the contents of] the bowls [of frankincense] should not be offered on the pyre because of it.58Because that offering is made only when the breads are fit. The Radbaz explains that the situation is comparable to that of a meal offering whose substance was reduced before a handful of flour was offered on the altar. In such a situation, the entire offering is disqualified. If it was broken after the bread was removed, the bread is disqualified,59And should not be eaten. See also Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 12:4. but the [the contents of] the bowls should be offered.60Being on the table for the required time is sufficient to warrant that the breads be offered.If the bread breaks after the frankincense is offered, it may be eaten, for all the mitzvot associated with it have been fulfilled (ibid.).
If the time to remove the bread61The beginning of the seventh hour on the Sabbath afternoon. arrived, it is as if the breads were removed. [Even] if a bread became broken, the [the contents of] the bowls should be offered although the arrangement [of the breads] has not been taken apart.If one of the arrangements became impure - whether before [the frankincense] was offered or afterwards - or one of the bowls [of frankincense] became impure, the entities that are impure are impure and those that are pure are pure.62I.e., the frankincense should be offered and the priests should partake of the loaves.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
[The following is] order of continuous offerings brought each day: Shortly before dawn1The term "dawn" refers to the first shining of the rays of the sun on the horizon, more than an hour before sunrise. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 1:2) which explains that the meaning of the term "the call of the gever" used by that source. the supervisor in charge of the lotteries comes and knocks gently2Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 1:2) which refers to the Song of Songs 5:2: "The voice of my beloved comes knocking," i.e., a gentle, beckoning knock. on [the gates of] the Temple Courtyard.3As indicated by Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 8:11, the supervisor would come from the chayl and knock on the outer door of the Chamber of the Hearth where the priests slept. By knocking, he would wake them. They would open the door for him.Now the Chamber of the Hearth was located in the midst of the wall on the north side of the Temple Courtyard. Half was consecrated and half was not. There were two gates leading to the Temple Courtyard from the Chamber of the Hearth. A large gate which would be opened at dawn and a smaller gate whose keys were hanging in the Chamber of the Hearth. The supervisor would take those keys and enter the Courtyard. They are opened for him and an inspection is made of the Temple Courtyard.4As described in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, loc. cit. The bakers of the chavitin are roused to prepare the chavitin.5See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 13:2 with regard to how this offering was prepared.All of the priests there will have already immersed themselves before the supervisor comes and garbed themselves in the priestly garments. They come and stand in the Chamber of Hewn Stone and carry out the first and second lottery6It appears that, according to the Rambam, these two lotteries were performed one after the other. The commentaries have noted that from Yoma 22a, 24b, it would appear that there was a span of time between the two. and [the priests] who merit [are designated to perform] their services, as we explained.7See Chapter 4, Halachot 1, 5-6.The one who merited to remove the ashes [from the outer altar] begins removing them according to the procedure we described.8See Chapter 2, Halachah 12. Afterwards, he arranges the large array [of wood on the altar], then he arranges the second array,9The Rambam does not mention the third array which was kept to maintain a fire, because that was kept burning at all times. Nevertheless, if it was necessary to place wood on it, the same priest would do so (Radbaz). and then he brings up two logs of wood and places them on the array to increase the fire.10See Chapter 2, Halachah 2, and Chapter 4, Halachah 5.Afterwards, they enter the Chamber of the Utensils11The location of this chamber is not mentioned in Hilchot Beit HaBecghirah, nor in the Mishnah of Middot. and remove all the utensils that are necessary for the entire day.12Tamid 3:4 speaks of removing 93 utensils. They give [the lamb to be sacrificed as] the continuous offering water to drink.13See Chapter 1, Halachah 9. The one who merited to slaughter it pulls it to the butchering area. All of the priests who merited to take the limbs [up to the ramp] follow him and wait there until they open the Great Gate14See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:6-7. of the Sanctuary. When the gate is opened [the lamb to be sacrificed as] the continuous offering is slaughtered.15See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:5.Afterwards two priests enter the Sanctuary: one who merited to remove the ashes from the inner altar16See Chapter 3, Halachah 4, and Chapter 4, Halachah 6. and the other who merited to remove the ashes from the Menorah.17See Chapter 3, Halachah 10, and Chapter 4, Halachah 6.
The one who removes the ashes from the altar should do that at the same time the slaughterer slaughters [the lamb to be offered] as the continuous offering. Afterwards, the person who receives its blood dashes it on the altar.18See Chapter 4, Halachah 6.
After the blood is dashed on the altar, [the second priest] in the Sanctuary kindles five lamps19See Chapter 3, Halachah 16. and both of them leave the Sanctuary. The priests in the butchering area skin [the lamb] and cut it into portions.20As described in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 6:1. Each one brings the limb which he merited to the ramp. The limbs are placed on the lower half of the western portion of the ramp.21In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Ra'avad explains that they were placed there so that they would be "before God," closer to the entrance to the Temple. The portions [of the animals sacrificed as] additional offerings are placed on the lower half of the eastern portion of the ramp. Those of the Rosh Chodesh are placed on the top of the altar between the horns, in the place where the priests walk to publicize that it is Rosh Chodesh.22I.e., to place them in an openly visible place. There they salt the limbs. They also salt the ramp, even on the Sabbath,23Even though causing the salt to dissolve would be forbidden in other circumstances on the Sabbath. so the priests will not slip and fall while bringing wood up to the ramp. Although the salt intervenes between [the priests'] feet and the ramp, it is not a concern since carrying this wood is not part of [the Temple] service.24Implied is that while bringing the limbs to the altar - which is part of the Temple service - there should not be any such intervening substances.
After the limbs are brought to the ramp, all of the priests gather in the Chamber of Hewn Stone and the supervisor tells them: "Recite one blessing." They begin the recitation of the blessing Ahavas Olam,25The blessing recited before the recitation of the Shema. The blessing Yotzer Or (which precedes Ahavat Olam in the prayer service) is recited afterwards, when the sun rises, because the order of the blessings of the Shema is not an absolute requirement [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 5:1)]. the Ten Commandments,26There the Rambam writes that the Ten Commandments were chosen because they comprise the fundaments of our faith. Indeed, they should be recited every day as part of the prayer service outside the Temple as well. Nevertheless, our Sages [Berachot 12a; Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 1:5)] refrained from doing so, lest the heretics say that these alone are the foundation of the Jewish faith. the passage Shema, the passage Vehayah Im Shamoa, and the passage Vayomer,27I.e., they read the three passages of the Shema. Even though the optimum time for the recitation of the Shema has not arrived, the priests are allowed to recite it early (and fulfill their obligation), because afterwards they will be occupied with the Temple services and we fear that they might forget to do so (Rashi, Yoma 37b). [the blessing] Emet VaYatziv,28The blessing that follows the Shema. and the blessings Retzei and Sim Shalom.29Two of the final three blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh. These blessings are chosen because they are all prayers for the sake of the Jewish people [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc cit.)]. On the Sabbath, another blessing is added. It is recited by the members of the priestly watch that depart30After the conclusion of their week of service in the Temple, because the priestly watches switch on the Sabbath afternoon (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:3). to the members of the watch that enter: "May He Who causes His name to rest in this house cause love, brotherhood, peace, and friendship to rest among you."Afterwards, they hold the third and fourth lotteries.31See Chapter 4, Halachot 7-8. The priest who merits to offer the incense enters [the Sanctuary] and offers it.32All authorities agree that an interruption is made between kindling the five lamps and kindling the two lamps. There is, however, a difference of opinion between the Sages and Abba Shaul with regard to the service that intervenes. Here the Rambam follows the opinion of the Sages that it is the offering of the incense. In our daily prayers, however, we read the passage "Abbaye would recount the order of the offerings on the altar... according to Abba Shaul" (Yoma 33a). That passage states that the blood of the daily sacrifice was offered on the altar between the kindling of the lamps and the incense was offered afterwards. The Eshkol explains that even though Abbaye's reckoning does not follow the halachah in this instance, it is still included in the prayers, because it is a concise review of all the Temple services Afterwards, the one who merited to remove the ashes of the Menorah enters and kindles two candles.33See Chapter 3, Halachah 16. The priest who offered the incense and the one who removed the ashes of the Menorah depart and stand on the steps of the Entrance Hall together with their priestly brethren.34Where they recite the priestly blessing, as stated in the following halachah.
When [the priest who offered the incense] reaches the area between the Entrance Hall and the Altar,35The Kessef Mishneh maintains that on the basis of Tamid 5:6, this was performed when the priest entered the Sanctuary to offer the incense and not when he departed. [a priest] takes a rake and throws it between the Entrance Hall and the Altar. It made a loud noise.36Tamid, loc. cit., states that its noise was so loud that no one in Jerusalem could hear his fellow man speaking to him at that time. And Tamid 3:8 states that the noise could be heard even in Jericho. It served three purposes:a) one who heard its sound would know that his priestly brethren were entering [the Sanctuary] to prostrate themselves37The prostration was not performed until after the continuous offering had been offered. and he would [also] run and go.b) a Levite who heard its sound would know that his Levitical brethren were gathering to begin the singing [that accompanied the offerings]38In this instance as well, as indicated by the conclusion of the halachah, the singing did not actually begin until later, but the preparations were begun. and he would run and go.c) when the head of the ma'amad39The term ma'amad refers to the Israelites who would be present during the offering of the sacrifices as explained in Hilchot K'lei Hamikdash, ch. 6. heard its sound, he would have the impure people40In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 5:6), the Rambam explains that this refers to people who had been afflicted by tzara'at (a skin malediction similar to leprosy) and had been cured, but had not brought their offerings as of yet. stand at the eastern gate41I.e., the Gate of Nicanor which is the main entrance to the Temple Courtyard. See also Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 4:2. because of the suspicion, i.e., so that everyone should know that they had not brought their atonement offerings as of yet.Afterwards, [the priest] who merited [to bring up] the limbs, brings the limbs up from the ramp to the altar. After the limbs are brought up,42This follows the order initiated by Aaron, the High Priest, at the dedication of the altar who did not bless the people until he had completed the offering of the sacrifices (see Leviticus, ch. 9). [the priests] standing on the steps of the Entrance Hall begin to recite the Priestly Blessing [as] one blessing43I.e., in contrast to the practice outside the Temple, the people would not respond after each blessing. Instead, when all three blessings are completed, they would say: "Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom forever and ever" (Hilchot Tefilah UNesiat Kapayim 14:9). [reciting] God's explicit name, as explained in the appropriate place.44Ibid.:10. I.e., they would pronounce the name Y-H-V-H as it is written.As stated in the above source, after the death of Simon the Just, the priests stopped using this name, lest it be learned by a person of improper character.Afterwards, they bring the flour of the accompanying offerings45See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:1. up [to the altar]. After the flour, they offer the chavitin on the pyre. After the chavitin, they offer the wine libation. While the wine is being poured, the Levites recite song and the musicians play on the various instruments in the Temple.46See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 3:2-4. Nine tekiot are sounded during the bars of the song.47See Halachot 6-7. Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 7:5
When they would give the wine to the priest who would perform the libation, there were two priests holding two trumpets in their hands who would stand on the table where the fats [were placed].48In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 6:6), the Rambam states that this refers to the marble table that was positioned to the west of the ramp. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:15. The Segen49The assistant to the High Priest. See ibid. 4:16. stands on the corner of the altar with flags in his hands. [When he waves them], they would sound a tekiah, a teruah, and a tekiah.50The trumpets were sounded like the shofar is sounded on Rosh HaShanah: one long blast (tekiah), a series of staccato blasts (teruah), and then another long blast (tekiah). [The priests with the trumpets] would then stand next to the priest who was placed in charge of the cymbals,51See ibid. 7:7. one to his right and one to his left.
When the [priest who offered the libation] bent down to pour it, the segen would wave the flags,52As a sign for the others to perform their activities. [the priest] with the cymbals would sound them and the others would sound the trumpets. The Levites began singing.53The songs are recited at this time, because "song is recited only over wine" (Berachot 35a). The songs the Levites would sing are mentioned in Halachah 9. When they reached [the end] of a bar, [the priests] would sound the trumpets54I.e., a series of tekiah, teruah and tekiah blasts. and all the people in the Courtyard would prostrate themselves.At [the conclusion of] every bar [of the song],55Each song had three bars. they would sound the trumpets and at every trumpet sounding, [the people] would prostrate themselves. There were a total of nine trumpet blasts56I.e., three series of three. sounded for the continuous offering, as we explained.57Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 7:5.
Song is recited only over the communal burnt-offerings and peace-offerings which are mentioned in the Torah. Song is not recited over the free-will burnt-offerings that are offered from the remaining funds of the Temple collection58See Hilchot Shekalim 4:9. even though they are communal offerings. Similarly, when the additional offerings are brought independently, song is not recited over them.59See ibid 3:2 where the concepts mentioned here are explained in slightly greater detail.
[These are] the songs that the Levites would recite:60These psalms are also recited as "the song of day" in our daily prayers to recall the Temple Service. On Sunday, they would recite "The earth and its fullness is God's" (Psalm 24).61This psalm was associated with Sunday, for the world was created on Sunday and this psalm states how all existence is His [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 6:7, based on Rosh HaShanah 31a)]. On Monday, they would recite "God is great and exceedingly praised in the city of our Lord" (Psalm 48).62For God's greatness was manifest in the division of the waters, the creation of the second day (ibid.). On Tuesday, they would recite "God stands in the council of judges, among the judges, He delivers judgment" (Psalm 82).63For on this day, the earth - the place were judgment is carried out - came into existence (ibid.). On Wednesday, they would recite "The Lord is a God of retribution, O God of retribution reveal Yourself" (Psalm 94).64On this day, the sun and the moon were created and this song is a prayer that God will take retribution against those who worship these celestial bodies (ibid.). On Thursday, they would recite "Raise joyous song to God our strength; sound the shofar to the God of Jacob" (Psalm 81).65On this day, animal life was created. This is truly wondrous and arouses within man a desire to sing praises to the Creator (ibid.). On Friday, they would recite "God is King. He clothes Himself with grandeur. God has robed Himself. He has girded Himself with strength" (Psalm 93).66For on this day, with the creation of man, God's work of creation was brought to its ultimate fulfillment, because man acknowledges God's Kingship (ibid.). On the Sabbath, they would recite: "A psalm, a song for the Sabbath day" (Psalm 92).67For God rested on the seventh day (Rosh HaShanah 31b). And as the Mishnah (Tamid, loc. cit.) concludes, this is "a song for the ultimate future which will be entirely Sabbath and rest for life everlasting."For the Musaf offering of the Sabbath, the song Haazinu (Deuteronomy, ch. 32) is recited. It is divided into six segments: haziv lech68I.e., the Hebrew letters are an acronym for the words which begin the verses of these segments: Ha'azinu (32:1), Z'chor (32:7), Yarkiveihu (32:13), Vayar (32:19), Lu (32:29), Ki (32:40). just as it is read in the synagogue.69I.e., as the Torah reading is divided up into aliyot. See Hilchot Tefilah 13:5. One segment is recited each Sabbath. After the song is completed on six Sabbaths, they would return to the beginning.In the afternoon on the Sabbath, they would recite from "Then Moses sang..." and from "Who is like You...."70The song of redemption after the splitting of the sea. They would read from the beginning of the song until "Who is like You" (Mi Chamocha, Exodus 15:1-11) on one Sabbath afternoon, and then from that verse until the end of the song on the next Sabbath afternoon. The standard published text of Rosh HaShanah, loc. cit., states that on the third Sabbath they would recite the song of the well (Numbers 21:17 , but apparently the Rambam's version of the text did not include that point. For the Musaf offering of Rosh HaShanah, they would recite "Raise joyous song to God our strength."71For this psalm also includes the verse "Sound the shofar on the day of the new moon." If [Rosh HaShanah] fell on Thursday,72When Psalm 81 was recited as the psalm of the day. they would recite "I have removed his shoulder from the burden" (Psalm 81:7).73I.e., the second half of the psalm. Since the psalm was already recited in the morning, they did not desire to repeat it in its entirety. From Rosh HaShanah 31b, it would appear that when Rosh HaShanah falls on Thursday, they would recite the second half of the psalm in the morning and the first half (which includes the verse concerning the sounding of the shofar) for the Musaf offering. The Rambam's ruling is based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh HaShanah 4:8). In the afternoon on Rosh HaShanah, they would recite: "The voice of God causes the desert to tremble" (ibid. 29:8).74Rashi (Rosh HaShanah, loc. cit.) explains that this verse recalls the sounding of the shofar at Mount Sinai.
When Rosh Chodesh falls on the Sabbath, the song of Rosh Chodesh75There is no Rabbinic source which is extant that mentions which psalm was recited on Rosh Chodesh. takes priority over that of the Sabbath76I.e., for the Musaf offering. in order to publicize that the day is Rosh Chodesh.
On the Sabbath, the two bowls of frankincense77That had been on the Golden Table together with the showbread. are offered on the altar's pyre together with the additional offerings before the wine libation that accompanied those offerings.78The Kessef Mishneh questions the Rambam's source for the concept that the offering of the frankincense preceded the wine libation. Rav Yosef Corcus explains that were there not a verse that teaches otherwise, we would think that the offering of the frankincense takes precedence over the additional offering as well. Hence once the additional offering has been brought, it is offered next.The order that was followed [for the sacrifices offered] in the morning is followed [for the sacrifices offered] in the afternoon79See Chapter 1, Halachah 10. with the exception of the removal of the ashes from the outer altar,80The ashes were, by contrast, removed from the Menorah and the inner altar in the afternoon, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 10. the arrangement of the arrays [of wood on the altar], and the lotteries which are only performed each day in the morning, as we explained.81See Chapter 2, Halachot 2 and 11, and Chapter 4, Halachah 8.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
On Rosh Chodesh, the additional offering of Rosh Chodesh is offered after the continuous offering of the morning.1For the offerings that are offered more frequently are given precedence over those offered on occasion (Zevachim 89a).Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 42) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 403) include offering the additional offering of Rosh Chodesh as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. What does the additional offering of Rosh Chodesh comprise? Two bulls, one ram, and seven sheep. All are burnt-offerings. A goat is brought as a sin-offering.2See Numbers 28:11-14.
The procedure through which all the burnt-offerings are offered is the same as that of continuous offering.3See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, Chapter 6. The procedure through which the sin-offerings of Rosh Chodesh and the festivals are offered is the same as that employed for the sin-offering which is eaten that we described.4See ibid., Chapter 7.
On Pesach, an additional offering is brought every day,5Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 43) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 299) include offering the additional offering of Pesach as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.The fact that the same offering is brought on each of the days of the holiday has several consequences in other areas of Jewish Law. Among them: Hallel is only recited on the first (and in the Diaspora, on the first two) days of the holiday. The blessing Shehechiyanu is not recited on the last day(s). from the first day to the seventh day, like that of the additional offering of Rosh Chodesh: two bulls, one ram, and seven sheep; all are burnt-offerings. A goat is brought as a sin-offering which is eaten.6Numbers 28:19-24.On the second day of Pesach, the sixteenth of Nisan,7With regard to the date when this offering is brought, see Halachah 11. besides the additional offering brought each day [of the holiday],8As stated in the previous clause. a lamb is offered as a burnt-offering together with the omer of barley that is waved.9See Leviticus 23:11. This is a communal meal-offering, as we explained.10Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:3.Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 44) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 302) include bringing the omer offering and the accompanying sacrifice as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.
There is a fixed time [when this offering is brought]. Hence it supersedes [the prohibitions against forbidden labor on] the Sabbath and the restrictions of ritual impurity.11See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:9-17.
This meal offering may be brought only from Eretz Yisrael,12In contrast to most of the other meal-offerings that may be brought from the Diaspora as well (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 6:15). as [Leviticus 23:10] states: "And you shall bring the omer, the first of your harvest,13The words "your harvest" can be interpreted as a reference to the harvest of your land, i.e., Eretz Yisrael. Alternatively, the Rambam is referring to the beginning of the verse "When you come to the land," as some have inferred from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:1). to the priest." It is a mitzvah to bring the omer from [fields that are] close [to Jerusalem].14In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit. 10:2), the Rambam explains that the rationale is that it is improper to pass over the opportunity to perform a mitzvah. Since there was barley fit for this offering in Jerusalem, it was not fitting to seek it elsewhere. If it was not brought from a close place,15Because the grain close to Jerusalem had not ripened (Rashi, Menachot 83b). it may be brought from any place in Eretz Yisrael.
It is a mitzvah that it be reaped at night, on the night of the sixteenth [Nisan].16In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 10:3), the Rambam explains that this preference stems from the fact that the Counting of the Omer must be "seven perfect weeks" (Leviticus 23:15 , including both day and night. The counting and the reaping should begin at the same time, as implied by Deuteronomy 16:9 which describes this offering with the phrase: "When the sickle is first put to the standing grain, you shall begin counting." Hence the reaping should also be done at night. [This applies] whether [that day falls] during the week or on the Sabbath.17Since offering the omer supersedes the prohibition against forbidden labor on the Sabbath, this applies to all the aspects of its offering, including harvesting the barley.
The entire night is acceptable for reaping [the barley for] the omer. If it was reaped during the day, it is acceptable.18Menachot 72a states that the Sages that maintain that it is acceptable to harvest the barley for the offering during the day do not accept the view that this barley may be harvested on the Sabbath. How then can the Rambam accept both rulings? Nevertheless, since the Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh HaShanah 1:8, Megilah 2:7) does not see the two as contradictory, it is possible for the Rambam to accept both rulings.
The mitzvah is to bring it from standing grain.19For this offering with the phrase: "When the sickle is first put to the standing grain." If [appropriate standing grain] was not found, it should be brought from the sheaves.
The mitzvah is [to harvest grain] that is fresh.20For Leviticus 23:14 uses the term karmel which has the connotation of fresh grain. If [such grain] was not found, it may be brought from dried grain.
Their practice was to bring [the omer] from fields to the south [of Jerusalem].21I.e., from the southern slopes of the mountains on the outskirts of Jerusalem which had greater exposure to the sun (Tosafot, Menachot 85a). They would leave one half of the field fallow22Plowing it, but not sowing it [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 8:2)]. and sow the other half one year. And the following year, they would leave fallow the half of the field that was previously sown and sow the other half and bring [the omer] from it.23In this way, the field's power of growth would always be restored and the barley would be of high quality. Compare to Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:4.
This omer would come from barley.24In contrast to all other meal offerings with the exception of the meal offering brought by a sotah (a woman suspected of infidelity) which were from wheat. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:2, Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 14:3. This is a halachah communicated by Moses our teacher.25I.e., a concept that, although not explicitly stated in the Torah, was given to Moses at Sinai and always practiced among the Jewish people.How was [the offering] brought? On the day before the festival of Pesach, the agents of the court would go out [to the field] and tie [the barley] into bundles26Rashi (Menachot 65a) states that all the stalks of barley that could be gathered within the reach of one's forearm would be tied together. while it was still attached to the ground so that it would be easy to reap. [On the evening after Pesach,] all [of the inhabitants] of all the neighboring villages would gather so that it would be reaped with much flourish.27This was to refute the approach of the Sadducees as the Rambam proceeds to explain. Perhaps the Rambam elaborates so extensively in the refutation of the Sadducees, because in his time there were Karaites who also rejected the authority of the Oral Law while claiming to follow the Written Law. They would have three men reap three se'ah of barley in three baskets with three sickles.When it became dark, the reapers would ask those standing [in attendance]: "Has the sun set?" They would answer: "Yes.""Has the sun set?" They would answer: "Yes.""Has the sun set?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is this a sickle?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is this a sickle?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is this a sickle?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is this a basket?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is this a basket?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is this a basket?" They would answer: "Yes."If it was the Sabbath, they would ask: "Is it the Sabbath?" They would answer: "Yes."28Thus emphasizing that reaping the omer supersedes the prohibition against forbidden labor on the Sabbath, as stated in Halachah 6."Is it the Sabbath?" They would answer: "Yes.""Is it the Sabbath?" They would answer: "Yes."Afterwards, they would ask: "Should I reap?" They would answer: "Yes.""Should I reap?" They would answer: "Yes.""Should I reap?" They would answer: "Yes."Three [questions and answers] were given regarding each matter. Why was all this necessary? Because of those who erred who departed from the community of Israel in the Second Temple [era].29The Sadducees who maintained that only the Written Law was of Godly origin and that the Oral Law should not be followed. They maintained that the Torah's expression [Leviticus 23:11]: "From the day following the Sabbath" [should be understood literally, as referring to] the Sabbath of the week. Nevertheless, according to the Oral Tradition, [our Sages] derived that the intent is not the Sabbath, but the festival.30I.e., Pesach. This is an accepted interpretation, because the festivals are referred to as "Sabbaths" several times in the Torah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chagigah 2:4). And so, was understood at all times by the prophets and the Sanhedrin31The Supreme Jewish court. in every generation. They would have the omer waved on the sixteenth of Nisan whether it fell during the week or on the Sabbath.[This interpretation is also reflected in the Written Torah itself,]32The proof proposed by the Rambam does not appear to be based on any prior Rabbinic source. Although Menachot 65b brings several proofs of this concept from the exegesis of different verses, the Rambam does not refer to them because he is seeking an explicit proof from Scripture which the Saduccees accept rather than a concept derived from exegesis which they do not accept. The Sages did not refer to the proof used by the Rambam, because they would rather employ a proof that has its source in the Torah itself rather than in the works of the prophets (Radbaz). for it is written in the Torah [ibid.:14]: "You shall not eat bread, roasted grain, or kernels of grain until this self-same day." And [Joshua 5:11] states: "And they ate from the produce of the land on the day after Pesach, matzot and roasted grain."33Thus we can assume the day when the omer was brought and new produce was permitted to be eaten was the day following Pesach. And if one would presume that in that year Pesach fell on the Sabbath34And thus there would be no proof of what to do in a year when Pesach does not fall on the Sabbath. as these fools have supposed,35Tosafot, Menachot 30a, mentions two opinions with regard to the day of the week on which Moses died: Friday or the Sabbath. Moses died on 7 Adar. Accordingly, Pesach, 15 Nisan, was either a Sunday or a Monday. why would Scripture make the license for them to eat new grain dependent on a factor that is not fundamental, nor the true cause, but mere coincidence.36For according to the Saduccees' misguided conception, the fundamental point is that they ate the grain on the day after the Sabbath. If their approach was right, Scripture should have emphasized that the event took place then and not "on the day after Pesach." Instead, since [Scripture] made the matter dependent on "the day after Pesach," it is clear that the day after Pesach is the cause that permits new grain [to be eaten] and no attention is paid to the day of the week [on which it falls].
They reaped [the barley]; [then] they placed it in the baskets, and brought it to the Temple Courtyard. [There] they beat it, winnowed it, and selected [the kernels]. The barley [kernels] were taken and roasted over the fire in a cylinder with holes so that the fire would reach it in its entirety, as [Leviticus 2:14] states: "From ripe ears, roasted over fire, ground from fresh kernels." According to the Oral Tradition,37See Sifra to the verse; Menachot 66b. we learned that the verse is speaking only about the omer meal-offering. After it is roasted, it is spread out in the Temple Courtyard and the wind wafts through it. It is then taken to a mill for kernels and ground [to produce] three se'ah.38A se'ah is approximately 8.3 liters in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah. There are also more stringent views. From that quantity, an isaron39An isaron is one tenth of an ephah and an ephah is three se'ah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 6:6)]. Thus an isaron is approximately 2.4 liters in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah.The priests would be endeavoring to get one tenth of the original amount of grain. There the Rambam explains that since the kernels of grain are still somewhat underdeveloped - for this offering is being made right at the beginning of the harvest - there will not be as much fine flour and much sifting will be required to produce the desired quantity. is taken out after it has been sifted with thirteen sifters. The remainder is redeemed and [afterwards] may be eaten by any person. Challah must be separated from [that grain], but it is exempt from the tithes, as we explained.40Hilchot Ma'aser 3:25; Hilchot Bikkurim 6:3. The rationale is that once the flour has been redeemed, the holiness associated with it has departed. Hence, dough produced from it must be treated like ordinary dough. The obligation to separate terumah and tithes takes effect at the conclusion of the harvest. At that time, the produce is consecrated and therefore exempt. The obligation to separate challah, by contrast, takes effect when the dough is kneaded and, at that time, the flour has already been redeemed and is no longer consecrated.This isaron of fine barley flour is taken and mixed with a log of oil41As all the other meal-offerings. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:7 on the sixteenth of Nisan and a handful of frankincense is placed upon it like on the other meal-offerings.42See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, loc. cit. It is waved in the eastern portion of the Temple Courtyard, being passed to [all four directions], lifted up and brought down.43See the description of the waving of the offerings in ibid. 9:6-7. It is then brought close to the tip of the southwest corner of the altar like the other meal-offerings.44See ibid. 12:6. A handful of the meal is taken and offered on the altar's pyre. The remainder is eaten by the priests like the remainder of all other meal-offerings.45See ibid. 12:9.When is this handful taken? After the additional offering of the day is offered.46For the offering brought more frequently receives priority (Kessef Mishneh). The lamb brought as a burnt-offering47Which accompanies the omer as stated in Halachah 3.  is offered before the continuous offering of the afternoon.
It is forbidden to reap any of the species of grain48Wheat, barley, oats, rye, and spelt. in Eretz Yisrael49In the Diaspora, this is permitted, however, because the omer may not be brought from there. before the reaping50The Kessef Mishneh questions why the Rambam puts the limit on the reaping of the omer and not on its offering. Some have suggested that since the verse mentions "your harvest," the prohibition applies only until then. of the omer, [because Leviticus 23:10] refers [to it as]: "the first of your harvest," [implying that] it should be the first [grain] that is reaped.51As mentioned in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:2-3, it is forbidden to partake of any grain before the offering of the omer. That prohibition is referred to as chadash ("new [grain]"). Here the Rambam is emphasizing that even harvesting such grain is forbidden. The prohibition is, however, an outgrowth of a positive commandment and is not considered as a negative commandment. See Halachah 21.To what does the above apply? To a harvest from which the omer offering could be brought. [A field located] in parched land in a valley, by contrast, may be reaped before [the reaping of] the omer, because it is not fit to bring [the omer offering] from it.52See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 6:12. Since this grain is not of high quality, the offerings should not be brought from it. It must be emphasized that this is only an a priori consideration. After the fact, such a meal-offering is acceptable.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 10:2), the Rambam explains why this leniency is granted. The prooftext cited above states: "You shall reap your harvest and you shall bring the omer, the first of your harvest." From the first portion of the verse, it appears that the harvest should precede the omer, but the second portion states that the omer is "the first of the harvest." The Oral Tradition resolves the difficulty by teaching: "From the place where you may bring the omer, you may not harvest, but from a place where that offering may not be brought, you may harvest." [Even such grain] should not, however, be collected in a grain heap.
When grain grew its roots53The Rabbis explain that it takes fourteen days between the time when seedlings trees are planted and when they took root. One may assume that it takes less time for grain to root. before [the reaping of] the omer, [reaping] the omer causes it to be permitted. If not, it is forbidden to harvest it, just as it is forbidden to partake of it until the omer is harvested next [year].
When grain has not completed the final third of its growth,54At this stage, it has not reached a state fit to serve as food for humans. Hence the prohibition mentioned above does not apply. Our translation is dependent on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 10:8). it may be reaped [even if it had not grown roots before the reaping of the omer] to feed it to an animal. [Grain] may be reaped so it does not ruin trees. [Similarly,] it may be reaped to clear a place for an assembly of mourning or an assembly of study. For [the prooftext] states "your harvest." [Implied is that the restrictions] do not [apply] to harvests associated with a mitzvah.
Even though it is permitted to reap, one should not bind [the stalks of barley] as sheaves55Larger bindings collected from several smaller bundles (ibid.). as the reapers do. Instead, he should leave them as small bundles.56The Rambam does allow the stalks to be tied in contrast to Rashi's view (Menachot 71a).
We already explained57Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:9. that meal-offerings, the meal-offerings for the additional offerings,58This also includes the wine for the libations (ibid.). and first fruits,59The first-fruits are not mentioned in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, loc. cit. may not be brought from new grain before the bringing of the omer.60Because the omer must be "the first of your harvest" as mentioned above. If one brought them, the offering is invalid. [Similarly, these offerings] should not be brought before bringing the two loaves [on Shavuot], but if one brought them, the offering is acceptable.61As explained in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:10, the two loaves are described by Leviticus 23:17 as "the first fruits unto God." Hence, no other grain offerings should be offered before them. Nevertheless, since this grain is acceptable for a private individual, after the fact, the offering is still acceptable.
Anyone who offers a meal-offering from new grain should recite the blessing Shehechiyanu.62Since it is the first meal-offering to be brought from new grain, it warrants a blessing. The Rambam is interpreting Menachot 75b differently than Rashi.
When grain was sown after the offering of the omer and harvested after the omer was offered the following year, there is an unresolved doubt:63Our Sages discussed the issue in Menachot 68b and did not arrive at a resolution. May meal-offerings be brought from it as an initial preference, before the two loaves are brought [on Shavuot], because the two loaves and the omer had been brought while this grain [was growing],64I.e., the two loaves of the previous year and the omer of the present year. or perhaps [meal-offerings] should not be brought from it until after bringing the two loaves, after the omer of the same year were brought.65Rav Yosef Corcus states that if one does bring a meal-offering from such grain, after the fact, he is not required to bring a second one. See also the conclusion of the following halachah.
Similarly, if grain was growing in the ground and its leaves began to form or they began to blossom at the time of the bringing of the two loaves,66I.e., without the grain having become rooted in the ground. The Kessef Mishneh questions how is it possible for the leaves of a plant to grow without it taking root. He explains that this refers to a situation where the seeds were sprouted in water which could produce leaves before roots. there is an unresolved question if the blossoming or the formation of leaves is considered equivalent to [the grain] taking root, and it is permitted to bring meal-offerings from it, or it is not considered as equivalent to it having taken root. Therefore one should not bring [such offerings]. If one did, [we assume that] they were accepted.
One who reaps grain before the harvest of the omer is not liable for lashes67For the violation of a negative Scriptural commandment is not involved. The Radbaz maintains that one is, however, liable for stripes for rebellious conduct. and [the grain] he reaps is fit to be used.68Both as food and for a meal-offering (Rav Yosef Corcus). Needless to say, one must wait until the omer or the two loaves are offered.
It is a positive commandment to count69Verbalizing the reckoning of each day (see Radbaz). seven complete weeks70Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 161) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 306) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. from the day the omer is brought, as [Leviticus 23:15] states: "And from the day after the Sabbath, you shall count... seven weeks." It is a mitzvah to count the days together with the weeks, as [ibid.:15] states: "You shall count 50 days."71In Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., the Rambam emphasizes that these are not two separate commandments. In some Ashkenazic communities, the custom is to count each night and, at the end of a week, to count the passage of the week. The Sephardic custom is to mention the days and the weeks each night when counting.One should count at the inception of the [new] day. Therefore one counts at night,72For by including the night, the weeks will be "complete," without any lack (Menachot 66a). [beginning] from the night of the sixteenth of Nisan.
When one forgot and did not count at night, he should count during the day.73It appears that according to the Rambam, after the fact, by counting during the day, one fulfills the mitzvah just as one does by counting at night. Rabbenu Asher does not accept this view. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 489:7) states that if one did not count during the night, he should not recite a blessing while counting during the day. One should count only when standing.74For in its reference to this mitzvah, Deuteronomy 16:9 mentions "standing grain," which our Rabbis interpret as an allusion to fulfill the mitzvah while standing (Kessef Mishneh). If one counted while sitting, he fulfilled his obligation.
This mitzvah is incumbent on every Jewish male75I.e., the mitzvah of counting is not entrusted to the court as is the mitzvah of counting the Jubilee, but rather is a personal responsibility for every individual (Radbaz). in every place76I.e., in both Eretz Yisrael and the Diaspora. and at all times.77I.e., even after the destruction of the Temple. There are Ashkenazic authorities who differ and maintain that according to Scriptural Law, the mitzvah is dependent on the harvest of the omer. Hence in the present era, our observance only possesses the status of a Rabbinic commandment. Shulchan Aruch HaRav 489:2 writes that although primacy should be given to this view, there is no difference in practice between the two approaches. Women and servants are absolved from it.78As is true with regard to all other mitzvot associated with a specific time.
Each night, the [following] blessing should be recited before counting:79As one does before fulfilling any other positive commandment (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). "Blessed are You, God, our Lord, Who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the counting of the omer." If one counted without reciting the blessing, he fulfills his obligation80For the failure to recite a blessing does not nullify the mitzvah (Kessef Mishneh). and should not recite the blessing afterwards.81Even if one counted accidentally, one should not count afterwards with a blessing. Therefore if one's friend asks what day of the omer it is, one should answer "Yesterday was such and such" [Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 489:4)].

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
The fiftieth day of the counting of the omer is the holiday of Shavuot.1I.e., unlike other holidays, the celebration of Shavuot is not associated with a specific date of the month, but is instead dependent on the counting of the omer. In the era of the Temple, when the calendar was established based on the sighting of the moon, it was possible for the holiday to be celebrated on the fifth, sixth, or the seventh of the month. See Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 3:12. It is also called Atzeret. On this day, an additional offering is brought like the one brought on Rosh Chodesh:2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 45) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 404) include offering the additional offering of Shavuot as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Two bulls, one ram, and seven sheep. All are burnt-offerings. A goat is brought as a sin-offering. These are the addition offerings that are mentioned in the Book of Numbers.3Numbers 28:27-30. They are the additional offering associated with the day.Also, besides the additional offering of this day, a meal-offering is brought from new grain: two loaves. Together with the loaves are offered a bull, two rams, and seven sheep. All are burnt-offerings. A goat is brought as a sin-offering and two sheep are brought as peace-offerings.4Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 46) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 307) include offering these loaves and these sacrifices as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. These are the addition offerings that are mentioned in the Book of Leviticus.5Leviticus 23:16-19. The Rambam is following the opinion of Rabbi Akiva (Menachot 45b) who sees the two as two different sets of offerings.Thus on this day, besides [the two lambs brought as] continuous offerings, there are offered three bulls, three rams, and fourteen sheep - a total of 20 animals - as burnt offerings and two goats as sin-offerings which are eaten and two sheep as peace-offerings which are eaten.
These two loaves may be brought only from Eretz Yisrael and from freshly-harvested grain,6For Leviticus 23:16 describes this as "a new meal-offering," i.e., a meal-offering from grain harvested in the present year. as [indicated by Leviticus 23:17]: "From your dwelling places,7I.e., Eretz Yisrael. bring bread that will be waved...." If freshly-harvested grain cannot be found, one may bring from that which had been stored away.8The literal meaning of the Rambam's words is "from the attic." To support such a ruling, Menachot 83b explains that the expression "a new meal-offering" can be interpreted to mean that after these two loaves are brought, meal-offerings can be brought from new grain.
If wheat kernels descended from the clouds,9I.e., miraculously, without there being a logical explanation for their descent (see Tosafot, Menachot 69b). there is an unresolved doubt whether they are considered as coming from "your dwelling places."10I.e., from a simple perspective, the phrase "from your dwelling places," comes to exclude the Diaspora. Hence one might think grain from the clouds would be acceptable. Nevertheless, grain from the clouds also does not come "from your dwelling places." Hence there is room to say that it is excluded (Menachot, loc. cit.). Hence, [as an initial preference, the two loaves] should not be brought [from such grain]. After the fact, [the offering] is acceptable.How are [the two loaves] brought? Three se'ah of wheat from new grain are brought. [The kernels] are struck and tread upon as [is done] for all the meal offerings.11See Chapter 5, Halachah 6, and Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:4. They should be ground into fine flour [to produce] two esronim12As mentioned in the notes to Chapter 7, Halachah 12, an isaron is one tenth of an ephah and an ephah is three se'ah. Thus an isaron is approximately 2.4 liters in contemporary measure according to Shiurei Torah.The priests would be endeavoring to get one fifth of the original amount of grain. Since the kernels of grain are still somewhat underdeveloped, for this is an early stage in the harvest, there will not be as much fine flour and much sifting will be required to produce the desired quantity. that are sifted with twelve sifters. The remainder is redeemed and [afterwards] may be eaten by any person. Challah must be separated from [that grain], but it is exempt from the tithes, as we explained.13See Chapter 7, Halachah 12; Hilchot Ma'aser 3:25; Hilchot Bikkurim 6:3.
The two loaves that come from new grain must each come from an isaron produced from a se'ah and a half [of kernels]. They are sifted with twelve sifters. For the showbread that comes from grain that was grown for a full season, it is sufficient to use eleven sifters and an isaron is produced from every se'ah.14Since the grain has had more time to grow, the kernels of wheat have matured more, and there is more fine flour in each kernel. Hence, there is no need to sift them so thoroughly and more fine flour is produced per se'ah. The omer which comes from fresh barley does not come from choice grain.15Because at the beginning of the harvest such grain does not exist. [Hence it requires] three se'ah and thirteen sifters.
In all these instances, if one added to the number of se'ah used or subtracted from them,16The same law applies if the grain was sifted less (see Chapter 5, Halachah 6). [the offering] is acceptable.17He must, however, use the required amount of esronim for each offering (Kessef Mishneh).
The two esronim are taken and each one is kneaded into dough individually and baked individually.18In his Commentary to the Mishneh (Menachot 11:1), the Rambam states that this practice has its roots in the Oral Tradition transmitted by Moses from Sinai.
The dough for them is made and they are shaped outside [the Temple Courtyard].19In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:2), the Rambam notes that the Talmud does not explain why the two loaves were not prepared in the Temple Courtyard. They are, however, baked inside [the Courtyard] like all the meal-offerings.20See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:23.
Preparing these loaves does not supersede [the prohibitions against forbidden labor on] the festivals and needless to say, not [those of the] Sabbath. Instead, they are baked on the day preceding the festival. For [Exodus 12:16 which permits cooking and baking on the festivals states]: "It alone may be done for yourselves." [Implied is an exclusion:] "For yourselves and not for the Most High.21Even though the priests do partake of these two loaves, the purpose of their preparation is not to serve as food, but to be an offering unto God.
If the day before the festival is the Sabbath, they should be baked on Friday and eaten on the third day after they were baked which is the festival.It is explicitly stated in the Torah that they should be leavened bread.22See Leviticus 23:17. Aside from one of the types of breads offered together with the thanksgiving offering, all of the meal-offerings were unleavened bread. How were they prepared? One would bring yeast from another place and place it into the isaron measure. He would then fill that measure with fine flour and let it leaven with that yeast.23See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:18 with regard to the leavening of one of the types of bread used for the thanksgiving offering.
They were rectangular.24The Kessef Mishneh states that the Rambam derived this concept from the showbread. See also Tosefta, Menachot 11:1. The length of each loaf is seven handbreadths and their width was four handbreadths. Their height was four fingerbreadths.
How is the bread waved together with the two sheep brought as peace offerings?25As stated in Chapter 9, Halachah 9, the two loaves should be offered before the sheep that accompany them. Two sheep are brought and they should be waved while they are still alive, as [Leviticus 23:20] states: "And [the priest] shall wave them...." If one waved each of them individually, the obligation is fulfilled. Afterwards, they are slaughtered and skinned.The breast and the thigh from both of them are taken and placed aside the two loaves. [A priest] should place both of his hands below them and wave them all as a single entity,26Menachot 61a derives this from the description of the guilt offering and the log of oil that accompanies it. in the eastern portion of the Temple Courtyard, in the place where all the waving [of offerings] is performed.27See Chapter 7, Halachah 12; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:6. One should bring them back and forth [to each of the four directions] and up and down. If he waved each of the loaves [together with one breast and one thigh] individually, the obligation is fulfilled.Afterwards, the eimorim28The fats and organs offered on the altar. of the sheep are offered on the altar's pyre. The remainder of the meat is eaten by the priests.29I.e., the meat, and apparently also the bread, may not be eaten until the eimorim were offered on the altar. With regard to the two loaves: the High Priest receives one of them30As in the instance of the showbread where half the loaves are given to the High Prist (Chapter 4, Halachah 14; Kessef Mishneh). and the other is divided among all the priestly watches.31For the priests of all the watches are able to offer the sacrifices of the festivals and share in their division (see Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:4-5). As the Radbaz emphasizes, this division is followed even though each of the priests will receive only a miniscule portion. They both may be eaten for the entire day and half the night like the meat of the sacrifices of the most sacred order.32As stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:8, this is a Rabbinic safeguard. According to Scriptural Law, the sacrifices may be eaten until dawn. Even though they are peace offerings, since they are communal sacrifices, they are considered sacrifices of the most holy order and the time during which they may be eaten is regulated accordingly (Kessef Mishneh).
[The following laws apply if] one slaughtered the two sheep for four loaves: If [the priest performing the service] said:33The Radbaz emphasizes that if the priest does not make such a statement explicitly, the breads are not sanctified. "Let two of the four become sanctified," he should remove two of the four, and wave them.34And they are acceptable for the offering. The remainder should be redeemed inside the Temple Courtyard35For if they were redeemed outside the Temple, they would be disqualified (Menachot 47b). Rav Yosef Corcus explains that although one is forbidden to bring ordinary food into the Temple Courtyard, in this instance, one is not bringing the bread into the Temple Courtyard, The loaves are redeemed while they are located there. Afterwards, they are removed. and eaten outside like other ordinary [bread]. If he did not make such a stipulation, the bread does not become sanctified.
If he slaughtered four sheep for two loaves, they should take away two of them and dash their blood on the altar with the intent that they not be for this offering.36In such an instance, the sacrifices are not disqualified, but they are not considered as fulfilling the obligation of the given offering. Hence they are no longer associated with the two loaves. If, however, the blood of the first two sheep was offered with the proper intent, the later two are disqualified, before they were slaughtered. For this reason, the option mentioned by the Rambam is preferable (Menachot 48a). That passage asks: Should one slaughter a sacrifice without the proper intent, because there is a redeeming factor by doing so? It explains that there is no transgression involved in slaughtering a sacrifice without the proper intent. Hence in this situation, it is the most desired alternative. He should then wave the remaining two together with the two loaves.37And they are acceptable.
The two breads are each indispensable requirements for the offering of each other38One is not acceptable without the other and should not be brought (Menachot 27a). and the two sheep are each indispensable requirements for the offering of each other.39One is not acceptable without the other and should not be brought (Menachot 27a). If one of them died, fled, or became treifah, a partner should be taken for the second. If one was slaughtered with the proper intent [and then the other died or the like], a partner should be taken for [the first].40Our additions were made on the basis of the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh. The Or Sameach suggests (and his suggestion is borne out by some manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah) amending the text to read "If one was slaughtered without the proper intent, (i.e., and thus disqualified,) a partner should be taken for the other."
The two loaves are indispensable requirements for the offering of the sheep,41If there are no loaves, the sheep should not be offered. but the two sheep are not indispensable requirements for the offering of the loaves.42And even if there are no sheep, the loaves should be offered [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 4:3)]. [Nevertheless,] if [the loaves] were waved together with the sheep, they are indispensable requirements for their being offered.43For waving them together establishes interdependence (see Menachot 46b). The Ra'avad states that the matter is left unresolved by the Talmud and hence, questions the Rambam's ruling. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, offer an interpretation of the passage that supports the Rambam's approach. Thus if the loaves were lost, the sheep should be destroyed, and if the sheep were lost, the loaves should be destroyed, and other loaves and other sheep should be brought.
How should the two loaves be brought when they are brought without the sheep? They should be waved and then [left] until their form spoils44Since they were waved, they are considered as sacrificial entities and may not be burnt until they are disqualified. and then taken out to the place where [sacrifices] are burnt.45In the initial version of his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.; this is the version in the standard published text), the Rambam rules according to Scriptural Law and states that the loaves should be eaten. Afterwards, he amended that text to read as above (Rav Kappach's notes). This is a decree, [enacted] lest sheep be available in the coming year and the loaves be offered without them.The two rams, seven sheep,46Offered as burnt offerings (Halachah 1). and the goat,47Offered as a sin offering (ibid.). brought on this day because of the loaves, are not indispensable requirements for the offering of the loaves, nor are the loaves indispensable requirements for their being offered.
The two bulls of the additional offering of the day, and the bull brought because of the bread, are not indispensable requirements for the offering of each other.48Indeed, the two bulls brought because of the additional offering are not even indispensable requirements for the offering of each other (Kessef Mishneh).
The ram of the additional offering of the day, and the two rams brought because of the bread, are not indispensable requirements for the offering of each other.49In this instance, however, the two rams brought because of the bread are indispenaible requirements for the offering of each other (ibid.).
The seven sheep of the additional offering of the day and the seven sheep brought because of the bread are not indispensable requirements for the offering of each other.50Here also the seven sheep brought because of the additional offering are not even indispenaible requirements for the offering of each other. The Ra'avad maintains, however, that the seven sheep brought because of the bread are indispenaible requirements for the offering of each other. The Kessef Mishneh differs and maintains that none of the sheep are indispenaible requirements for each other. If they were slaughtered, they are indispensable requirements for the offering of each other.51For the fact that they were slaughtered for the same purpose causes them to be considered as a single entity. The Ra'avad does not accept this concept, but the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer an explanation of the Rambam's source, Menachot 55b, that supports his ruling.
The continuous offerings are not indispensable requirements for the additional offerings, nor are the additional offerings indispensable requirements for the continuous offerings, nor are the additional offerings indispensable requirements for each other, nor is the entire amount of burnt offerings an indispensable requirement.What is implied? If only six sheep were found, the six should be offered. Even if one found only one sheep, it should be offered.52With regard to the Rosh Chodesh sacrifice, Ezekiel 46:7 speaks of offering one bull, while the Torah (Numbers 28:11  speaks of bringing two. Menachot 45a reconciles the apparent contradiction stating that if two are available, two should be offered. If only one is available, that one should be brought. Similarly that passage speaks of offering "six sheep... that one's hand will come by," though the Torah speaks of seven. Implied is that if seven are not available, six should be brought. And if six are not available, whatever animals "that one's hand will come by" should be offered. [This applies] whether on Rosh Chodesh or on the festivals or Sabbaths. There is no obligation to offer the other animals on the following day or at any other time. Instead, whenever the date for a communal sacrifice passes without it being offered, [the obligation to offer] the sacrifice is nullified.53See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:7.If there were only two sheep to be found, and thus if they would be offered for the additional offering of the day, there would not be any for the continuous offering on the next day, the options are of equal weight.54The continuous offerings have the advantage of being offered more frequently, but the additional offerings are on a higher level of holiness. See also Chapter 9, Halachah 2. If they were offered for the additional offering of that day, the offering [is acceptable]. If it was desired that they be left to be offered on the following day, they should be left.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
On the first day of Tishrei,1Which is Rosh HaShanah. Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 47) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 312) include the offering of these sacrifices as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for the additional offering of the day,2Although at present - and as explained in Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 5:8, even at times in the Talmudic era - Rosh HaShanah was observed for two days, sacrifices were offered only on the day consecrated as the first of Tishrei. we offer a bull, a ram, seven sheep, all as burnt-offerings, and a goat as a sin-offering.3See Numbers 29:1-5. This is the additional offering of the day aside from the additional offering of Rosh Chodesh that is offered on every Rosh Chodesh.4See Chapter 7, Halachah 1. Therefore [if that date] fell on the Sabbath, three additional offerings were brought: the additional offering of the Sabbath, the additional offering of Rosh Chodesh, and the additional offering of that date.
What is the order in which they were offered? First they would offer the additional offering of the Sabbath, then the additional offering of the new month, and then the additional offering of the festival.5I.e., Rosh HaShanah. [The rationale is that any offering brought] more frequently than another takes precedence over the other one.6Zevachim 89a derives this from the fact that Numbers 28:23 refers to the "the morning offering that is the continuous offering." The latter phrase teaches that it is given precedence because it is a continuous offering, brought every day. Similarly, if [an offering] is on a higher level of holiness than another one, it takes precedence over it.7For example, as stated in Halachah 5, since it brings about atonement, the blood of a sin-offering is considered as on a higher level of holiness than the blood of a burnt-offering. Hence, it is given precedence. If one has a choice of [an offering that] is brought more frequently and one which is on a higher level of holiness, one may award precedence to whichever one desires.8Zevachim 90b debates which of the two should be given precedence without resolving the matter. Hence, it is left to an individual's choice (Kessef Mishneh).
If one transgressed and slaughtered [an animal for an offering that was] not [brought] more frequently, or one which was on a lower level of holiness first, one should offer it [on the altar]9Lest its blood coagulate before the other animal was offered. and then slaughter the one [brought] more frequently, or one which was on a higher level of holiness.
If the two [animals]10One from a sacrifice offered more frequently and one from a sacrifice offered less frequently or one on a higher level of holiness and one on a lower level. were slaughtered at the same time,11More precisely, whenever the animal from the more frequent or holier offering was slaughtered before the blood of the other was sprinkled on the altar (see Radbaz). one should stir the blood [of the one that is less frequent or less holy] until the blood of the one that is more frequent or holier is sprinkled [on the altar].
The blood of a sin-offering is given precedence12I.e., this and the following instance exemplify the principle that an offering that is holier than another receives precedence over it. over the blood of a burnt-offering, because the blood of a sin-offering brings atonement.13While a burnt-offering, by contrast, is considered merely as a present to God (Zevachim 7b). [The offering of] the limbs of a burnt-offering take precedence over offering the fats and organs of a sin-offering, because a burnt-offering is consumed entirely by fire.14And hence is considered as holier.[If one must choose] between the blood of a sin-offering,15As mentioned in the notes to the following halachah, this is speaking about a situation where both animals were already slaughtered. or the limbs of a burnt-offering,16Since each has a positive quality, neither is considered as holier than the other. one may give precedence to whichever one desires. Similarly, [if one must choose] between the blood of a burnt-offering and the fat and organs of a sin-offering17In this situation, neither possesses a distinctive positive quality in and of itself. Instead, the blood of the burnt-offering is secondary to its limbs and the fats and organs of the sin-offering are secondary to its blood. or the blood of a burnt-offering and the blood of a guilt-offering,18Zevachim 89b states that the blood of a guilt-offering is not on the same level of holiness as that of a sin-offering. According to the Rambam's version, there is an unresolved question which is holier, its blood or that of a burnt-offering (Radbaz). one may give precedence to whichever one desires.
A sin-offering takes precedence over a burnt-offering.19Rav Yosef Corcus understands this as referring to the slaughter of the sin-offering. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh ask: Since we know that a sin-offering receives precedence, why was it necessary to state previously that the blood of a sin-offering is given precedence? They explain that the previous halachah is speaking about a situation when both animals were already slaughtered and the question is which blood should be given precedence. Even a sin-offering of a fowl takes precedence over a burnt-offering of an animal, as [Leviticus 5:8 which] states: "[who shall offer] the sin offering first." This is a general principal teaching that every sin-offering takes precedence over the burnt-offering that accompanies it. Similarly, when setting aside [animals for sacrifices], one should set aside the animal to be offered as a sin-offering and then the one to be offered as a burnt-offering.
This does not apply with regard to the sacrifices of the holiday [of Sukkot].20See Chapter 10, Halachot 3-4, where these offerings are described. They are sacrificed in the order that they are mentioned in the Torah, for [Numbers 29:33] states: "according to their ordinance."What is implied? At first the bulls [should be offered], after them the rams, after them the sheep and after them, the goats, even though the goats are sin-offerings and those which preceded them are burnt-offerings.Similarly, with regard to the burnt-offering of a bull and the sin-offering of a goat the community brings to atone for the inadvertent transgression [of the prohibitions] against the worship of false deities,21See Hilchot Shegagot 12:1, where these offerings are described. the bull is given precedence, because [ibid. 15:24] states: "according to the ordinance."The bull offered by the anointed priest22The High Priest. As stated in Hilchot Shegagot 1:4; 15:1-2, when a High Priest inadvertently transgresses and violates a sin other than idol worship. is given precedence over the bull offered [to atone] for an inadvertent transgression by the community.23As stated in Hilchot Shegagot 12:1, if the High Court errs in the issuance of a halachic warning and causes the people at large to sin, each tribe is required to bring a bull as a sin-offering.Horiot 13a derives the sequence of these offerings from Leviticus 4:21, which describes the bull brought by the High Priest as "the first bull." Our Sages understood that as implying that it is given precedence. Moreover, they maintain that it is logical to assume that the High Priest's offering should be given precedence, for he is the one who offers the bull on behalf of the community. Hence first he should atone for himself and then, offer atonement for the community. The latter sacrifice takes precedence over the bull [offered to atone] for the worship of false deities.24When the community violates a transgression involving the worship of false deities due to an erroneous ruling by the High Court, each tribe must bring a burnt-offering of a bull and a sin-offering of a goat (Hilchot Shegagot, loc. cit.). Since this bull is a burnt-offering, the bull brought to atone for other transgressions is given precedence. The latter sacrifice takes precedence over the goat offered with it. Even though the bull is a burnt-offering and the goat is a sin-offering,25And sin-offerings should be given precedence, as stated in the preceding halachah. [the bull is given precedence], for this is the order of the verses in the Torah.The goat brought [to atone for] idolatry takes precedence over the goat brought by a king,26As stated in Hilchot Shegagot 1:4, when a king sins and inadvertently performs a transgression punishable by karet other than idolatry, he must bring a goat as a sin-offering. for the king is one individual.27While the goat brought to atone for idolatry is brought on behalf of a tribe as a whole. The goat brought by a king takes precedence over the she-goat brought by an ordinary individual.28As a sin-offering. Hilchot Shegagot, loc. cit., states that an ordinary individual who performs a transgression punishable by karet must bring either a she-goat or a ewe as a sin-offering. The sin-offering brought by a king receives precedence, for his sacrifice is associated with his elevated position. The she-goat brought by a private individual takes precedence over a ewe,29A she-goat can be brought to atone for all transgressions, including idolatry, while a ewe may not be brought for idolatry. This indicates that the goat is of greater power. even though they are both sin-offerings. For a she-goat is fit to be brought [to atone] for [all] sins for which one is liable for karet, for which a sin-offering is brought, and the ewe may not be brought [to atone] for the inadvertent transgression of the prohibitions of idolatry.
Even the sin-offering of a fowl brought by a woman after childbirth30This offering is singled out, because it is not brought to atone for any particular transgression (Kessef Mishneh). takes precedence over the sheep she brings.31As related in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:2, after childbirth, in order to be able to partake of sacrificial foods, a woman must bring a dove or turtle-dove as a sin-offering, and a sheep as a burnt-offering. Since the fowl is a sin-offering, it is given precedence. A sin-offering takes precedence over a guilt-offering, because its blood is applied to the four corners [of the altar] and on its base.32See the description of the presentation of the blood of a sin-offering in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:7. There are, by contrast, only two presentations of the blood of a guilt-offering on the altar (ibid. :6). Hence the sin-offering is given precedence. All of the sin-offerings mentioned in the Torah take precedence over all of the guilt-offerings with the exception of the guilt-offering brought by a person afflicted by tzaraat, because it comes to make a person fit.33As explained in the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 10:5), this sacrifice enables the person to regain his ritual purity. Afterwards, he may enter the Temple Courtyard and partake of sacrificial foods. The order of the sacrifices brought by a person after being healed from a tzara'at affliction is described in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 4:2.A guilt-offering takes precedence over a thanksgiving-offering and the ram brought by a nazirite, because it is a sacrifice of the most sacred order.34While the latter two are considered as sacrifices of lesser sanctity. A thanksgiving-offering and the ram brought by a nazirite take precedence over a peace-offering, because they may be eaten for only one day and require that bread bey brought with them. A thanksgiving-offering takes precedence over the ram of a nazirite, because it must be brought with four types of meal-offerings.35The offering of these three types of sacrifices and the breads that accompany them are described in Hilchot Ma'aseh Korbanot, ch. 9. The fact that the thanksgiving-offering and the nazirite's ram are eaten for only one day and a night indicate a higher level of holiness for those restrictions are also placed on a sin-offering and a guilt-offering which are sacrifices of the most sacred order (Radbaz). The inclusion of breads in these offerings also points to their importance.A peace-offering takes precedence over a firstborn offering, because it requires two presentations of blood which are in fact four,36The presentation of the blood on the altar for these sacrifices is described in ibid.:6. leaning on the animal,37See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, ch. 3, which describes this practice. waving the offering,38The waving of the peace-offering is described in ibid. 9:6-8. and accompanying offerings.39The obligation to bring accompanying offerings is mentioned in ibid., ch. 2. None of these rites are associated with the firstborn offering. Its blood is only poured out at the base of the altar (ibid. 5:17); it does not require the owner to lean upon it (ibid. 3:6); nor is it waved; nor are accompanying offerings brought with it (see (ibid. 2:2). The firstborn offering takes precedence over the tithe offering, because it is sanctified from the womb and may be eaten only by priests.40Both of these factors indicate a higher level of holiness.The tithe offering takes precedence over fowl41I.e., sin-offerings and burnt-offerings brought from turtle doves and ordinary doves. because it involves ritual slaughter and it has an element of the most sacred order: its blood and the fats and organs are offered on the altar.42In contrast, when a fowl is brought as an offering, only its blood is offered on the altar. Sacrifices of fowl take precedence over meal-offerings, for [they involve offering] blood.If a person has a sin-offering of fowl, a tithe offering, and a burnt-offering of an animal [to sacrifice], since the burnt-offering takes precedence over the tithe offering and the sin-offering of the fowl takes precedence over the burnt-offering,43As stated in Halachah 6. he should sacrifice the sin-offering of the fowl first, then the burnt-offering, and then the tithe offering.44I.e., were he not to have brought the burnt-offering, the tithe offering would have been sacrificed first, but because he brought it, the entire order is rearranged.
When a person has several types of animals from one type of sacrifice,45E.g., they are all burnt-offerings or sin-offerings. in which order should they be offered? Bulls take precedence over rams, for their accompanying offerings are larger.46As indicated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:4. Rams take precedence over sheep for the same reason. Sheep take precedence over goats, because they have more fats and organs offered on the altar, because the fat-tail is among the organs of the sheep offered and the goats do not have a fat-tail.47See ibid. 1:18.The omer offering takes precedence over the sheep offered with it. The loaves take precedence to the two sheep [offered with them]. This is the general principle: An entity offered because of the day48I.e., the omer offering and the two loaves. takes precedence over an entity brought because of the bread.49The sheep mentioned above.
A meal-offering brought by a male takes precedence over one brought by a female.50This also applies to animal offerings brought by males (Radbaz). A meal-offering of wheat51Brought as a sin-offering, as evident from the concluding clause of the halachah. takes precedence over a meal-offering of barley.52I.e., the sotah offering, for this is the only individual meal-offering brought from barley. Wheat is a more important grain and hence, its offerings are given precedence. A meal-offering brought as a sin-offering takes precedence over a meal-offering brought as a free-will offering, because it comes [as atonement] for sin. With regard to a meal-offering brought as a free-will offering and the meal-offering of a sotah, one may give precedence to whichever one desires.53For each have a positive quality lacking in the other. The free-will offering is brought together with frankincense and oil, but the sotah offering comes to clarify whether a transgression was performed (Menachot 90a).
Meal-offerings receive precedence over wine libations.54For the meal-offering is called a "sacrifice" and the wine libation is not (Radbaz). Alternatively, a handful of meal is sprinkled on the altar's pyre, while the wine is merely poured down the shittin; holes on the base of the altar. Wine libations receive precedence over oil.55For the wine libations are poured out separately, while oil is always offered with other sacrifices (Radbaz). Alternatively, the majority of the oil is eaten by the priests, while the wine libations are poured on the altar in their entirety. Oil receives precedence over frankincense.56Because the minimum quantity of oil is larger than the minimum quantity of frankincense (Or Sameach). Frankincense receives precedence over salt57The Radbaz questions the Rambam's statements, noting that nowhere does the Rambam mention offering salt as an independent offering. and salt receives precedence over wood.58For salt is associated with the sacrifices by the Torah (Leviticus 2:13 , while wood is called a sacrifice only by Scripture (Nechemiah 10:35, see Kiryat Sefer).When does the above apply? When they are all brought at the same time. When, however, a sacrifice is brought first, it is offered first, and one which is brought last, is offered last.59This principle applies to all the above situations.
All [the sacrifices] that receive precedence with regard to being offered also receive precedence with regard to being eaten.
If a person had before him a peace-offering that had been sacrificed on the previous day,60Peace-offerings may be eaten for two days and one night. and one that was offered the present day, the one offered on the previous day is given precedence, because the limit [until when it may be eaten] is closer.61For the peace-offering sacrificed on the present day may also be eaten at night and on the following day, while the one offered the previous day must be completed by sunset. If one has a peace-offering from the previous day and a sin-offering or a guilt-offering from the present day,62In which instance, one must complete eating both before sunset. the sin-offering and the guilt-offering take precedence, because they are sacrifices of the most sacred order, as we explained.63Halachah 8; see also Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:17.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
On the fast day of Yom Kippur an additional offering is offered like that of Rosh HaShanah:1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 48) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 314) include the offering of these sacrifices as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. These sacrifices are mentioned in Numbers 29:7-8. a bull and a ram - this ram is called "the ram of the people"2In the Mishnah (Yoma 7:3). This follows the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi (Yoma 70b) who maintains that the ram mentioned in Leviticus 16:5 is the same mentioned in Numbers. See also Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 1:1. - and seven sheep. All are burnt-offerings. A goat [is brought as] a sin-offering and it is eaten in the evening.3After the conclusion of the fast.
In addition, the community offers another goat as a sin-offering, it is burnt.4See Leviticus 16:27; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:16. Its pair is the goat sent to Azazel.5As mentioned in Leviticus 16:5-9. See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim, ch. 3, for a description of the service performed with these goats.
On the first day of the Sukkot festival, the following are brought as the additional offering of the day: thirteen bulls, two rams, and fourteen sheep. All are burnt offerings. And a goat which is eaten [is brought as] a sin-offering.6Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 50) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 320) include the offering of these sacrifices as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. These sacrifices are mentioned in Numbers 29:12-34. Similarly, on all the seven days of [the Sukkot] festival, two rams, fourteen sheep, and a sin-offering of a goat are offered.
The number of bulls [offered], however, is decreased each day.7The fact that the sacrifices of each day of Sukkot differ from each other endow the days of the holiday with an advantage over the days of the holiday of Pesach. For that reason, the full Hallel is recited on each of the days of Sukkot, while this is not true with regard to Pesach. Nevertheless, the fact that the sacrifices differ is not sufficient for each day to be considered a separate mitzvah. On the second day, twelve bulls are offered, on the third eleven,... until on the seventh day, seven bulls, two rams, and fourteen sheep are all brought as burnt-offerings and a goat is brought as a sin-offering.
On Shemini Atzeret,8Literally, "the eighth day of assembly." the following are brought as the additional offering of the day: a bull, a ram, and seven sheep. All are burnt offerings. And a goat [is brought as] a sin-offering.9Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 51) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 322) include the offering of these sacrifices as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. These sacrifices are mentioned in Numbers 29:35-38. This is a separate offering in its own right.10I.e., it is not a continuation of the Sukkot offerings. As Rosh HaShanah 4b, et al, state, there are six aspects in which Shemini Atzeret is considered as an independent festival. One of them is that it has its own sacrifice.
On all the seven days of the [Sukkot] festival, a water libation is poured on the altar.11In connection with the water libation, a special celebration, Simchat Beit HaShoevah was held in the Temple Courtyard. The Rambam describes that celebration and the immensity of the joy expressed at that time at the conclusion of Hilchot Shofar Sukkah VeLulav. Interestingly, however, in that source, he does not associate the celebration with the water libation and here, he does not mention the celebration. This practice is a halachah communicated to Moses on [Mount] Sinai.12A practice that is part of the Oral Law, but is not specifically mentioned in the Written Law. As the Rambam mentions in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sukkah 4:8), there are allusions to this practice in the Written Law. The water was poured as a separate libation together with the morning wine libation.13I.e., initially, this is the preferred manner of observing the mitzvah.
If one poured the water into the wine or the wine into the water and then poured the two of them as a libation from a single utensil, the obligation is fulfilled.14I.e., after the fact; the initial preference is that each be poured separately as the Rambam proceeds to explain. The Radbaz explains that since ultimately, when the wine and the water reach the shittin, they will be mixed together, after the fact, it is acceptable if they were mixed together initially. If the water libation was offered before the [daily] sacrifice - indeed, even if it was offered at night - the obligation is fulfilled.15As stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 4:5, libations offered in connection with a sacrifice must be offered by day, but those offered independently may be offered at night.The libation was poured at the southwest corner, above the mid-point of the altar, and then it would all descend to the shittin,16See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 2:11 which explains that these were two cavities in the southwest corner of the Altar, through which the blood would run off and flow through the drainage canal and from there, to the Kidron River. as we explained.17See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:1 and the discussion of the Rambam's ruling by the other commentaries. How was it offered? He would fill a golden vessel that contains three lugin18A log is 346 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 600 cc according to Chazon Ish. from the Shiloach stream.19A stream that is located on the southern side of the Temple Mount. When they reached the Water Gate,20One of the gates located on the south side of the Temple Courtyard. It was given its name, because the water for the libation was brought in through it. tekiah, teruah,, and tekiah blasts are sounded.21See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 7:6. [The priest] would ascend the ramp and turn to his left22Usually, the priests would circle the altar, turning first to the right. In this instance, they would turn to the left lest the smoke affect the water and the wine (Sukkah 48b; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 7:11). and pour the water into a cup that was positioned there. For there were two silver cups there.23In his gloss to Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:1, the Kessef Mishneh states that these cups were not a permanent part of the altar, but placed there only during the Sukkot holiday. The water [was poured] into the western one and the wine libation [was poured] into the eastern one. They were pierced with two small holes like two small nostrils. The hole for [the cup] of water was thinner than that for the wine so that the water would conclude flowing together with the wine.
They would tell [the priest] who would pour the water libation: "Lift up your hands,"24So that it would be obvious that he is pouring the water in the altar's cups (Rav Yosef Corcus). because once [a priest] poured [the water] on his feet,25Rather than on the altar. and the entire nation stoned him with their esrogim. For they said: "He was a Sadducee,"26Lit., "a follower of Tzadok." The Sadducees represented a splinter group within Judaism. They accepted the Written Law, but not the Oral Law. [In truth, they wanted to abandon Jewish practice entirely, but realized that they could never attract a large number of followers with such an approach and hence, adopted this ruse (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Avot 1:3)]. Since the water libation is not explicitly stated in the Written Law, the Sadducees did not accept its validity. for they say that there is no water libation.
[The water libation] was performed on the Sabbath in the same manner in which it was performed during the week, except that on Friday, a golden jug that was not a sacrificial vessel27In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sukkah 4:9), the Rambam gives an original interpretation for the reason the water should not be held in a sacred vessel. Were it to be held in a sacred vessel, it would be possible that the priests would sanctify their hands with it. Thus they would perform that rite with water that was not consecrated or would use up the water and prevent it from being used for the libation (Rav Kappach's notes to that mishnah). This represents a different approach than that of the other commentaries. was filled28With water from the Shiloach Stream. [with water] and left in the chamber. On the morrow, [the pitcher used for the libation] was filled from it.29This change was necessary, for going down to fill the pitcher with water from the stream was forbidden on the Sabbath, because one would be carrying from a public domain to a private domain.
If the water was spilled or was uncovered,30Water that was uncovered is unacceptable as a libation, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 6:10. one should fill [the pitcher] from the basin and pour the libation.
On every day of the Sukkot festival, a separate song31I.e., in addition to the song recited for the daily sacrifice. See also Chapter 6, Halachot 8-9 which describe the Levites' songs. was recited for the Musaf offering. On the first day of Chol HaMoed, they would say: "Render to God, children of the mighty..." (Psalm 29).32This psalm contains the verse "The voice of God is upon the water" and thus is appropriate to mark the beginning of the offering of the water libation (see Sukkah 55a). On the second [day of Chol HaMoed], they would say "And to the wicked, God said..." (Psalm 50).33This psalm warns of coming to the Temple to celebrate and offer sacrifices without first repenting (Rashi, Sukkah, op. cit.). On the third, they would say: "Who will stand up for me against the wicked?..." (ibid. 94:16).34From this verse until the end of the psalm. These verses were chosen, because they speak of confronting wicked powers. Our Sages ordained that it be recited in the Second Temple period when the Temple was under the authority of Persian, Greek, and Roman rulers (ibid.). On the fourth, they would say: "Understand, you senseless among the people..." (ibid.:5).35I.e., from verse 5 until verse 16. These verses speak about God's watchful eye that surveys man's actions. These verses were chosen, because Sukkot marks the end of the harvest season when the agricultural gifts must be given to the poor. These verses serve as a warning, impressing the people with the awareness that God is observing them at all times and seeing whether they give these gifts or not. On the fifth, they would say: "I removed his shoulder from the burden" (ibid. 81:7).36Until the end of the psalm. These verses contain words of comfort and the reassurance of Divine blessings. On the sixth, they would say: "All the foundations of the earth tremble" (ibid. 82:5).37These verses speak of Divine judgement and Hoshaana Rabbah, the day on which these verses are recited marks the conclusion of the judgment begun on Rosh HaShanah. If the Sabbath falls on one of [the days of Chol HaMoed, the verses beginning] "All the foundations tremble" are superseded [by the song for the additional offering of the Sabbath].38The song for the additional offering of the Sabbath (a portion of the song Ha'azinu, as mentioned in Chapter 6, Halachah 9) is recited on that day and the songs for the remaining days are pushed back a day (Kessef Mishneh).
We have already explained39Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:3-4. that there are a total of 24 priestly watches and they all serve with equal rights during the festivals. On the holiday of Sukkot, each watch would offer [only] one bull, one ram, or a goat as a sin-offering. With regard to the sheep, however, [there was a difference]. There were watches which would offer two sheep and there were watches that would offer one.What is implied? On the first day of the festival of Sukkot, there are thirteen bulls, two rams, and a goat. Every watch [that receives an animal to offer] would offer one of these animals. Thus there remain fourteen sheep for eight watches. Six watches offer two sheep and two watches offer one.On the second day, there are twelve bulls,40Because the number of bulls are being reduced by one each day. See Halachot 3-4 above. two rams, and a goat. Every watch [that receives an animal to offer] would offer one of these animals. Thus there remain fourteen sheep for nine watches. Five watches offer two sheep and four watches offer one.On the third day, there are eleven bulls, two rams, and a goat. Every watch [that receives an animal to offer] would offer one of these animals. Thus there remain fourteen sheep for ten watches. Four watches offer two sheep and six watches offer one.On the fourth day, there are ten bulls, two rams, and a goat. Every watch [that receives an animal to offer] would offer one of these animals. Thus there remain fourteen sheep for eleven watches. Three watches offer two sheep and eight watches offer one.On the fifth day, there are nine bulls, two rams, and a goat. Every watch [that receives an animal to offer] would offer one of these animals. Thus there remain fourteen sheep for twelve watches. Two watches offer two sheep and ten watches offer one.On the sixth day, there are eight bulls, two rams, and a goat. Every watch [that receives an animal to offer] would offer one of these animals. Thus there remain fourteen sheep for thirteen watches. One watch offers two sheep and twelve watches offer one.On the seventh day, there are seven bulls, two rams, a goat, and fourteen sheep, [an amount of animals] equivalent to the number of watches. Each watch offers one animal.
Whichever watch offered a bull one day did not offer a bull the next day. Instead, they would rotate. On the eighth day,41When there are far fewer sacrifices, as stated in Halachah 5. they allot them through a lottery42The Radbaz infers from this that no lotteries were conducted during the prior seven days. Although there were some days when one watch received more sheep to offer than another, they would balance that matter by allowing the other watches to receive more the following days. in which all watches are equal,43There were two watches that did not offer three bulls throughout the Sukkot holiday. One opinion in Sukkot 55b maintains that on Shemini Atzeret, the lottery to offer the bull should be held only between these two watches. The Rambam accepts the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi which maintains that all the watches are included in this lottery. as we explained.44Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:3-4.
When the first day of the festival of Sukkot fell on the Sabbath, there would be 61 esronim of accompanying meal-offerings from the additional offerings and the continuous offerings.45According to the guidelines established in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:4, for the additional offerings of Sukkot, the thirteen bulls required a total of 39 esronim, the two rams, a total of 4 esronim, and the fourteen sheep, a total of 14 esronim, a total of 57 esronim. In addition, two esronim were brought for the additional offering of the Sabbath, and two esronim for the continuous offerings. They would not be mixed together.
The accompanying meal-offerings46This includes the wine and the oil as well as the meal, as indicated by the concluding halachot of the chapter. are never mixed together.47Indeed, if the meal-offerings for two types of animals become intermingled before they are mixed together with their oil, they are disqualified [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 9:4)]. Instead, the accompanying offerings of bulls [are prepared and offered] separately, those of rams separately, and those of sheep separately.48The rationale for the separation is that the ratio of oil to meal is different for the offerings of sheep and bulls. [This applies] both with regard to communal offerings and individual offerings.
All of the fats of the sacrifices [that are to be offered on the altar] - whether from communal sacrifices or from individual sacrifices - should not be mixed with each other.49The Sifra derives this concept from Leviticus 3:11 which states "And he shall offer it on the pyre," using a singular form. Instead, the fats and the organs of each sacrifice are offered on the altar's pyre separately. If, however, they become mixed together, they may be offered all as one.
If the meal-offerings of the accompanying offerings become intermingled after each type50I.e., those of bulls, those of sheep, and those of rams. was mixed with oil separately,51As required by Halachah 15. they are acceptable.
Since the meal-offerings were mixed together and their oil and meal have become intermingled, it is permissible to mix their wine [libations] together as an initial preference. Similarly, if the meal-offerings of the accompanying offerings were already offered, each one separately, it is permissible to mix their wine [libations] together.52The rationale for the restriction against mixing their wine libations is only to prevent their meal-offerings from being intermingled. Once the meal-offerings have been offered, there is no longer any need for that constraint (Menachot 89b). They may be mixed as an initial preference [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. See Halachah 20.
When the wine-libations of the accompanying offerings are mixed together, it is permissible to mix a wine libation of a sacrifice offered on the previous day with one offered on the present day53For as stated in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 2:12, the wine libations may be brought several days after the sacrifice was offered. or those of an individual offering with those of a communal offering.When one mixes together [wine libations], he may mix the wine libations of the accompanying offerings of bulls with those of the accompanying offerings of rams, or those of the accompanying offerings of sheep with others of the accompanying offerings of sheep. One should not, however, mix the wine libations of the accompanying offerings of sheep with those of bulls or rams.
As an initial preference, one should not mix wine [libations] unless the meal-offerings have been mixed together or they have been offered, as we explained.54In Halachah 18.
