=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
“The Song of Songs that is Solomon’s” (Song of Songs 1:1).Prologue of the Sages. “The Song of Songs,” that is what [the verse] written by Solomon states: “Have you seen a man diligent in his labor? He will stand before kings, he will not stand before dark ones” (Proverbs 22:29). “Have you seen a man diligent in his labor” – This is Joseph, in whose regard it is written: “He came into the house to perform his labor [and none of the men of the house were there, in the house]” (Genesis 39:11). Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Neḥemya, Rabbi Yehuda says: It was a day of disgrace and manure,1The midrash is referring here to Egyptian ritual worship, and uses these words to describe it in order to demean such idolatry. and a day of theater. Rabbi Neḥemya says it was a day of theater in honor of the Nile. Everyone went to see, and he entered to perform his labor to calculate the accounts of his master.Rabbi Pinḥas says in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Abba: Anyone who serves his master properly is set free. From where do we derive this? From Joseph. Because he served his master properly, he was set free. Therefore, “he will stand before kings,” this is Pharaoh, as it is stated: “Pharaoh sent and summoned Joseph, and they rushed him from the dungeon” (Genesis 41:14). “He will not stand before dark ones,” this is Potiphar, as the Holy One blessed be He blinded his eyes and castrated him.
Another matter, “have you seen a man diligent…,” this is Moses in the labor of [constructing] the Tabernacle; therefore, “he will stand before kings,” this is Pharaoh, as it is stated “Arise early in the morning and stand before Pharaoh” (Exodus 8:16). “He will not stand before dark ones,” this is Yitro. Rabbi Neḥemya said: You have rendered the sacred profane; rather, “he will stand before kings,” this is the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, as it is stated: “He was there with the Lord forty days” (Exodus 34:28). “He will not stand before dark ones,” this is Pharaoh, as it is stated: “There was a thick darkness [in the entire land of Egypt]” (Exodus 10:22).2Pharaoh is referred to as dark because his land became dark. Alternatively, the reference is due to the fact that Moses announced that he would no longer come to see Pharaoh after the plague of darkness (see Exodus 10:29).
Another matter, “have you seen a man diligent in his labor…,” these are the righteous who are engaged in the labor of the Holy One blessed be He; therefore, “he will stand before kings,” as they stand resolute in the Torah, as it is stated: “Through me kings reign” (Proverbs 8:15).3This statement is stated from the persective of the Torah. Thus, one who stands resolute in Torah is able to stand before kings. “He will not stand before dark ones,” these are the wicked, as it is stated: “Their deeds are in the dark” (Isaiah 29:15), and it is written: “Let their way be dark and slippery” (Psalms 35:6).
Another matter, “have you seen a man diligent in his labor,” this is Rabbi Ḥanina. They said: One time, he saw the residents of his city taking up burnt offerings and peace offerings [to the Temple in Jerusalem]. He said: All of them are taking peace offerings up to Jerusalem and I am not taking up anything. What shall I do? Immediately, he went to the wilderness of his city, in the ruins of his city.4An area of the city that had become ruins and was therefore uninhabited (Etz Yosef). He found a particular stone there and he went and smoothed it, chiseled it, and painted it. He said: ‘I take it upon myself to take it up to Jerusalem.’ He sought to hire laborers, he said to them: ‘Will you take this stone up to Jerusalem for me?’ They said to him: ‘Give us one hundred gold pieces as our wages and we will take your stone to Jerusalem for you.’ He said to them: ‘From where do I have one hundred gold pieces, or [even] fifty to give to you?’ He was unable to find [enough money] at that time, and immediately they went on their way. Immediately, the Holy One blessed be He summoned for him five angels in the guise of men. They said to him: ‘Rabbi, give us five sela and we will take your stone up to Jerusalem for you, provided that you give your hand [and carry it] with us.’ He gave his hand and they found themselves standing in Jerusalem. He sought to give them their wages but did not find them. The incident came to the Chamber of Hewn Stone.5This was the seat of the Great Sanhedrin. He sought direction in what he should do with the money since he was unable to locate the laborers. They said to him: ‘Our rabbi, it appears that ministering angels took the stone to Jerusalem for you.’ Immediately, he gave the Sages those wages with which he hired the angels.
Another matter, “have you seen a man diligent in his labor,” this is Solomon son of David. “He will stand before kings,” as he was diligent in the construction of the Temple; that is what is written: “He built it in seven years” (I Kings 6:38), and another verse says: “Solomon built his palace in thirteen years” (I Kings 7:1). Is the result that the construction of Solomon’s palace was finer and more elaborate than the construction of the Temple? Rather, this is what they said: In the construction of his palace, he was indolent; in the construction of the Temple he was diligent and was not indolent. Huna [said] in the name of Rav Yosef: If everyone assists the king, all the more so that everyone assists for the honor of the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He, even spirits, even demons, and even ministering angels.Yitzḥak son of Rav Yehuda bar Yeḥezkel said: It is written: “I have built [bano baniti] an abode for You” (I Kings 8:13); I have built for you a built building.6The verse is quoting Solomon as saying that he put up a building, the Temple, that was actually built by itself. Rabbi Berekhya said: “The House that they were building,” is not written here, but rather: “The House, in its construction” (I Kings 6:7), [indicating that] it was built on its own, as it is stated: “It was built of whole stones that were transported” (I Kings 6:7). “Built” is not written here, but rather, “it was built [nivna].”7The midrash understands the term nivna as a reflexive term, indicating that it built itself. This teaches that the stone would lift itself and be placed on the row of stones. Rav said: Do not be astonished by this. What is written below? “One stone was brought and placed at the entrance to the den” (Daniel 6:18). Were there stones in Babylon?8Babylon has only lowlands and soft earth, and no mountains. Rather, it flew from the Land of Israel at that moment and came and settled at the entrance to the pit. Rav Huna said, in the name of Rav Yosef: An angel descended in the image of a stone lion and settled at the entrance of the pit. That is what in written: “My God sent His angel and closed the lions’ mouths” (Daniel 6:23). Do not be astonished; if in honor of that righteous one [Daniel], it is written: “One stone was brought,” in honor of the Holy One blessed be He9For the building of the Temple. all the more so.“He will stand before kings”—he will stand before kings of the Torah. “He will not stand before dark ones,” this is the group of the wicked. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: When [the Sages] voted, and concluded that three kings and four commoners do not have a portion in the World to Come, they sought to add Solomon to them.10This was due to what is described in I Kings 11:1–10. A Divine Voice emerged and said: “Do not touch My anointed ones” (Psalms 105:15). Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Moreover, he is listed as the head of a [royal] genealogical lineage, as it is stated: “Reḥavam the son of Solomon [reigned in Jerusalem]” (I Kings 14:21). Rabbi Yudan bar Simon said: Moreover, the Divine Spirit rested upon him and he composed these three books: Proverbs, Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes.
That is what is written: “Your sons will be in the stead of your fathers” (Psalms 45:17). You find a righteous person begetting a righteous person, a wicked person begetting a wicked person, a righteous person begetting a wicked person, and a wicked person begetting a righteous person. Each of them has [an allusion in] the Bible, has [an allusion in a popular] proverb, and has [an allusion in] common parlance. A righteous person begetting a righteous person has [an allusion in] the Bible and has [an allusion in] a proverb. The Bible, as it is written: “Your sons will be in the stead of your fathers.” It has a proverb: A scion11The scion (a shoot or twig of a plant used to form a graft) of a fig tree. that established a fig tree. A wicked person begetting a wicked person has [an allusion in] the Bible, has [an allusion in] a proverb, and has [an allusion in] common parlance. The Bible, as it is written: “Behold, you have risen in the stead of your fathers, [a brood of sinful men]” (Numbers 32:14). A proverb, [as it is written]: “as the ancient proverb says: From the wicked, wickedness will emerge” (I Samuel 24:14). [In] common parlance, from where? What does the beetle bear? Ticks that are worse than it. A righteous person begetting a wicked person has [an allusion in] the Bible: “Thistles will emerge in the stead of wheat” (Job 31:40). A proverb, [as it is written]: They12Partridges. beget fledglings that are not like them; they raise those that are not similar to them. A wicked person begetting a righteous person has [an allusion in] the Bible: “In the stead of a brier, a cypress will rise” (Isaiah 55:13). [And] a proverb: From the thorn, a rose will emerge.But Solomon was a king, son of a king; a wise man, son of a wise man; a righteous man, son of a righteous man; a nobleman, son of a nobleman. You find that everything that is written regarding this one is written regarding that one. David reigned forty years, and that one [Solomon] reigned forty years. David reigned over Israel and Judah, and his son reigned over Israel and Judah. His father [David] built the foundations [of the Temple] and he [Solomon] built the superstructure. His father reigned from one end of the earth to [the other] end, and that one reigned from one end of the earth to [the other] end. David wrote books and Solomon wrote books. David recited songs and Solomon recited songs. David said vanities and Solomon said vanities.13They instructed the people not to chase after temporal pleasures, which are mere vanities (Midrash HaMevoar). David said words and Solomon said words.14They spoke words of wisdom inspired by the Divine Spirit. David stated proverbs and Solomon stated proverbs. David lauded with “then” and Solomon lauded with “then.” David built an altar and Solomon built an altar. David sacrificed an offering and Solomon sacrificed an offering. David took up the Ark and Solomon took up the Ark.David reigned forty years, as it is stated: “The days that David reigned over Israel were forty years” (I Kings 2:11). Solomon reigned forty years, as it is stated: “Solomon reigned in Jerusalem, over all Israel, for forty years” (II Chronicles 9:30). David reigned over Israel and Judah, as it is stated: “The Lord, God of Israel, chose me from all the house of my father [to be king over Israel forever, for He has chosen Judah]” (I Chronicles 28:4). Solomon reigned over Israel and Judah, as it is stated: “Judah and Israel were numerous...” (I Kings 4:20).15The passage is discussing the reign of Solomon, and begins: “Solomon was king over all Israel” (I Kings 4:1). Thus, the verse cited in the midrash specifically mentions Israel and Judah because he was king over both. David built the foundations [of the Temple], as it is stated: “King David rose on his feet [and said: …it was in my heart to build a resting place for the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and for the footstool of our God, and I prepared to build]” (I Chronicles 28:2). Solomon built the superstructure, as it is stated: “I have built an abode for You” (I Kings 8:13). David said words, as it is stated: “These are David’s last words” (II Samuel 23:1). Solomon said words, as it is stated: “The words of Kohelet ben David, king in Jerusalem” (Ecclesiastes 1:1). David said vanities, as it is stated: “Indeed, everyone is vanity, every standing man, Selah” (Psalms 39:6). Solomon said vanities, as it is stated: “Vanity of vanities, said Kohelet; vanity of vanities, everything is vanity” (Ecclesiastes 1:2). David stated proverbs, as it is stated: “As the ancient proverb says: From the wicked, wickedness will emerge” (I Samuel 24:14). Solomon stated proverbs, as it is stated: “The proverbs of Solomon son of David” (Proverbs 1:1). David wrote books, as Psalms is attributed to him. Solomon wrote books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs. David lauded with “then,” as it is stated: “Then our mouths will be filled with laughter, and our tongues with song. Then the nations will say…” (Psalms 126:2). Solomon lauded with “then,” as it is stated: “Then Solomon said: The Lord said…” (I Kings 8:12). David took up the Ark, as it is stated: “David, and the elders of Israel […were walking to take up the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord]” (I Chronicles 15:25). Solomon took up the Ark, as it is stated: “Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel… [to take up the Ark of the Covenant…]” (I Kings 8:1). David recited songs, as it is stated: “David spoke to the Lord the words of this song…” (II Samuel 22:1). Solomon recited songs, as it is stated: “The Song of Songs that is Solomon’s.”Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yonatan of Bet Guvrin in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: Since you equate them, equate them regarding all aspects. Just as his [Solomon’s] father was forgiven for all his iniquities, as it is stated: “The Lord has also put away your sin; you shall not die” (II Samuel 12:13), so, too, in his regard. Moreover, the Divine Presence rested upon him and he composed three books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs.
Another matter, “The song of songs”—that is what the verse said: “The heart of the wise will make his mouth prevail” (Proverbs 16:23); the heart of the wise man is filled with wisdom. What can attest to him, what can indicate that he is full of wisdom? His mouth will indicate his wisdom; his mouth will be instructive in his regard. “He will increase his lesson on his lips” (Proverbs 16:23); by expressing matters of Torah from his heart, he increases the lesson of Torah. They stated an analogy, to what is the matter comparable? To a barrel that is filled with gems and pearls, is sealed with a tight cover, placed in one corner, and no one knows what is in it; one person comes and empties it, and everyone knows what is in it. So too, Solomon’s heart was filled with wisdom, but no one knew what was in it. When the Divine Presence rested upon him, and he composed three books, everyone became aware of his wisdom.“He will increase his lesson on his lips,” the lesson that he added to matters of Torah elevated him, as it is stated: “I applied my heart to seek and to scout [velatur] wisdom” (Ecclesiastes 1:13). What is velatur? It is to become a scout for wisdom. That is what is written: “So they may scout [veyaturu] the land of Canaan” (Numbers 13:2). One who is expert in Bible, I will go to him; one who is expert in Mishna, I will go to him, as it is stated: “To scout wisdom.”Another matter, “to seek and to scout [latur],”—to fulfill the quota [latur] and go beyond [lehotir]. The poet, when he composes an alphabetic acrostic poem, at times he finishes [the alphabet] and at times he does not finish it. However, Solomon composed an alphabetic acrostic and [added lines for] five additional letters, as it is written: “His songs were a thousand [alef] and five” (I Kings 5:12); his song was an alphabetic acrostic16The word a thousand [alef] is read as a reference to the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet, aleph, indicating an alphabetical acrostic poem. and five. It was not only regarding matters of Torah that Solomon would scout, but rather: “Everything that is done under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 1:13), such as how one can sweeten mustard [and] how one can sweeten mandrakes. The Holy One blessed be He said: You scouted after matters of Torah, by your life, I will not withhold your reward. I will rest My Divine Spirit upon you. Immediately, the Divine Spirit rested upon him and he composed Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs.
Another matter, “The song of songs,” that is what the verse says: “Beyond the fact that Kohelet was wise” (Ecclesiastes 12:9). Had another person said them,17The lessons stated in the book of Ecclesiastes. you would have been required to bend your ear and listen to those matters; more so because Solomon said them. Had he said them on his own, you would have been required to bend your ear and listen to them; more so because he said them through the Divine Spirit.“Beyond the fact that Kohelet was wise, moreover, he taught the people knowledge, considered [izen] and investigated, composed many proverbs” (Ecclesiastes 12:9). He considered matters of Torah, investigated matters of Torah, and made ears [ozynayim] for the Torah.18This can be understood to mean that he attracted many listeners for matters of Torah. Or it could be understood to mean that he crafted handles [oznayim] for the Torah in the sense that he explained the Torah and thereby made it more accessible, just as the handles of a vessel allow one to easily lift and transport it. You find that until Solomon arose, there was no analogy.19No one composed analogies to help the masses understand difficult Torah concepts. Rav Naḥman , Rav Naḥman said: [This is analogous] to a large palace in which there were numerous entrances, and everyone who would enter it would stray from the path of the entrance.20They were unable to find the entrance that would take them where they needed to go. One clever man came and took a skein and hung it on the path of the entrance. Everyone would enter and exit by means of the skein. So too, until Solomon arose, there was no person who was able to understand matters of Torah. Once Solomon arose, everyone began discoursing regarding matters of Torah. Rav Naḥman : This is analogous to a thicket of reeds into which no person could enter. One clever man came and took a scythe and cut [them]. Everyone began entering and exiting through the cut area. So it was with Solomon.Rabbi Yosei said: [This is analogous] to a large basked filled with produce, but it did not have a handle, and it could not be moved. One clever man came and crafted handles for it and it began to be moved by means of the handles. So too, until Solomon arose, no one was able to understand matters of Torah. Once Solomon arose, everyone began discoursing regarding matters of Torah.Rabbi Sheila said: [This is analogous] to a large jug that was filled with boiling water but it did not have a handle so that it could be moved. One came and crafted a handle and it began to be moved by means of the handle.Rabbi Ḥanina said: [This is analogous] to a deep well filled with water, and its water was cold, sweet, and excellent, but no creature could drink from it. One man came and tied rope to rope and string to string, drew from it and drank. Everyone began drawing and drinking. So too, from word to word and proverb to proverb, Solomon comprehended the secrets of the Torah, as it is written: “The proverbs of Solomon son of David” (Proverbs 1:1). By means of Solomon’s proverbs, he was able to comprehend matters of Torah.The Rabbis say: Do not let this analogy be insignificant in your eyes, as by means of the analogy a person can comprehend matters of Torah. This is analogous to a king who lost a gold piece in his house, or a fine gem; is it not by means of a wick worth an isar21A small copper coin. that he finds it? So too, do not let the analogy be insignificant in your eyes, as by means of the analogy a person comprehends matters of Torah. Know that it is so, as Solomon, by means of analogy, comprehended the minute details of the Torah.Rabbi Yudan said: It is to teach you that anyone who says matters of Torah in public will be privileged to have the Divine Spirit rest upon him. From whom do you learn [this]? From Solomon, as because he said matters of Torah in public, he was privileged to have the Divine Spirit rest upon him, and he composed three books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs.
Rabbi Pinḥas ben Yair began: “If you seek it like silver…” (Proverbs 2:4). If you seek matters of Torah like these hidden treasures, the Holy One blessed be He will not withhold your reward. This is analogous to a person, if he loses a sela or a kilarin22This was a valuable ornament of gold inlaid with a jewel. in his house, he will kindle several lamps, several wicks, until he finds them. The matter can be inferred a fortiori; if for these, that [enhance] the temporal life of this world, a person kindles several lamps and several wicks until he discovers them and finds them, matters of Torah, that [are essential for] life in this world and in the World to Come, do you not need to search for them like these hidden treasures? That is: “If you seek it like silver….” Rabbi Elazar said: In all my days, no one preceded me to the study hall and I did not leave a person there and exit. One time I awoke early and I found the collectors of manure and collectors of straw,23These individuals would arise very early to collect straw and manure from public thoroughfares in order to sell them as fertilizer. They had begun their work before Rabbi Elazar had gone to the study hall. and I said: “If you seek it like silver and search for it like for hidden treasures, then you will understand fear of the Lord” (Proverbs 2:4–5). We are not even like the collectors of manure and collectors of straw. Thus we have learned that Rabbi Pinḥas ben Yair used to say: Alacrity leads to cleanliness. Cleanliness leads to purity. Purity leads to sanctity. Sanctity leads to humility. Humility leads to fear of sin. Fear of sin leads to piety. Piety leads to the Divine Spirit. The Divine Spirit leads to the resurrection of the dead. The resurrection of the dead leads to Elijah the prophet, of blessed memory.Alacrity leads to cleanliness, as it is stated: “He shall complete atoning24The term kapara means atonement as well as cleanliness. This verse, which is about the service of the High Priest in the Temple on Yom Kippur, indicates that it is the completion of a service, which is accomplished through alacrity, that leads to atonement, or cleanliness. for the Sanctuary” (Leviticus 16:20). Cleanliness leads to purity, as it is stated: “The priest shall atone for her and she will be purified” (Leviticus 12:8). Purity leads to sanctity, as it is stated: “He shall purify it and he shall sanctify it” (Leviticus 16:19). Sanctity leads to humility, as it is stated: “For so said the Exalted and Most High, who abides forever and whose name is holy: Exalted and holy I will dwell and I will be with the downtrodden and lowly” (Isaiah 57:15). Humility leads to fear of sin, as it is stated: “In the wake of humility is fear of the Lord…” (Proverbs 22:4). Fear of sin leads to piety, as it is stated: “Then you spoke in a vision to your pious ones” (Psalms 89:20).25Some suggest that the text here should read: “The mercy [ḥesed] of the Lord is forever and ever upon those who fear Him” (Psalms 103:17), in accordance with the parallel text of the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 3:3). The term ḥesed, translated in the verse as mercy, is related to the term ḥasidut, piety (see Etz Yosef). Piety leads to the Divine Spirit, as it is stated: “Then you spoke in a vision to your pious ones” (Psalms 89:20). The Divine Spirit leads to the resurrection of the dead, as it is stated: “I will place My spirit in you, and you will live” (Ezekiel 37:14). The resurrection of the dead leads to Elijah the prophet, of blessed memory, as it is stated: “Behold, I am sending Elijah the prophet to you [before the coming of the great and terrible day of the Lord]” (Malachi 3:23).26“The great and terrible day of the Lord” is understood as a reference to the resurrection of the dead. Elijah will come before the resurrection of the dead, but it is the need to perform the resurrection of the dead that leads to his coming (Etz Yosef). Rabbi Matna said: What wisdom made as a crown on its head, humility made as a sandal on its heel. What wisdom made a crown on its head [roshah], as it is stated: “The beginning of wisdom is fear of the Lord” (Psalms 111:10), humility made a sandal on its heel [akevah], as it is stated: “In the wake of [ekev] humility is fear of the Lord…” (Proverbs 22:4).The resurrection of the dead is by means of Elijah the prophet, of blessed memory. That is what is written: “Then you will understand fear of the Lord, and you will find knowledge of  ” (Proverbs 2:5), this is the Divine Spirit.27Commentaries struggle to understand this line, which does not prove that resurrection of the dead is by means of Elijah. Some suggest that it be deleted (Etz Yosef). Others suggest that this is a proof that alacrity eventually leads to understanding via the Divine Spirit, as indicated above. This is because the verse that precedes the one cited here relates to alacrity (Midrash HaMevoar). Rabbi Simon [said] in the name of Rabbi Ḥalafta: [This is analogous] to a royal adviser who grew prominent in the king’s palace. The king said to him: ‘Make a request; what shall I give you?’ The adviser said: If I request silver and gold, he will give them to me; gems and pearls, he will give them to me. He said: I will request the king’s daughter, and everything will be included. So too, “In Givon, the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream at night; God said: Request; what shall I give you?” (I Kings 3:5). Solomon said: If I request silver, gold, gems and pearls, he will give them to me. But I will request wisdom and everything will be included. That is what is written: “Give Your servant an attentive heart” (I Kings 3:9). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘Solomon, you requested wisdom and you did not request wealth and property and the lives of your enemies. By your life, wisdom is granted you, and thereby, I will give you wealth and property.’ Immediately, “Solomon awakened and behold, a dream” (I Kings 3:15). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The dream was fulfilled; a donkey brayed and he knew what it was braying, a bird tweeted and he knew what it was tweeting. Immediately, “he came to Jerusalem and stood before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord. He sacrificed burnt offerings, he performed peace offerings, and he made a feast for all his servants” (I Kings 3:15). Rabbi Elazar said: From here it is derived that one makes a feast upon completion of the Torah. Rabbi Yudan said: It is to teach you that anyone who teaches Torah in public is privileged to have the Divine Spirit rest upon him, as so Solomon did. He taught and the Divine Spirit rested upon him and he composed three books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs.
Another matter, “The song of songs,” Rabbi Aivu and Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Aivu said: Song, one, of songs, two; that is three.28The term song is singular while the term songs is plural. Adding the two terms together, they refer to three songs, indicating that Song of Songs is really comprised of three independent songs. Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon said: Song of Songs is entirely one. The other two, what do you do with them? [One is] “A song of ascents for Solomon” (Psalms 127:1) and one is: “A psalm, a song for the dedication of the House, by David” (Psalms 30:1). They thought to say that David said it. But you say it was attributed to David,29One might think that David composed Psalm 30 with divine inspiration, despite the fact that it is about the Temple, which was built after his death. The midrash clarifies that Solomon composed it and attributed it to David because David had made the preparations necessary for the construction of the Temple. Thus, the verse is to be understood as referring to the “House by David,”—the Temple, whose construction was prepared by David. as it is stated: “Your neck is like the tower of David” (Song of Songs 4:4).30This is a reference to the Temple. Rather, it is just like Song of Songs; Solomon said it, and attributed it to David.When you analyze you say that all the actions of that man [Solomon] were threefold. Solomon rose to three levels. Regarding the first level, it is written: “For he ruled over the entire region beyond the River” (I Kings 5:4). Regarding the second level, it is stated: “Solomon was the ruler [over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt]” (I Kings 5:1). Regarding the third level, it is stated: “Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord as king” (I Chronicles 29:23). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Is it possible for a person to sit on the throne of the Lord, in whose regard it is written: “For the Lord your God is a consuming fire” (Deuteronomy 4:24), and it is written: “A river of fire flowed and emerged [from before Him]” (Daniel 7:10), and it is written: “His throne was sparks of fire” (Daniel 7:9), and you say: “Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord”? Rather, just as the throne of the Holy One blessed be He rules from one end of the earth to the other, so, too, the throne of Solomon ruled from one end of the earth to the other. Just as the throne of the Lord judges without witnesses and forewarning, so, too, the throne of Solomon judged without witnesses and forewarning. Which [trial] was that? That was the trial of the harlots. That is what is written: “Then two women, [who were harlots,] came” (I Kings 3:16).31They each had a baby, and one of the babies died. Each claimed the living baby was hers, and they came before King Solomon for adjudication. See I Kings 3:16–28. Who were they? Rav said: They were spirits. The Rabbis say: They were childless women awaiting levirate marriage.32If a man dies without children, his widow is subject to the law of levirate marriage, whereby the brother of her dead husband must marry her. The husbands of these women had died without living children, but while their wives were pregnant, and the women subsequently gave birth. However, a child who dies within the first thirty days of its life does not exempt the mother from undergoing levirate marriage, and therefore an outcome of the case would be the determination of which woman would be subject to levirate marriage (Midrash HaMevo’ar). Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: They were actual harlots, and Solomon issued his ruling without witnesses and forewarning.Solomon descended three descents. The first descent: After he was a great king from one end of the earth to the other, his kingdom diminished and he was king only over Israel. That is what is written: “The proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel” (Proverbs 1:1). The second descent: After he was king over Israel, his kingdom diminished and he was king only over Jerusalem. That is what is written: “I am Kohelet, I was king over Israel in Jerusalem” (Ecclesiastes 1:12). The third descent: After he was king over Jerusalem, his kingdom diminished and he was king only over his house,33The reading in the Gemara (Sanhedrin 20b) is that he was king only over his own bed. as it is stated: “Behold Solomon’s bed; [sixty mighty men are around it, from the mighty of Israel,] all armed with a sword… [from fear in the nights]” (Song of Songs 3:7–8). He was not even king over his bed, as he feared the spirits.34Even in his own bed he was not a powerful king, as indicated in the verses cited in the midrash. He feared the spirits who had deposed him from his throne; see Kohelet Rabba 1:12. He saw three worlds. Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Ḥunya, Rabbi Yudan said: King, commoner, and king, wise man, fool, and wise man, wealthy, indigent, and wealthy.35He was a king, wise, and wealthy, and then he became a commoner, a fool, and indigent, and then he once again became a king who was wise and wealthy. These were Solomon’s three worlds, meaning three stages of life. What is the reason? “I have seen everything in the days of my vanity” (Ecclesiastes 7:15). A person relates his troubles only during the days of his wellbeing.36Thus, since this verse was written at the end of Solomon’s life, it is apparent that he was restored to his position of wellbeing, as a king who was wise and wealthy. Rabbi Hunya said: Commoner, king, and commoner, fool, wise man, and fool, indigent, wealthy, and indigent. What is the reason? “I am Kohelet, I was king over Israel in Jerusalem” (Ecclesiastes 1:12). “I was,” I was when I was; however, now, I am no longer.37Thus, since this verse was written at the end of Solomon’s life, it is apparent that he ended his life as a commoner who was a fool and indigent. Since Solomon did end his life as a wise king, this is to be understood to mean that he did not regain the levels of power, wisdom, and wealth that he once had (Etz Yosef). He violated three prohibitions: He amassed horses, he amassed women, he amassed silver and gold,38These were in violation of the Torah’s commandments regarding the behavior of kings; see Deuteronomy 17:16–17. as it is stated: “The king rendered the silver in Jerusalem like stones” (II Chronicles 9:27). Would they not have been stolen? Rabbi Yosei bar Ḥanina said: They were ten-cubit stones and eight-cubit stones.39Thus, the silver and gold pieces on the streets of Jeusalem were too heavy to steal. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Even the weights that were in use during Solomon’s era were of gold; that is what is written: “Silver was not considered anything in the days of Solomon” (II Chronicles 9:20). He amassed women, as it is stated: “King Solomon loved many foreign women, and Pharaoh’s daughter…from the nations of whom the Lord said to the children of Israel: Do not consort with them and they shall not consort with you… [to them Solomon cleaved for love]” (I Kings 11:1–2).Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: It is due to: “You shall not marry them” (Deuteronomy 7:3).40In addition to the fact that Solomon married too many women, the verse in Kings appears to critique him for marrying foreign women. This is due to the fact that he violated the verse cited here from Deuteronomy. Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai says: “For love” (I Kings 11:2); for actual love, for licentiousness.41He consorted with them but did not marry them. Thus, he did not violate the prohibition stated in Deuteronomy 7:3, but his conduct was considered improper. Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili says: It is written: “He, too, the foreign women caused him to sin” (Nehemiah 13:26); it teaches that he would have relations with them when they were menstruants and they would not inform him. Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta says: “For love,” to render them beloved [to God], to love them, to draw them near, to convert them, and to cause them to enter beneath the wings of the Divine Presence. It turns out that Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai, and Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yosei HaGelili all said the same thing. Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta disagrees with the three of them.42According to Rabbi Yosei ben Ḥalafta, the verse does not criticize Solomon for the fact that he married foreign women. Three adversaries confronted him. That is what is written: “The Lord raised up an adversary for Solomon, Hadad the Edomite” (I Kings 11:14); and it is written: “God raised up an adversary for him: Retzon son of Elyada” (I Kings 11:23); and it is written: “He was an adversary for Israel all the days of Solomon,” (I Kings 11:25).43Although this verse refers to Retzon, the midrash may be interpreting this as a reference to Jeroboam, whom the next verse (I Kings 11:26) states rebelled against Solomon. Thus, Jeroboam is the third adversary (see Etz Yosef). He amassed horses, as it is stated: “A chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred silver pieces and a horse for one hundred and fifty” (I Kings 10:29).44The verse previously established (I Kings 10:26) that Solomon had one thousand four hundred chariots and twelve thousand horsemen, which were considered very large numbers. He stated three proverbs: “The proverbs of Solomon son of David, king of Israel” (Proverbs 1:1); “the proverbs of Solomon: A wise son brings joy to a father” (Proverbs 10:1); “these, too, are the proverbs of Solomon, that the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied” (Proverbs 25:1).He said three vanities: “Vanity [havel] of vanities [havalim] said Kohelet…” (Ecclesiastes 1:2), havel, one, havalim, two;45Havel is a singular term, whereas havalim is a plural term. that is three.He recited three songs: Song, one, of songs, two, that is three.He was called three names: Yedidya, Solomon, Kohelet. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said these three, [and also] Agur, Yakeh, Lemuel, Itiel,46These additional names are based on Proverbs 30:1 and 31:1. are seven. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: The primary among them are Yedidya, Kohelet, Solomon. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman concedes that these [additional] four were added for him and that he was called by them, and they must be expounded: Agur, because he amassed [agur] matters of Torah; bin-Yakeh, a son [bin], who vomited [hekia] for a time, like this basin that is filled for a time and emptied for a time; so, too, Solomon studied Torah for a time and forgot it for a time. Lemuel,47This is expounded as though it were written Nemuel. who spoke to God [nam laEl] with all his heart. He said: I can amass and not sin. “To Itiel, to Itiel and Ukhal” (Proverbs 30:1). Itiel, God [el] is with me [iti] and I will prevail [veukhal].He wrote three books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs. Which of them did he write first? Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great and Rabbi Yonatan, Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great said: He wrote Proverbs first, then Song of Songs, and then Ecclesiastes, and he derived it from this verse: “He spoke three thousand proverbs” (I Kings 5:12); proverbs, this is the book of Proverbs; “his songs were one thousand and five” (I Kings 5:12), this is Song of Songs, and he said Ecclesiastes last.The baraita of Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great disagrees with this statement.48This baraita represents an alternate tradition regarding Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great’s opinion, different from the statement cited previously in his name. The baraita says: He wrote the three of them simultaneously, and the statement says that he wrote each and every one individually. Rabbi Ḥiyya the Great taught: It was only in Solomon’s old age that the Divine Presence rested upon him and he composed three books: Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Song of Songs. Rabbi Yonatan said: He wrote Song of Songs first, then Proverbs, and then Ecclesiastes. Rabbi Yonatan derived it from the way of the world. When a person is young, he says words of song, when he matures, he says words of proverbs, when he grows old, he speaks of [how the pleasures of the world are] vanities. Rabbi Yannai, the father-in-law of Rabbi Ami said: Everyone concedes that he composed Ecclesiastes last.
Rabbi Elazar bar Avina in the name of Rabbi Aḥa and the Rabbis. Rabbi Elazar said [in the name of Rabbi Aḥa]: “He spoke three thousand proverbs” regarding each and every matter. “His songs were one thousand and five”—one thousand and five reasons for each and every matter. The Rabbis say: “He spoke three thousand proverbs” on each and every verse. “His songs were one thousand and five”—one thousand and five reasons for each and every proverb. “His proverbs were” is not written here, but rather, “his songs were one thousand and five”—the song of the proverb, the reason for the matter, [and another] reason for the matter.Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: We reviewed the entire book of Proverbs and we found written in it only nine hundred and fifteen verses, and you say three thousand proverbs? Rather, you do not have any verse that does not have two or three thoughts, like: “A nose ring of gold and an adornment of fine gold” (Proverbs 25:12), “a nose ring of gold in the snout of a pig” (Proverbs 11:22). 49The first verse equates “a nose ring of gold and an adornment of fine gold.” The second verse mentions only the nose ring of gold, but it also applies to an adornment of fine gold. “Do not glorify yourself before a king, and do not stand in the place of the great” (Proverbs 25:6). It goes without saying do not sit; do not sit, and it goes without saying, do not speak.50By teaching that one should not stand in the place of the great, by corollary Solomon is also teaching that one should not sit in their place, and that one should not speak there. We learned:51Mishna Yadayim 3:5. Rabbi Akiva said: God forbid, not even one person in Israel disagreed regarding Song of Songs, claiming that it does not impurify the hands,52There is a rabbinic decree that any sacred scroll renders teruma or one’s hands impure. (This decree was enacted so that people would not store their teruma with those scrolls; that could result in vermin attracted by the teruma gnawing at the scrolls and causing them damage.) Thus, if one were to hold that a scroll of the Song of Songs does not render one’s hands impure, that would mean it is not part of the Bible. as there is no day in the entire history of the world like the day that Song of Songs was given. Why? It is because all the Writings are holy, and this is the holy of holies. Regarding what did they disagree? It is regarding Ecclesiastes. Rabbi Yoḥanan bar Rabbi Yehoshua son of Rabbi Akiva’s father-in-law said in accordance with the statement of ben Azai: So they disagreed, so they concluded.53There was a dispute regarding both Song of Songs and Ecclesiastes, but the conclusion was that both are part of the Bible and therefore render one’s hands impure. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya stated a parable for it. [It is comparable] to one who took a se’a of wheat to the baker [and] said to him: ‘Produce for me from it flour, fine flour.54Grind the wheat into flour, and then sift it repeatedly to produce fine flour. Produce for me from it one loaf, from the fine flour, [produced from] the flour.’ So, of all of Solomon’s wisdom, only Song of Songs is fine flour for Israel. Song of Songs, the best of songs, the finest of songs, the most excellent of songs; we will recite songs to the One who has made us into a song in the world, just as you say: “Wail, songs of the palace” (Amos 8:3); the praises of the Temple.55The verse addresses songs as if they are people, alluding to the fact that the people of Israel are like a song in that they represent the glory of God. Another matter, Song of Songs, the best of songs, the finest of songs, the most excellent of songs; we will recite songs [shirim] to the One who rendered us the remnants [shiyurim] of the world, just as it is stated: “The Lord alone will lead him” (Deuteronomy 32:12).56The verse is expounded to mean that the Lord will lead him alone, meaning that the people of Israel will remain alone in tranquility at the end of days. Rabbi Yoḥanan [said] in the name of Rabbi Aḥa in the name of Rabbi Shimon bar Abba: We will recite songs and praise to the One who is destined to rest the Divine Spirit upon us. We will recite many songs before Him.In all the songs, either He lauds them, or they laud Him. In the song of Moses, they laud Him and say: “This is my Lord and I will glorify Him” (Exodus 15:2). And in the song of Moses, He lauds them: “He would mount him on the elevations of the earth” (Deuteronomy 32:13). However, here, they laud Him and He lauds them. He lauds them, “Behold, you are fair, my love” (Song of Songs 1:15) and they laud Him: “Behold you are fair my beloved, pleasant, too” (Song of Songs 1:16).Rabbi Shimon in the name of Rabbi Ḥanin of Tzippori said, it is a double song.57God and Israel praise each other. Rabbi Simon said: Doubled and redoubled.58In many verses, the praise is doubled even from the perspective of one speaker, such as: “Behold, you are fair, my love, behold, you are fair” (1:15). Rabbi Levi said: The numerical value of shir corresponds to the years of the patriarchs and the Ten Commandments.59Song of Songs is a tribute to Israel, as implied by the fact that the numerical value of the word shir, song, corresponds to the number of years of the lives of the patriarchs, plus the Ten Commandments given to Israel at Sinai. Shir is five hundred and ten.60Shin 300, yod 10, reish 200, equal 510. If you say that there is a surplus in them,61Abraham lived 175 years, Isaac, 180, and Jacob, 147, plus 10 commandments, equal 512, not 510. deduct from them the years of famine62One year during the lifetime of Abraham, and one year during the lifetime of Isaac. that are not included in the tally.Another matter, Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Levi in the name of Rabbi Yoḥanan [said]: Every place that “King Solomon” is mentioned in this scroll, the verse is speaking of King Solomon. [Whenever it says] simply “the king,” the verse is speaking of the Holy One blessed be He. The Rabbis say: Every place that “King Solomon” [Shelomo] is mentioned in this scroll, the verse is speaking of the King, [of Whom it may be said that] peace is His. [Whenever it says] simply “the king,” the verse is speaking of the congregation of Israel.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
“I am a rose of Sharon, a lily of the valleys” (Song of Songs 2:1).“I am a rose [ḥavatzelet] of Sharon.” The congregation of Israel said: I am as I am, yet I am beloved [ḥaviva]. It is I whom the Holy One blessed be He loved me more than seventy nations. “A rose [ḥavatzelet] of Sharon,” I made Him shelter [tzel] by means of Betzalel, as it is written: “Betzalel crafted the Ark” (Exodus 37:1). “Of Sharon,” as I recited song [shira] before Him by means of Moses, as it is written: “Then Moses and the children of Israel sang” (Exodus 15:1).Another matter, “I am a rose of Sharon.” The congregation of Israel said: I am as I am, yet I am beloved. It is I who was shrouded in the shadow of Egypt, but the Holy One blessed be He brought me quickly to Rameses. I sprouted good deeds like a lily, and I recited a song before Him, as it is stated: “The song will be for you like the night of the consecration of the festival” (Isaiah 30:29).1The song after the fall of Sennacherib will be like the Hallel that they recited in Egypt on the night before they left.Another matter, “I am a rose of Sharon.” The congregation of Israel said: I am as I am, yet I am beloved. It is I who was shrouded in the shadow of the sea,2I was in danger when Pharaoh was pursuing me. but I quickly sprouted good deeds like a lily, and I pointed to Him with my finger [and pronounced that He is] my Master, as it is stated: “This is my God and I will exalt Him” (Exodus 15:2).Another matter, “I am a rose of Sharon.” I am as I am, yet I am beloved. It is I who was shrouded in the shadow of Sinai.3God suspended the mountain over the Israelites, threatening to obliterate them if they refused to accept the Torah (see Shabbat 88a). I quickly blossomed good deeds with my hand and my heart, and I said before Him: “Everything that the Lord has spoken we will perform and we will heed” (Exodus 24:7).Another matter, “I am a rose of Sharon.” I am as I am, yet I am beloved. It is I who was shrouded and trampled in the shadow of kingdoms. Tomorrow, when the Holy One blessed be He redeems me from the shadow of the kingdoms, I will blossom like a lily, and I will recite a new song before Him, as it is stated: “A psalm. Sing to the Lord a new song, for He has performed wonders; His right hand and His holy arm have wrought salvation for Him” (Psalms 98:1).
Rabbi Berekhya said: This verse, the wilderness said it.4Solomon wrote it from the perspective of the wilderness (Etz Yosef). The wilderness said: ‘I am the wilderness, yet I am beloved, as all the good in the world is shrouded in me, as it is stated: “I will place in the wilderness cedar, acacia…” (Isaiah 41:19). The Holy One blessed be He gave them to me so they would be protected in me. When the Holy One blessed be He asks me for them, I will return His deposit to Him with nothing lacking. I generate good deeds and sing songs before Him,’ as it is stated: “The wilderness and wasteland will be glad” (Isaiah 35:1).In the name of the Rabbis they said: The earth said it. It said: ‘I am as I am, yet I am beloved, as all the dead of the world are shrouded in me, as it is stated: “Your dead will live, my corpses shall arise” (Isaiah 26:19). When the Holy One blessed be He asks me for them, I will return them to Him. I will generate good deeds like a lily and recite song before Him,’ as it is stated: “From the edge of the earth we heard songs” (Isaiah 24:16).
Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Eliezer, Rabbi Yudan said: “I am a rose [ḥavatzelet] [of Sharon, a lily [shoshana] of the valleys],” is it not a ḥavatzelet and is it not a shoshana?5Is ḥavatzelet not the same as shoshana? Although generally translated differently, as rose and lily, the midrash assumes that the ḥavatzelet and shoshana are the same flower. Rather, as long as it is small, [the verse] calls it ḥavatzelet, when it grows larger, it calls it shoshana. “Rose [ḥavatzelet],” why is it called ḥavatzelet? Because it is shrouded in its shade [ḥavuya betzila].6When it is small, its petals are folded around the top of the stalk.Rabbi Eliezer said: The righteous are likened to the most excellent of species and to the most excellent of that species; the most excellent of the species, like a lily, the most excellent of that species, a lily of the valley. Not like the mountain lily, which quickly withers, but like the lily of the valley that remains moist. The wicked are likened to the vilest of species and the vilest of that species; the vilest of the species, “like chaff before the wind” (Psalms 83:14). If you say like chaff of the valley, that has moisture in it; rather, “it will be pursued like the chaff of mountains before the wind” (Isaiah 17:13).Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: The congregation of Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: 'I am as I am, yet I am beloved. I am sunk in the depths7In Hebrew, imkei, related to the word valleys [amakim] that appears in the verse. of troubles, but when the Holy One blessed be He will extricate me from the troubles, I will blossom good deeds like a lily and will sing songs before Him. That is what is written: “Lord, in their trouble they turned to You” (Isaiah 26:16).Rabbi Aḥa said: The congregation of Israel said: When You intensify Your gaze at me,8You discover my shortcomings and transgressions and punish me. I blossom good deeds like a lily and sing songs. That is what is written: “A song of ascents. From the depths I call to You, Lord” (Psalms 130:1).The Rabbis say: The congregation of Israel said it. The congregation of Israel said: I am as I am, yet I am beloved. I am situated in the depths of Gehenna, but when the Holy One blessed be He will rescue me from its depths—that is what is written: “He raised me from the pit of destruction” (Psalms 40:3)—I will blossom good deeds and sing songs before Him. That is what is written: “He placed a new song in my mouth” (Psalms 40:4).The opinion of the Rabbis corresponds with what Rabbi Elazar HaModa’i said: The princes of the nations are destined in the future to come to denounce Israel before the Holy One blessed be He, and say: ‘These engaged in idol worship and those engaged in idol worship, these engaged in forbidden sexual relations and those engaged in forbidden sexual relations, these shed blood and those shed blood; why are these descending to Gehenna and those are not descending?’9Why are the gentiles descending to Gehenna while the Jews are not? The Holy One blessed be He responds to them and says: ‘If that is so, all the peoples will descend with their gods to Gehenna.’ That is what is written: “For all the peoples will walk, each in the name of its god, [but we will walk in the name of the Lord our God forever and ever]” (Micah 4:5).Rabbi Reuven said: Had this matter not been written, it would have been impossible to say it: As it were, “for the Lord will judge [nishpat]10This is the reflexive [nifal] conjugation, indicating, as it were, that God will be judged. in fire” (Isaiah 66:16). Shofet11This conjugation is the standard way of expressing that God will judge. is not written here, but rather nishpat. This is what David said, inspired by the Divine Spirit: “Even if I were to walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me [your rod and your staff they will comfort me]” (Psalms 23:4).Another matter, “your rod,” this is the suffering, “and your staff,” this is Torah. “They will comfort me…” Is it perhaps without suffering? The verse states: “Only [Akh].”12The term akh is always understood to be a restrictive term. Here, it indicates that not everyone will merit Torah, and therefore goodness and kindness, as in the continuation of the verse; only those who have experienced suffering will experience these blessings. Is it perhaps in this world? The verse states: “May only [akh] goodness and kindness pursue me all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the House of the Lord forever [le’orekh yamim]” (Psalms 23:6).13Le’orekh yamim is expounded to mean a world where the day is infinitely long [yom shekulo arokh]. Thus, the goodness and kindness will be experienced in the World to Come.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
“On my bed at nights I sought the one whom my soul loves; I sought him, but did not find him” (Song of Songs 3:1).“On my bed at nights.” Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: What is “on my bed at nights”? During my illness, just as it says: “And he does not die but falls into bed” (Exodus 21:18). Rabbi Levi said: The congregation of Israel said before the Holy One blessed be He: Master of the universe, in the past You would illuminate for me between nights and nights; between the night of Egypt and the night of Babylon, between the night of Babylon and the night of Media, between the night of Media and the night of Greece, and between the night of Greece and the night of Edom.1Edom refers to Rome. The meaning of Rabbi Levi’s statement is that there would be a bright period between periods of persecution. But now that I have slumbered from the Torah and the mitzvot, nights have become consecutive for me. “On my bed at nights,” Rabbi Alexandra said: When I slumbered from the Torah and the mitzvot, my nights became consecutive for me. “On my bed at nights [balelot],” the nights came [ba’u lelot].2The nights, meaning the periods of persecution, came consecutively.
Another matter, “on my bed at nights,” this is the night of Egypt. “I sought the one whom my soul loves,” this is Moses.” I sought him, but did not find him.”3This is because Moses returned from Egypt to Midian for three months (see Shir HaShirim Rabba 2:9).

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
“Behold, you are fair, my love, behold, you are fair; your eyes are doves behind your braid; your hair is like a flock of goats that streams down from Mount Gilad. Your teeth are like a flock of ordered ewes that have come up from bathing, that are all paired, and there is none missing among them” (Song of Songs 4:1–2).“Behold, you are fair, my love, behold, you are fair” – behold you are fair in mitzvot, behold you are fair in performing acts of kindness. Behold you are fair in positive mitzvot, behold you are fair in negative mitzvot. Behold you are fair in the mitzvot of the house: in ḥalla, teruma, and tithes; behold you are fair in the mitzvot of the field: gleanings, forgotten sheaves, the corner,1The mitzva to leave produce in a corner of the field for the poor. This and the other mitzvot of the field mentioned here are found in Leviticus 19:9 and 23:22. tithe of the poor, and ownerless property.2The requirement to declare ownerless the produce that grows in one’s field during the Sabbatical Year. Behold you are fair in diverse kinds, behold you are fair in a cloak with ritual fringes. Behold you are fair in planting, behold you are fair in orla,3It is forbidden to eat and derive benefit from fruit that grows during the first three years after a tree is planted. behold you are fair in the fruit of a fourth-year sapling. Behold you are fair in circumcision, behold you are fair in uncovering.4After the foreskin is severed, the membrane underneath is pulled back, exposing the corona. Behold you are fair in the Amida prayer, behold you are fair in the recitation of Shema. Behold you are fair in mezuza, behold you are fair in phylacteries. Behold you are fair in sukka, behold you are fair in the palm branch and the citron. Behold you are fair in repentance, behold you are fair in good deeds. Behold you are fair in this world, behold you are fair in the World to Come.
“Your eyes are doves” – your eyes are the Sanhedrin, who are the eyes of the congregation. That is what is written: “It shall be, if from the eyes of the congregation” (Numbers 15:24). There are two hundred and forty-eight limbs in a person, and all of them come and go only after the eyes. So too, Israel is unable to do anything without their Sanhedrin. “Doves” – just as this dove is faultless, so too, Israel is pleasant as they walk when they ascend on the occasions of the pilgrimage festivals. Just as the dove is conspicuous, so too, Israel is conspicuous in haircut, circumcision, and ritual fringes. Just as the dove is modest, so too, Israel is modest. Just as a dove extends its neck for slaughter, so too, Israel: “For we are killed for You all day” (Psalms 44:23). Just as the dove atones for evils, so too, Israel atones for the nations, as all the seventy bulls that they sacrifice on the festival [of Sukkot] correspond to the seventy nations, so that the world will not be bereft of them. That is what is written: “In return for my love, they accuse me; but I am all prayer” (Psalms 109:4).Just as the dove, from the time it meets its mate, it does not exchange it for another, so too Israel, from the time they came to know the Holy One blessed be He, they did not exchange Him for another. Just as the dove enters its nest and knows its nest, its dovecote, its fledglings, its chicks, and its windows, so are the three rows of Torah scholars when they sit before them,5Three rows of scholars would sit before the members of the Sanhedrin when the Sanhedrin would deliberate. When new judges for the Sanhedrin were needed, they were chosen from these scholars (see Sanhedrin 37a). each and every one knows his place. Just as the dove, even though you take its fledglings from beneath it, it will never forsake its dovecote, so too Israel, even though the Temple was destroyed, the three annual pilgrimage festivals were not abrogated. Just as the dove produces a new brood each and every month, so too Israel renew for themselves Torah, mitzvot, and good deeds each month. Just as the dove travels far afield and returns to its dovecote, so too Israel; that is what is written: “They will stir like a bird from Egypt” (Hosea 11:11) – this is the generation of the wilderness; “and like a dove from the land of Assyria” (Hosea 11:11) – these are the Ten Tribes. These and those, “I will settle them in their houses, the utterance of the Lord” (Hosea 11:11).Rabbi says: There is a type of dove that they feed it, and its counterparts smell it and come to its dovecote. So too, when an elder sits and teaches, many proselytes convert at that time, such as Yitro, who heard and came, and Raḥav heard and came. So too Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya, many proselytes converted at that time. What is the reason? “When he sees his children” (Isaiah 29:23); what is written thereafter? “Those of misguided spirit will attain understanding” (Isaiah 29:24).Rabbi [Yehuda HaNasi] was sitting and expounding, and the audience was dozing. He sought to rouse them. He said: A certain woman in Egypt bore six hundred thousand in a single womb. There was one student there, Rabbi Yishmael ben Rabbi Yosei was his name. He said to [Rabbi]: ‘For whom was it so?’ [Rabbi] said to him: ‘This is Yokheved, who bore Moses, who is the equivalent of six hundred thousand of Israel. That is what is written: “Then sang Moses and the children of Israel” (Exodus 15:1). “The children of Israel did according to everything that the Lord commanded Moses, so they did” (Numbers 1:54).6The verse does not say that God commanded Israel, but rather that He commanded Moses and Israel did what He commanded. “There has not arisen another prophet in Israel like Moses” (Deuteronomy 34:10).’7The verse is formulated such that the last phrase quoted here can be translated as “Israel is like Moses.”“Your eyes are doves” – like doves; your characteristic is like that of a dove; just as this dove brought light to the world, so too, Israel brings light to the world, as it is stated: “Nations will walk by your light” (Isaiah 60:3). When did the dove bring light to the world? In the days of Noah. That is what is written: “The dove came to him in the evening, and there was an olive leaf plucked in its mouth…” (Genesis 8:11). What is plucked [taraf]? Dead, just as you say: “Joseph has been torn apart [tarof toraf]” (Genesis 37:33). Rabbi Berekhya said: Had it not killed it,8Had the dove not plucked the olive leaf. it would have become a great tree.From where did it bring it? Rabbi Levi said: It brought it from the branches of the Land of Israel. That is what people say: The Land of Israel was not stricken with the water of the Flood. That is what was stated by Ezekiel: “Son of man, say to it: You are a land that has not been cleansed, that has not been rained upon on the day of fury” (Ezekiel 22:24). Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Even the upper millstones were dissolved in the water.9This strengthens the question: If the destruction was so great, where did the dove find an olive branch (Maharzu). Alternatively, this supports Rabbi Levi’s answer: Since the destruction was so great, it must be that the olive branch was found in a place that remained unaffected by the Flood (Etz Yosef). Rabbi Taryi said: The gates of The Garden of Eden were opened for it, and from there it brought it. Rabbi Aivu said to him: Had it brought it from the Garden of Eden, should it not have brought a quality item such as cinnamon or balsam? Rather, it was hinting to Noah as though saying to him: My master Noah, [it is preferable to have] something bitter like this from the hand of the Holy One blessed be He and not something sweet from you.
“Behind [mibaad] your braid” – Rabbi Levi said: Any bride whose eyes are ugly, her entire body requires examination. One whose eyes are beautiful, her entire body does not require examination. When a woman braids her hair behind her, it is an ornament for her. So was the Great Sanhedrin, which convened behind the Temple, and it was an ornament of the Temple. Rabbi Abbahu said: They appeared crowded, but it was spacious for them, as in the great colloquium in Tzippori. Rabbi Levi said: [The word mibaad] is Arabic. When he wants to say: Make room for me, he says: Maved li.“Your hair is like a flock of goats that streams down [shegaleshu] from Mount Gilad” – the mountain from whose midst I directed away streams [shegalashti], I rendered a memorial [galed] for the nations of the world. Which is that? It is the Red Sea.10This is a reference to the splitting of the sea. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: The mountain from whose midst you streamed. When a woman’s hair grows too much, she thins it [galshin]. When the flame in a lamp burns too bright, one thins [the wick].11These statements are cited in order to demonstrate that the root gimmel-lamed-shin means to thin out or strip away.What is it that I took away [higlashti] from its midst? “Your teeth are like a flock of ordered [ketzuvot] ewes” – defined [ketzuvin] matters, the plunder of Egypt and the plunder of the sea. “That have come up from bathing” – Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai: Before the song [of Deborah], it is written: “The children of Israel continued to do what was evil in the eyes of the Lord” (Judges 3:12). After the song it is written: “The children of Israel did what was evil in the eyes of the Lord” (Judges 6:1). Was this the beginning of their action?12Earlier it says they continued to do what was evil in the eyes of the Lord, indicating that they had already been doing so previously. But after the song it does not say they continued, rather only that they did what was evil in the eyes of the Lord, implying that this was the beginning of their evil behavior. It is because the song had already atoned for the past. On a similar note it says: “These are David’s last words” (II Samuel 23:1). The first ones, where are they? Rather, the song13The song of David (II Samuel chap. 22). atoned for the past.“That are all paired [matimot]” – as they are all in the middle [metuamim] between the Divine Spirit and the angel. That is what is written: “The angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel, moved [and went behind them]” (Exodus 14:19). “And there is none missing among them” – that not one of them was harmed.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
“I came to my garden, my sister, my bride; I gathered my myrrh with my perfume; I ate my honeycomb with my honey; I drank my wine with my milk. Eat, friends; drink abundantly, beloved ones” (Song of Songs 5:1).“I came to my garden” – Rabbi Menaḥem, son-in-law of Rabbi Elazar bar Avuna, said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Rabbi Yosena: It is not written here, “I came to a garden,” but rather “to my garden [legani]” – to My wedding canopy [leginuni], to the place that was the site of My initial appearance. Was not the first appearance of the Divine Presence in the lower realm? That is what is written: “They heard the voice of the Lord God moving about in the garden” (Genesis 3:8). Rabbi Abba said: It is not written here, “walking [mehalekh],” but rather moving about [mithalekh], leaping and ascending, leaping and ascending.1It gradually ascended from the lower, earthly realm to the heavens. Adam the first man sinned, and the Divine Presence ascended to the first firmament. Cain sinned, and it ascended to the second firmament. Enosh sinned, and it ascended to the third firmament. The Generation of the Flood sinned, and it ascended to the fourth firmament. The Generation of the Tower sinned, and it ascended to the fifth firmament. The residents of Sodom sinned, and it ascended to the sixth firmament. The Egyptians sinned during the days of Abraham, and it ascended to the seventh firmament. Corresponding to them were seven righteous men who lowered it to earth. Abraham was virtuous, and he lowered it from the seventh [firmament] to the sixth. Isaac arose and lowered it from the sixth to the fifth. Jacob arose and lowered it from the fifth to the fourth. Levi arose and lowered it from the fourth to the third. Kehat arose and lowered it from the third to the second. Amram arose and lowered it from the second to one, which is the first. Moses arose and lowered it to earth.Rabbi Yitzḥak said: That is what is written: “The righteous will inherit the earth and dwell upon it forever” (Psalms 37:29). What will the wicked do? They will be suspended in the air, because they did not cause the Divine Presence to rest upon the earth. But the righteous caused the Divine Presence to rest upon the earth. What is the source? “The righteous will inherit the earth and dwell [veyishkenu] upon it forever” – they caused the Divine Presence to rest [veyashkinu] upon it; “He dwells forever,2Just as in this verse the reference to dwelling forever is referring to the Divine Presence, the same is true of the verse in Psalms cited above. and Holy is His name” (Isaiah 57:15). When did the Divine Presence rest upon it? It was on the day that the Tabernacle was erected, as it is stated: “It was on the day that Moses finished erecting the Tabernacle” (Numbers 7:1).Rabbi Azarya said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon: This is analogous to a king who was angry at the queen and expelled her from his palace. Later, he sought to appease her. She said: ‘Let the king prepare for me something new3This will serve as an indication that the king is no longer angry. and come to me.’ So too, in the past, the Holy One blessed be He would accept offerings from on high,4From heaven, without resting His Presence on earth. as it is written: “The Lord smelled the pleasing aroma…” (Genesis 8:21). Now He accepts them from below.5The midrash is stating that “now,” with the establishment of the Tabernacle, the Divine Presence rested on earth. That is what is written: “I came to my garden, my sister, my bride.”“I gathered my myrrh with my perfume” – this is the incense of the spices and the handful of frankincense. “I ate my honeycomb with my honey” – these are the limbs of the burnt offering and the portions of the offerings of the most sacred order that are burned on the altar. “I drank my wine with my milk” – these are the libations and the portions of the offerings of lesser sanctity that are burned on the altar. “Eat, friends” – these are Moses and Aaron. “Drink abundantly, beloved ones” – these are Nadav and Avihu, who became inebriated to their detriment.Rabbi Idi said: David sought to sacrifice an offering for himself like the offering of the princes;6He sought to build the Temple and to sacrifice offerings similar to those brought by the tribal princes upon the inauguration of the Tabernacle (see Numbers, chap. 7). Rabbi Idi interprets the phrase “eat, friends” as a reference to the princes. that is what is written: “I will sacrifice to You burnt offerings of fattened animals [with the burning of rams; I will sacrifice bulls and goats]” (Psalms 66:15). What offering includes bull, rams, and goats? Say that this is the offering of the princes. That is what is written: “And for the peace offering, two oxen, [five rams, five goats]” (Numbers 7:17). Rabbi Shimon ben Yosena said: Why does he call the princes “friends”? It is because He intended to make them beloved and to draw them close.7The midrash questions why the verse in Song of Songs, which states “eat, friends,” and is interpreted as referring to the princes, used the term friends. The answer is that God, by accepting their offerings, sought to make them beloved to the Israelites and draw them near to Him.Rabbi Shimon ben Yosena said: In every other circumstance, an individual may not bring a voluntary incense offering, but here8In the offerings of the tribal princes upon the inauguration of the Tabernacle. there was a voluntary incense offering. In every other circumstance, an individual may not bring a voluntary sin offering, but here there was a voluntary sin offering. In every other circumstance, the offering of an individual does not override impurity and Shabbat, but here the offering of an individual did override Shabbat and impurity. In every other circumstance, an individual brings a sin offering only for a sin, but here an individual brought a sin offering not for a sin. Another matter: “Eat, friends” – these are the princes; “drink abundantly, beloved ones” – these are the libations.9The princes were so overjoyed to bring their offerings that it was as though they were inebriated.Another matter: “Eat, friends” – Rabbi Berekhya said: [This is analogous] to a king who made a feast and invited guests, but an insect fell onto the tray. Had the king withdrawn his hand, everyone would have withdrawn his hand. The king extended his hand, so everyone extended his hand.10Although these offerings were anomalous, since they were accepted by God, the princes could also partake of the parts that were not burned on the altar. “Drink abundantly, beloved ones” – Rabbi Yannai said: [This is analogous] to a king who made a feast and invited guests, and he would circulate among them and say to them: ‘May it be pleasant for you and may it be sweet for you.’ Rabbi Abbahu said: [This is analogous] to a king who made a feast and invited guests. After they ate and drank, he said: ‘Take this fine portion and give it to the host.’ Here, too, it was so.11In the analogy, a particular nobleman made the feast for the king and the king’s guests, and did not eat because he was busy ensuring that the king and the guests were satisfied. The king eventually ensured that the host also was able to eat. So too, after parts of the princes’ offerings were burned on the altar and other parts were given to the priests, the princes also partook of the remainder of the offerings. “I came to my garden, my sister, my bride; I gathered my myrrh with my perfume; I ate my honeycomb with my honey” – you, too, eat. “I drank my wine with my milk” – you, too, “eat, friends; drink abundantly, beloved ones.”
The Divine presence was not on the earthly , lowliest plane , proof is that it is written , and they heard the voice of the lord walking in the garden.
Rabbi Abba said that Walking is not stated but Mishalech,to tell you that the voice was jumping and leaving, jumping and leaving

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
“Where did your beloved go, fairest of women? Where did your beloved turn, that we may seek him with you?” (Song of Songs 6:1).“Where did your beloved go, fairest of women?” The nations of the world say to Israel: ‘Where did your beloved go? From Egypt, to the sea, to Sinai. Where did your beloved turn?’1The nations of the world taunt Israel: In the past, God performed wonders for you in Egypt, at the sea, and at Sinai; but where is He now? He has abandoned you. What does the congregation of Israel respond to the nations of the world? ‘Why are you asking about Him, while you have no share in Him? Now that I have cleaved to Him, am I able to separate from Him? Now that He has cleaved to me, can He separate from me? Wherever He is, He comes to me.’

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
“Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, and we will gaze upon you. Why will you gaze at the Shulamite like at a dance of two companies?” (Song of Songs 7:1)“Return, return, O Shulamite,” Rabbi Shmuel bar Ḥiyya bar Yudan [said] in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: Four times “return,” is written here, corresponding to the four kingdoms that rule over Israel. Israel comes under their control unscathed and emerges unscathed. “The Shulamite,” a nation in whose midst the eternal One who lives in peace [shalom] moves about; that is what is written: “I have moved about in a tent and a Tabernacle” (II Samuel 7:6).1God rested His presence in the Tabernacle in the midst of Israel. The Tabernacle resided in four places in the Land of Israel: Gilgal, Shilo, Nov, and Givon, corresponding to the four times “return” is written here, as though the word Shulamite is written with each one (Maharzu, Bereshit Rabba 66:2). Another matter, “the Shulamite,” a nation to whom [a blessing] concluding with peace is [recited] each day, just as it says: “And grant you peace [shalom]” (Numbers 6:26). Alternatively, “the Shulamite,” the nation that I am destined to settle in an abode of peace; that is what is written: “My people will live in a peaceful abode…” (Isaiah 32:18). Another matter, “the Shulamite,” the nation to whom I extend peace; that is what is written: “Behold, I will extend peace toward it” (Isaiah 66:12).Rabbi Elazar bar Rabbi Maron said: A nation that completes [mashlemet] the stability of the world, both in this world and in the World to Come. Rabbi Yehoshua of Sikhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: A nation that all the good of the word comes only due to its merit. That is what is written: “God will give you from the dew of the heavens, and from the fat of the earth” (Genesis 27:28); “you,” the matter is dependent upon you and your merit, as it is written: “The Lord will open for you His good storehouse” (Deuteronomy 28:12), the matter is dependent upon you and your merit.Rabbi Shmuel bar Tanḥum and Rabbi Ḥanan, the son of Rabbi Berekhya from Botzra, [said] in the name of Rabbi Yirmeya: The nation that made peace between Me and My world, as had they not accepted My Torah, I would have returned My world to emptiness and disorder, as Huna said in the name of Rabbi Aḥa: It is written: “The earth and all its inhabitants melt away” (Psalms 75:4). Had Israel not stood before Mount Sinai and said: “Everything that the Lord has said, we will perform and we will heed” (Exodus 24:7), the world would have begun to disintegrate. Who buttressed the world? It is I [anokhi], as it is stated: “I [anokhi] set its pillars firm, Selah” (Psalms 75:4); by the merit of: “I [anokhi] am the Lord your God” (Exodus 20:2), I set its pillars firm.2God caused the pillars of the world to be firm in the merit of the people of Israel accepting the Ten Commandments, the first of which was “I am the Lord your God” (Etz Yosef).
“And we will gaze upon you.” The nations of the world say to Israel: Until when will you die for the sake of your God and be devoted to Him? That is what is written: “Therefore the young women love you” (Song of Songs 1:3). And until when will you be killed for His sake? As it is written: “For we are killed for Your sake all day” (Psalms 44:23). And until when will you perform acts of kindness on His behalf, and for Him Himself, while He repays you with harshness? Come over to us and we will appoint you dukes, governors, and generals. “And we will gaze [veneḥezeh] upon you,” you will be the focus [meḥezyatei] of the world. That is what is written: “You shall discern [teḥezeh] from among the entire people [capable men… to be leaders of thousands…]” (Exodus 18:21).Israel responds to them: “Why will you gaze at the Shulamite like at a dance of two companies?” Have you ever heard that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob engaged in idol worship, such that their descendants would engage in idol worship in their wake? Our ancestors did not engage in idol worship and we, in their wake, will not engage in idol worship. But what can you do for us? [You can perform] a dance like that performed for Jacob our patriarch when he departed from the house of Lavan.3You cannot accord us honor after we become idolators, because that will never happen, but you can accord us honor nonetheless. The reference to dance is due to the conclusion of the verse: “like a dance of two companies.” Rabbi Berekhya said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Six hundred thousand angels were dancing and frolicking before Jacob our patriarch upon his departure from the house of Lavan. The Rabbis say: One million and two hundred thousand; that is what is written: “Jacob said when he saw them: This is the camp [maḥaneh] of God” (Genesis 32:3), this is six hundred thousand;4“The camp of God” refers to a camp in which God rests His presence. The model for such a camp is the Israelite camp in the wilderness, in which there were six hundred thousand men, and in which God rested His presence (see Bereshit Rabba 74:17). “he called the name of that place Maḥanayim” (Genesis 32:3),5Maḥanayim literally means two camps. this is one million and two hundred thousand.Or can you perhaps perform for us a dance like that performed for our ancestors at the sea, as it is stated: “The angel of God traveled” (Exodus 14:19). Or can you perhaps perform for us a dance like that performed for Elisha, as it is stated: “The attendant of the man of God arose early and he set out, and behold, an army was surrounding the city, with horse and chariot. His attendant said to him: Alas, my master, what shall we do? (II Kings 6:15). And it is written: “He said: Fear not, as there are more who are with us than who are with them” (II Kings 6:16). Immediately,  “Elisha prayed and he said: Lord, please open up his eyes and he will see. The Lord opened the attendant's eyes and he saw, and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and a chariot of fire, surrounding Elisha” (II Kings 6:17).Or can you perhaps perform for us a dance like that which the Holy One blessed be He is destined to perform for the righteous in the future? Rabbi Berekhya, Rabbi Ḥelbo, Ulla of Birya and Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Ḥanina: In the future, the Holy One blessed be He is destined to lead a dance for the righteous, as it is stated: “Pay attention to its ramparts [leḥeila]” (Psalms 48:14); to the dance [leḥola] is written.6The word is in fact written leḥeila. See Rabbi David Luria’s commentary to Vayikra Rabba 11:9. And they will point to Him with their finger, as it is stated: “For this is God, our God, for ever and ever, He will guide us beyond death [al mut]” (Psalms 48:15), like young women [alamot], like the dance of the righteous.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
“If only you were like a brother to me, who suckled the breasts of my mother. I would find you outside; I would kiss you, yet they would not despise me” (Song of Songs 8:1).“If only you were like a brother to me” – like what brother? Like Cain to Abel? Cain killed Abel, as it is stated: “Cain arose against Abel his brother, and killed him” (Genesis 4:8). Rather, like Ishmael to Isaac? Ishmael hated Isaac. Rather, like Esau to Jacob? But it is stated: “Esau hated Jacob” (Genesis 27:41). Rather, like Joseph’s brothers to Joseph? They hated him, as it is stated: “His brothers were jealous of him” (Genesis 37:11). Like what brother? “One who suckled the breasts of my mother” – that is to say like Joseph to Benjamin, who loved him wholeheartedly, as it is stated: “Joseph saw Benjamin with them” (Genesis 43:16).1As the story unfolds, the verse states that Joseph wept when he saw Benjamin (Genesis 43:30). “I would find you outside; I would kiss you”; “outside” – this is the wilderness, which is outside the settled area. “I would kiss you” – regarding two brothers who kissed each other, and these are Moses and Aaron, as it is stated: “He went, and he met him at the mountain of God, and he kissed him” (Exodus 4:27).“They would not despise me” – Rabbi Pinḥas said: There was an incident involving two siblings, one of whom was in Meron and one in Gush Ḥalav. The house of the one who lived in Meron caught fire. His sister from Gush Ḥalav came and began hugging, embracing, and kissing him, and saying: This does not demean me, as my brother was in dire straits and was delivered from them.
