=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
השותפין שרצו לעשות מחיצה – we are speaking of a courtyard where there is no law of division in it, where there lacks by the way four cubits for each one of the partners. For this reason, it (i.e., the Mishnah) taught " "שרצו/that they wanted, which implies that especially, two of them want [to make a partition] but neither one of them is able to force his fellow, for if in a courtyard which has a law of division, each one of them is able to force his fellow to divide, but now, it comes to teach us that since they wanted to divide it, and each one of them had taken possession of the direction that is entitled for him according to what they had compromised, they build the wall in the middle, and this one gives from his portion one-half of the place the thickness of the wall and also this one.
גויל – stones which are not trimmed or fixed.
גזית – stones which are trimmed and planed with a saw.
כפיסין – a small brick/girder which is a one-half brick which is a handbreadth-and-a-half (i.e., one handbreadth equals 3.65 inches or 9.34 cm) and a brick is three handbreadths.
הכל כמנהג המדינה – "הכל"/everything includes a place where they have the practice to make a partition with the sprouts of vine and the branches of trees that they make according to the custom, as long as the partition is wide enough so that neither one of them cis able to see that of his fellow for visual damage is called damage, and the height of the wall and the partition is not less than four cubits.
זה נותן שלשה טפחים – that the wall of untrimmed stones requires an additional handbreadth more than the wall of hewn stones because of the tops of the stones that protrude outward which are not smooth.
ובכפסים זה נותן טפחי – that the thickness of the wall of the one-half/small/girder brick is a handbreadth greater than the width of a wall of full brings because he places a small brick/bond-timber on one side and a small brick/bond-timber on the other side, which are three handbreadths and a handbreadth in the middle in which they place there plaster to attach them, but the wall made from bricks, one places a full brick along the thickness of the wall which is three handbreadths and there is no need for plaster in the middle.
המקום והאבנים של שניהם – this tells us that even though the stones fell into the domain of one them, or alternatively, that one of them first removed them into his domain, you might have thought that it belongs to the other – for the claimant must produce the evidence. But this comes to tell us that this is not the case.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
לא יחפור. בור – round.
שיח – long or short
מערה – it is covered with an arched ceiling.
נברכת הכובסין – a square pit. And rain waters gather in it as it is made to launder clothing.
אלא אם כן הרחיק מכותלו – it is saying from the wall of his cistern. And the thickness of the wall of his cistern is not less than three handbreadths, it is found that from the cavity/space of his cistern to the cavity/space of his fellow’s cistern is six handbreadths. But it is prohibited for a person to rely upon one of the damages to the end of his boundary equally, other than if he distanced it the appropriate measurement, even though his fellow lacks a wall there, lest his fellow decide that he will build on the side of his boundary, and it is found that this causes damage.
וסד בסיד – the walls of his pit.
הגפת – the refuse of the olives after they were gathered together in the olive press.
הסלעים – stones where the light comes out from them, for all of these are hard for the fortification and weaken the wall, and we are not referring to the wall of the cistern now.
זרעים – they are hard for the wall for they undermine the grounds (through their roots – see Talmud Bava Batra 19b) and bring up crushed, loose earth.
ואת המחרישה – even though there are no seeds, as, for example, when they plow for trees, it is hard for the wall.
מי רגלים – they make loathsome the bricks which are of dry plaster. Therefore, someone who urinates close by the wall that is made of bricks needs to distance himself three handbreadths. But with a wall of stones, he distances himself a handbreadth, and of a hard stone such as granite, he does not have to distance himself at all.
הריחים – they are hard on the wall because they shake the ground with the force of its rolling.
מן השכב – from the lower millstone.
הרכב – this is the upper one that rides on this. But it is shorter by a handbreadth of the lower one.
שלשה מן הכליא – the base upon which they build from plaster/clay and stones that they place the oven upon it, and It is wide from the bottom and narrow from the top, and upper rim of the belly of the stove is where the stove sits. It is like the measurement of the oven and one must distance the base from the wall three handbreadths from its underbelly, which are four [handbreadths] from the its upper rim, because the vapor of the oven damages the wall.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
חזקת הבתים – whomever has lost his document [of sale] and brought witnesses that he has taken possession for three years with all of those things that are written in our Mishnah, he is believed to state that they were purchased property in his hand and we don’t say to him, “bring the bill of sale that it it was sold to you for up to three years, people are careful with documents; more than three years, they (i.e., people) are not careful. And we say to the individual that is against him if you have [proof] that you didn’t sell it, you should have protested and state before two [witnesses]: “know that so-and-so consumed my land through theft” and the matter would reach his ears and he would be careful with his document, for your friend has a friend, and the friend of your friend has a friend, and if you don’t
שובכות – where they raise/grow doves there.
בית הבדים – that they press olives in them to produce oil.
בית השלחין – for since there is a spring in it that waters the field from it always and produces fruits frequently and anything that produces fruits frequently, its presumption of claim based upon undisturbed possession [during a legally fixed period] is three years from day to day.
והעבדים – and even though that we hold that animals living in folds (i.e., moving livestock, which they leave in the daytime) is no evidence of ownership (as they may have come over by accident – see Talmud Bava Batra 36a), meaning to say that sheep from the language "גדרות צאן"/fenced in sheep, have no presumption of ownership (as they may have come over by accident), and the same law applies to all living creatures; that is, a presumption immediately that they lack this if it was known that the sheep and/or the slaves belonged to someone else, and entered the house of the other person. But this one claims that they entered into his house that they were purchased in his hand: “Behold I am known to hold them in possession. This is not a presumption of ownership because it is their manner to go from house to house. But if he held/took possession of a slave for three years, that is claim based upon an undisturbed possession and there is no need [to produce] a bill of sale.
שדה הבעל – it is supplied from rain water and doesn’t produce fruits other than once a year.
חזקתה שלש שנים – and it doesn’t have to be from day to day.
רבי ישמעאל אומר שלשה חדשים – there is grain that grows in three months such as barley and oats and lentils and it is found that one eats three grains in eight months.
רבי עקיבא אומר – there is something that grows in thirty days such as corn at the earliest stage/low growth and vegetables. Therefore, if one ate it for fourteen months that is considered a presumption of ownership. But Rabbi Yishmael holds that the eating of corn at the earliest stage and vegetables are not considered presumption of ownership.
במה דברים אמורים – that one needs eighteen months for a field sufficiently watered by rain and requiring no artificial irrigation.
בשדה לבן – [a bright, vegetable or grain field that lacks shade] where all of its fruits are collected at one time, therefore, it requires three [complete] years.
אבל בשדה האילן – that whose fruits are collected at periods – grapes at one period and olives at another period and figs at another period.
כנס את תבואתו – wine of grapes.
כנס את זיתיו וכנס את קיצו – he harvested figs and dried them, and brought them into his house, that is a presumption of ownership, as if it is three years, but the Halakha is not according to either Rabbi Akiva nor Rabbi Yishmael.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
המוכר את הבית. היציע – like a kind of room that they make around the walls of the house from the outside, like what was in the Temple, as it is written (I Kings 6:6): “The lowest story was [five cubits wide],” and there are those who make it in the thickness of the wall. But even though that it is open to the house and its usage is within, even so, it is not sold. And it is four cubits, but if it is not four cubits, it is not considered [separate] and it is sold with the house.
ולא את החדר שלפנים – from the house, and even though it is open to the house and it is tread upon.
בזמן שיש לו מעקה גבוה עשרה – it is considered by itself and not nullified in regard to the house.
רבי יהודה אומר וכו' – The Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
המוכר את הספינה – undefined.
מכר את התורן – (see Talmud Bava Batra 73a) a tall [piece of] wood upon which they suspend the banner/flag. And the banner is a kind of curtain that they suspend on the mast towards the wind.
עוגין – iron that they tie with rope and throw it into the depths of the water to detain and to anchor the ship.
מנהיגים – These are oars that through them they lead the ship to the place that they desire.
מרצופין – large sacks that they place goods into.
אנתיקי – [the funds and stores connected with the business – see Talmud Bava Batra 77b] the practical things that are within the ship, and all of these are considered here that are in the sale, he did not sell if he gave or dedicated the ship [to the Temple]. These are not included in the gift and the dedication to the Temple, and are not similar to a cistern or a subterranean masoned storeroom or a winepress [mentioned] in the chapter above (Chapter 4, Mishnah 2), for all of them are in land and are made void regarding a field regarding sanctification [to the Temple] and gifting. But these are not made void at all.
פרדות – [mules], animals that pull the wagon, but they are not attached to it (i.e., the wagon) at the time of the sale. But there are those who explain פרדות as wood that is separate from the wagon that on pulls the wagon with them, but they are not attached to the it at the time of the sale.
צמד – it is the yoke that they attach and tie [the] bulls together with.
אין הדמים ראיה – for that which he said that one-sixth [overcharge] he purchased [the object], and he (i.e., the seller) returns the overcharge; more than one-sixth, the purchase is void; these words are incidental that the mind errs as the purchaser thinks that it is worth such. And this is an errant purchase, but in order that the mind doesn’t error, such as the example that he purchased a yoke that was worth a Zuz for two hundred, we say that it was given to him as a gift, and there is no voiding of the transaction here. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
המוכר פירות – undefined, and it (i.e., the Mishnah) does not explain whether for eating or for sowing.
אפילו זרע פשתן – for most purchase it for sowing. One can say: “I sold it for eating, and we don’t follow after the majority for money.
רבן שמעון בן גמליאל אומר וכו' – The Gemara (Talmud Bava Batra 93b) establishes all of our Mishnah according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel but the Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: even if it were flax seed, he is not responsible. But surely, garden seeds which are not eaten, one is responsible for them, the words of Rabbi Shimon ben Gamaliel. For Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel states that garden seeds which are not eaten, one is responsible for them, for it is an errant transaction for certainly he sold them for planting.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
האומר לחבירו בית כור עפר – the measurement of a Khor’s worth of seed is seventy-five thousand cubits where the courtyard of the Tabernacle was a field requiring two Se’ah of seed, which was one hundred [cubits] by fifty [cubits] and a Khor is thirty Se’ah.
עפר – that is appropriate for sowing is implied. But if he stated, in an area requiring a Khor’s of seed undefined, or a field requiring a Khor of seed, even if all of it is rocks, he takes possession of it, for perhaps it was to build a house or to spread out fruit [to dry], he required it.
נקעים – fields ten handbreadths deep or [rocks] ten handbreadths high, and for example, they are wide four handbreadths by four handbreadths and are an important place.
אין נמדדין עמה – and he must give him an area requiring a complete Khor of seed from level/smooth ground, for a person does not want to put all of his money into one place, and he will show him two or three places.
כבית כור – which implies as it is, whether it is rocks or soil.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
יש נוחלין – there are relations that inherit their relatives when they die, and even when they themselves die. They bequeath to them their money.
האב את הבנים – as it is written (Numbers 27:8): “If a man dies without leaving a son, you shall transfer his property to his daughter.” In place of a daughter, you transfer the inheritance from the father, but you do not transfer inheritance from the father in place of brothers.
והבנים את האב – as it is written (Numbers 27:8): “If a man dies without leaving a son;” but if he has a son, the son precedes.
והאחין מן האב – as it is written (Numbers 27:10): “in his own clan, and he shall inherit it.” And the family/clan of the father is called a family, as it is written (Numbers 1:2): “by the clans of its ancestral houses.”
והאיש את אמו – as it is written (Numbers 36:8): “ Every daughter among the Israelite tribes who inherits a share [must marry someone from a clan of her father’s tribe, in order that every Israelite may keep his ancestral share],”how a daughter inherits two tribes, but this [is the case] where her father is from one tribe and her mother is from another tribe, "וירשתן"/and she shall inherit them (see Numbers 36:8 and Talmud Bava Batra 111a) – for since it is written (in our verse): "ממטות"/from the tribe, he made an analogy of two verses near each other – the tribe of the mother to the tribe of the father. Just as the tribe of the father, the son precedes the daughter, so too, the tribe of the mother – the son precedes the daughter.
והאיש את אשתו – as it is written (Numbers 27:11): “[If his father had no brothers, you shall assign his property to] his nearest relative [in his own clan and he shall inherit it].” “the nearest relative” is one’s wife. And we read it this way: “And you shall give the inheritance of his nearest relative to him and deduct or add and we expound, that even she shall inherit him, as the inference teaches us: (Numbers 27: 11): “and he shall inherit it.” He inherits her, but she does not inherit him (see also Talmud Bava Batra 111b).

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
מי שמת. שהנכסים מרובים – in order that the sons will be supported and the daughters until they become adults (i.e., the age of twelve and one-half years – or until they are married, after which the balance of the estate goes to the sons).
שהנכסים מועטים – and they don’t have a measure like this.
בשביל שאני זכר הפסדתי – in astonishment. Burt rather, I will not lose out and all of us will be supported together. But the Halakha is not according to Admon. The put the widow with the daughter when the property is small, like a daughter with the brothers. Just as the daughter is with the brothers, the daughter is supported whereas the sons go begging at the doors. Even the widow is with the daughter. The widow receives support and the daughter goes begging at the doors.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
גט פשוט – a plain document similar to ours which are not sewn or folded; and every document is called a Get.
עדיו מתוכו – from the inside, similar to ours that we make.
מקושר מאחוריו – he (i.e., the scribe) writes one line or two and wraps them on the blank part and sews it. And one witnesses inscribes on the wrapping from the outside, and he (i.e., the scribe) goes back and writes two lines from the inside and wraps them on the blank part and the second witnesses inscribes on the wrapping from the outside. And similarly, the third witness. But the Rabbis established a folded document because of stringent Kohanim, because they would write a bill-of-divorcement suddenly to their wives and then regret it and they wouldn’t be able to restore them (i.e., because a Kohen cannot marry a divorced woman – see Leviticus 21:7), and the Rabbis ordained for them a folded bill-of-divorcement which is not easy to write quickly, lest in the midst of it, he is pacified. And just as they ordained/instituted a folded document for a Get, so they instituted for other documents that the Sages did not disagree with.
שניהם פסולין – for they did not act as the Sages ordained.
שיכול לעשותו פשוט – for if the seams would tear and the Get would open, it would be a plain document.
רשב"ג אומר הכל כמנההג המדינה – there is a dispute between Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel and the Rabbis in a place where there is the practice of [both] a plain document and a folded document. If someone said to him: “Make for me a folded [document]” and he went and he made for him an ordinary document, or “Make for me an ordinary document” and he made for him a folded document, the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] holds that he is particular, and it is unfit. But Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel holds that since with both (i.e., the plain document and folded document), it [depends upon] local custom, he is not strict and it is appropriate/fit, but the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] (see Talmud Bava Batra 165a).
