=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
הכל חייבין בראיה – In the commandment (Deuteronomy 16:16): “[Three times a year – on the Feast of Unleavened Bread, on the Feast of Weeks, and on the Feast of Booths – ] all your males shall appear [before the LORD your God in the place that He will choose….],” and one must show one’s self in the Temple courtyard on the Festival, and [the word] הכל/”Everyone” includes someone who is a half-slave and half-a free person, but the Halakha is not like this, since whomever is a half-slave and half-a free person is exempt from appearance in the Temple because of the side of servitude within him. (One could potentially argue that another possibility for a Biblical proof-text could be Exodus 23:17: “Three times a year all your males shall appear before the Sovereign, the LORD, though it lacks the reference to Jerusalem).
חוץ מחרש – and even though he can speak, and even one who is deaf in one ear is exempt, as it is written (Deuteronomy 31:11): “When all Israel comes to appear before the LORD your God [in the place that He will choose…],” and it written after this (verse 12): “[Gather the people….]-that they may hear….,” excluding one who lacks complete hearing. And the person who hears but cannot speak is also exempt as it is written (verse 12): “...[that they may hear] and learn [to revere the LORD your God and to observe faithfully every word of this Teaching].” (NOTE: Rabbinic tradition, as found in the Mishnah of Tractate Terumot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2, teaches that the deaf-mute individual, of whom the Sages generally spoke in all places, both cannot hear and cannot speak, and the Bartenura commentary on this Mishnah. Also see Chapter 12 of the Mishnah Tractate Yevamot, especially Mishnah four.)
שוטה וקטן – they are not considered having ritual obligations, for they are exempt from all of the commandments. But a minor who can hold his father’s hand and go up from Jerusalem to the Temple Mount, his father is obligated to bring him up in order that he may educate him in the commandments, as the School of Hillel states further on in our Mishnah.
וטומטום ואנדרוגינוס, נשים ועבדים שאינן משוחררין – all of these are excluded from [the word] זכורך/”your males,” (Deuteronomy 16:16) except for one whose sex is unknown, a hermaphrodite and a woman who are not included within [the term] זכורך/”your males.” For any commandment for which women are not obligated [to perform], slaves are also not obligated [to perform]. And further, when it [the Torah] states (Deuteronomy 31:11): “When all Israel comes to appear [before the LORD your God]...” and slaves are not considered part of the Jewish people. (See also Mishnah Bikkurim, Chapter 1, Mishnah 5, regarding the one whose sex is unknown and the hermaphrodite in regard to their exemption from the bringing of First Fruits to the Temple.)
החיגר והחולה ושאינו יכול לעלות ברגליו – from Jerusalem to the Temple courtyard, such as the case when he is celebrating to the extreme. All of these we derive them, following from the fact that it is written (Exodus 23:14): “Three times a year [you shall hold a festival for Me],” they excluded those who are not able to go up to Jerusalem.
והסומא – as it is written (Deuteronomy 31:11): “When all Israel comes to appear…” Just as they come to be seen, so they come to see the Holy Mountain and the House of God’s Divine Presence, which excludes someone who is blind, even in his one eye, for his sight is not complete.
שלש רגלים – who is fit to go up with his feet, the Biblical verse obligates, and since an adult [who cannot go up to Jerusalem due to physical constraints] is exempt from the Torah, the minor is also not one who can be educated.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
אין דורשין בעריות – to three people as one [i.e., together], we do not expound the secrets of the illicit sexual relationships, such his daughter from his outraged woman, which is not written in Scripture explicitly lest at the time when the Rabbi speaks with one, the other two will discuss it between them, and they will not give their hearts over to listen from the mouth of the Rabbi when he expounds upon this prohibition. But they will come to be lenient in illicit sexual relationships on account of the fact the soul of a person yearns for them and covets them more than the rest of the prohibitions of the Torah.
ולא במעשה בבראשית – in the event of the six days of creation even for [between] two people, and all the more so, for three or more, as it states in the Biblical verse (Deuteronomy 4:32): “You have but to inquire about bygone ages that came before you, [ever since God created man on earth from one end of heaven to the other: has anything as grand as this ever happened, or has its like ever been known?]. An individual can ask, but not two individuals.
ולא במעשה מרכבה – that Ezekiel saw and that Isaiah saw. And Maimonides explained, that the event of Creation, the natural wisdom, and the episode of the Chariot, which is the reality of God and his attributes, and the angels and the soul and the intellect/intuition, and what will be after death. But it does not appear to me that all of this will be called the episode of the Chariot, for if so, the wisdom of the chariot he (i.e., the Tanna of our Mishnah) should have taught, but the event of the Chariot is that via the mention of the names of holiness, we make use of the crown, and we look out how the angelic watches while they at their prayer meetings, and how the hall containing the golden altar is inside from the hall containing the golden altar, such as those who foresee the Holy Spirit.
ביחיד אלא א"כ היה חכם ומבין מדעתו – even for another person, we don’t explain the event of the Chariot, other than if the Rabbi knows him to be wise for if he would transmit to him “chapter-headings,” he would understand the rest from his own mind.
כל המסתכל בד' דברים – those that are explained further on.
ראוי לו – it is pleasant and it would be good for him if he had not come into the world.
מה למעלה – from the heads of the [divine] creatures.
מה למטה – from under the ground.
מה לפנים – outside the compartment of the firmament in the east.
ומה לאחור – to the west. Another explanation: what is before – prior to the creation of the world. And was is behind, at the end of the world and in the end of days.
כל שלא חס על כבוד קונו – that he violates a transgression in secret and states that God’s presence is not found here and who will see me and who will inform me.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
חומר בקודש. שמטבילין כלי בתוך כלי – when both of them are ritually impure.
אבל לא לקודש – since we say that the heaviness of the inner utensil which weighs upon the outside which is placed within it, leaves a space before the defilement (tit must say, “before the water, and so it is in Rashi and in the Gemara – Tractate Hagigah 21a), for Ritual immersion is not effective for either one (i.e., Terumah/Priest’s due or Holy things).
אחוריים ותוך ובית הצביטה לתרומה – a utensil that is appropriate to use inside it and at its back/outside and its handle. Each and every usage with it is considered a utensil in and of itself with regard to Terumah/priest’s due, for if one part became defiled, the other part did not become defiled. And we are speaking of Rabbinic defilements, for if the back/outside became defiled win ritually impure liquids, the inside is not defiled, nor the handle, but if the handle was defiled, the back and insides were not defiled. And the explanation of בית הצביטה – is something you grab hold of, such as the language of (Ruth 2:14): “He handed her roast grain, [and she ate her fill and had some left over].” But there are those who have the reading "בית הצביעה" – from the language for a finger – that they for the utensil a handle to place one’s finger inside it. When he drinks, in order that he not place hand inside the utensil proper.
אבל לא לקודש – for if one of them became ritually defiled in Rabbinic defilements, it is entirely impure for Holy things.
הנושא את המדרס – [A person who comes in contact with] the shoe of the individual with a flux.
נושא את התרומה – [he can carry priest’s due] if he wants in an earthen wine-jug, which does not touch its airspace.
אבל לא את הקודש – because of an incident that had taken place with an individual who had been carrying a jug of wine of drink-offerings, and his sandal-strap of his shoe broke that had Levitical uncleanness arising from an individual with a flux’s immediate contact by treading/leaning against, etc., and he took it in his hand and as a result, it fell into the atmosphere of the jug, and the Holy thing was ritually defiled; at that hour they said that whomever carries Levitical uncleanness arising from an individual with a flux’s immediate contact by treading/leaning against, should not carry any Holy thing, and because I was an incident that happened with something that was considered a Holy thing. Therefore, they did not make a decree other than with something that was Holy and not priest’s due.
לא כמדת הקדש – with the interposition (of an intervening object) of his ritual immersions, is the measure of the priest’s due.
שבקדש – if there is a ritually impure cloth and he comes to ritually immerse it, if it is tied, he releases the knot, because it is similar to an interposition [of an intervening object].
ומנגב – if it is moist, he dries it first for the fatty, oily substance that is upon it is like an interposition [of an intervening object] of his ritual immersion.
ובתרומה – if he desires, he can tie it up and afterwards he immerses it while it is tied and it has no effect.
