=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment to rest from performing agricultural work or work with trees1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 135) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 112) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.There is a difference of opinion among the commentaries if the mitzvah is incumbent on the gavra (the person himself) or on the land (the cheftza, the object). The commentaries note that the Rambam's wording in this halachah indicates that the mitzvah is on the person, he should rest. Nevertheless, the wording he uses when enumerating the mitzvot - that "the land should rest" - puts the emphasis on the land. in the Sabbatical year, as [Leviticus 25:2] states: "And the land will rest like a Sabbath unto God" and [Exodus 34:21] states: "You shall rest with regard to plowing and harvesting."2The citation of this verse reflects a general principle in the Mishneh Torah: that the Rambam will occasionally favor the understanding of a verse proposed by the Jerusalem Talmud even though the Babylonian Talmud interprets it otherwise. To explain: the Babylonian Talmud (Mo'ed Kattan 4a) inteprets this verse as a prohibition to work the land on the Sabbath. It is the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 1:3) which understands it as referring to the Sabbatical year.From Chapter 4, Halachah 1, it appears that here the Rambam is speaking of harvesting for the sake of improving the land, not for gathering its crops. The intent appears to be that harvesting produce will enable the land to produce better produce in the future.When a person3This mitzvah is incumbent both on men and women. performs any labor upon the land or with trees during this year, he nullifies the observance of this positive commandment and violates a negative commandment,4Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 220) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 326) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Leviticus 25:4] states: "Do not sow your field and do not trim your vineyard."
According to Scriptural Law, a person is not liable for lashes except for [the following labors] sowing, trimming,5As indicated by Halachah 20 and notes, the intent here is trimming the top of the tree and not the end of its branches. harvesting [grain], and harvesting fruit - both from vineyards and from other trees.6The term betzirah whose root is used in Leviticus 25:5 is usually employed specifically with regard to harvesting grapes. Nevertheless, in a wider sense, it refers to harvesting any fruit.
Trimming is considered in the category of sowing.7Because like sowing, trimming contributes to the growth of the tree (Radbaz). And harvesting fruit is considered in the category of harvesting grain. If so, why did the Torah single them out?8In Leviticus 25:5: "The aftergrowth of your harvest you shall not reap and the grapes you had designated you shall not gather." To teach that one is liable [for lashes] for performing these two derivatives alone. For the other derivatives that involve working the land9And performing work with trees. and the other major categories of labor that were not mentioned explicitly [by the Torah] in this context, one is not liable for lashes. He is, however, given stripes for rebellious conduct.
What is implied? When a person digs or plows10Plowing is explicitly mentioned in the positive commandment for observing the Sabbatical year, but not in the prohibition.Although Mo'ed Kattan 3a uses techniques of Biblical exegesis to show that other labors are forbidden, the Rambam considers these teachings merely as asmachteot, citing a verse as support for a concept forbidden by Rabbinic Law. for the sake of the land, removes stones,11To improve the land, not because he needs the stones. See Chapter 2, Halachah 10. fertilizes the land, or performs another similar type of work on the land or extends,12Implants the head of a branch of a vine or tree in the ground so that roots will grow to improve its nurture. grafts, plants, or performs other similar types of work with trees, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.
We do not plant even non-fruit-bearing trees in the Sabbatical year. Nor may one cut an abnormal outgrowth from a tree, remove dried leaves and branches, apply dust to the top of a tree,13In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:2), the Rambam writes that this is beneficial for certain trees. or smoke a tree so that worms [that infest it] die.14As will be explained (see Halachah 7), we are permitted to perform labor to maintain a tree's wellbeing. These activities, however, are intended to foster its growth. [Similarly,] one should not apply a foul-smelly potion to plants so that birds will not eat them when they are soft. One should not apply oil to unripened fruit, nor should one perforate them.15Both of these activities speed their ripening (ibid.:5). One should not bind plants,16Bind their branches so that they grow upward rather than spread out (ibid.:6). nor trim them, nor prepare a support for a tree or perform any other work with trees. If one performs any of these labors in the Sabbatical year, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.
One may not light a fire in an overgrowth of reeds, because this is considered as working the land.17For this prepares the land on which they grow to be used to plant crops. We train a cow to plow only in sand.18And not on land that could be used for crops in which instance, the plowing would benefit him. We do not test [the viability of] seeds in a flowerpot full of earth,19For this resembles sowing them. but we may test them in a flowerpot full of dung.20Because we do not usually sow in dung. One may soak seeds in the Sabbatical year in order to plant them in the following year.21For this does not involve working with the land. We maintain aloe22A fragrant herb, also used for medicinal purposes. plants on top of the roof,23I.e., prevent them from being damaged. The Radbaz questions why the aloe plant is singled out; seemingly the same principle applies with regard to all plants. He explains that since the aloe grows on the roofs, it is in need of shade. Our Sages permitted a person to construct a shelter to protect the aloe from the sun. This is not considered as forbidden labor. but we do not water them.24For that would promote their growth, not merely maintain them.
We may apply red paint to a tree25Chulin 78a states that this is intended to attract notice to the tree and cause people to pray that its fruit do not fall prematurely. This is permitted because it does not involve caring for the tree. and we may load it with stones.26This weakens the tree's strength and thus prevents it from causing its fruit to fall prematurely (ibid.). Since it weakens the tree, it is permitted. We may hoe under vines and under olive trees.27The Kessef Mishneh quotes Rashi (Mo'ed Kattan 3a) who explains that the words oder and kishkush - used by hthe Rambam in this halachah - are synonymous. The difference is only with regard to the type of plants. If [these activities are intended] to make the trees flourish, they are forbidden. If they are intended to close their cracks, it is permitted.
We may irrigate a beit hashilechin, i.e., a field that is sown [with grain] that is very arid, in the Sabbatical year.28For otherwise all the trees in the field will die, as stated in Halachah 10. Similarly, we may cause water to flow from one tree to another in an orchard if there were ten trees dispersed in an area larger than that necessary to sow a se'ah [of grain].29Hilchot Shabbat 16:3 defines an area in which a se'ah of grain is sown as 50 cubits by 50 cubits. This leniency is permitted to make sure that the trees do not die. One should not, however, irrigate the entire orchard.30Since it is unnecessary to do that to provide the individual trees with water. If they are closer to each other than that, one may irrigate the entire orchard for them.31For that is the most effective way of watering the trees, since they are close to each other.Similarly, [when trees grow in] a field where they are planted distant from each other,32I.e., ten in an area larger than 50 cubits by 50 cubits. Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:10). we can sprinkle the earth with water for the sake of the trees that they will not be ruined.
One may dig a pit at the roots of a grapevine [to collect water].33Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Mo'ed Kattan 1:1). One may make an irrigation ditch at the outset and one may fill the water reservoirs34Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kelayim 5:4). with water.
Why were all these activities allowed? For if he will not irrigate [the field], the land will become parched and all the trees in it will die. Since the prohibition against these activities and the like is Rabbinic in origin, they did not impose their decrees in these instances.35So the trees will not die. For according to Scriptural Law, a prohibition applies only to the two primary categories and their two derivatives, as explained.36In Halachot 2-3.
When the number of those who impose their desires by force increased and the gentile kings required the Jews to supply food37Our translation is based on the authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard publish text follows a slightly different version. for their soldiers, [the Sages] permitted [the people] to sow only those crops that are necessary for the servants of the king alone.38This leniency was granted even though sowing is forbidden by Scriptural Law. It must, however, be emphasized that (as stated in Chapter 10, Halachah 9), from the later years of the First Temple period, the observance of the Sabbatical year only had the status of Rabbinic commandment. The Radbaz maintains that such leniency would be granted even if the Scriptural ordinance was in effect. Similarly, if a person of force compelled someone to perform labor in the Sabbatical year without pay, for the service of the king or the like, he may do so.39For since he is being threatened, it makes no difference whether the person threatening him is a king or an ordinary person. Since there is danger involved, leniency is granted (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh).The Kessef Mishneh emphasizes that this leniency is granted only when the person does not receive payment for his activity. He is forbidden to take payment, even if he is being compelled for then a person could perform such labors and excuse himself, claiming that he was compelled to do so.
When a person plants [crops] during the Sabbatical year whether in inadvertent or willful violation, he should uproot them, because the Jews are suspect with regard to [the prohibitions of the] Sabbatical year.40There are many who sow their fields and reap their crops. See Chapter 8 which lists many safeguards instituted for that reason. If we would allow a person who [sowed] inadvertently to keep the crops, a person who [sowed] intentionally would say: "I did so inadvertently."41Terumot 2:3 contrasts sowing on the Sabbath with sowing during the Sabbatical year, explaining that the Jews are not suspect to violate the Sabbath. Hence, the results of the inadvertent violation of the Sabbath laws are not forbidden.
When one plows his field, breaks its ground,42This is the translation of the word nirah, based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 4:3, Pe'ah 2:1). The term differs from plowing in that it is a far less thorough activity. See Rashi's gloss to Jeremiah 4:3 which explains that it refers primarily to the removal of weeds, thorns, and the like. or fertilizes it43In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 4:2), the Rambam explains that this applies even if the field is fertilized by making it a corral for animals, so that their manure will fertilize it and improve its quality.in the Sabbatical year so that it will be better to sow in the following year, we penalize him and [prohibit] him from sowing it in the following year. He may not hire it out to others. Instead, he must leave it fallow. If he dies, however, his son may sow it.44For the penalty is imposed on him personally, not on the land. Note the contrast to Chapter 3, Halachah 11.
When a person removes thorns from his field in the Sabbatical year to improve it for the following year or removes stones from it, even though he is forbidden to do so,45As stated in Halachot 4 and 16. we do not penalize him. He is permitted to sow it in the following year.
[The following laws apply when a person] buries turnips, radishes, and the like46In these eras, there was no refrigeration and vegetables would be preserved by placing them in the ground. in the Sabbatical year. If some of their leaves were revealed, he need not be concerned.47As long as the leaves are revealed, one is not planting in the ordinary manner (Radbaz). Burying the plants in this manner is permitted, because he does not desire that the plants grow in the earth; they are merely buried there [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 1:9)]. If not, it is forbidden.48Because he appears to be planting them. When someone buries wild onions or the like, he should place at least four kabbim in the height of a handbreadth49If they are not packed so densely, burying them resembles planting [ibid. (Sh'vi'it 5:2)]. and place a handbreadth of earth above them. He should bury them in a place where people walk so that they will not grow.It is permitted to rip off the protruding stalks of rice in the Sabbatical year,50Our translation is based on Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid. 2:10). There the Rambam explains the term yichsech, but does not explain the term mereis. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh interpret the latter term as meaning that it is permitted to sprinkle water on the rice plants. The contrast to the following clause supports Rav Kappach's interpretation. but one should not cut them off.
At the outset, [the Rabbis] would say: A person may gather wood, stones, and grass from his field, provided he takes the larger ones51Those that stick out and attract attention [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 6:11; Sh'vi'it 4:1)]. alone, so that his intent is not to clear the land,52I.e., when clearing the land, one takes smaller stones and pieces as well as larger ones, so that the land will not have any foreign matter upon it. but from his colleague's field, he may take small and larger pieces.53For we do not suspect that he will be intending to clear his colleague's field. When there was an increase in the number of transgressors, i.e., people who intended to clear their fields, but would excuse themselves, saying: "We are only taking the larger pieces," they forbade a person from gathering wood and stones from his own field, [permitting this] only from a colleague's field.54It would appear that a person would be permitted to gather both larger and small pieces from his colleague's field. The Radbaz, however, grants this leniency only with regard to larger pieces. Even then, [the leniency was granted] only when he does not do so in order that he exchange the favor,55Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 4:1). There he emphasizes that the person clearing the field is expecting something in return. i.e., he does not tell his colleague: "See how much of a favor I did for you, for I have cleared your field."
When a person's animal is standing in his field, he may gather [all types of grasses]56Not only the large ones permitted in the previous halachah. Even though the person's field will be cleared in this manner, since this is not his intent, and the labor of clearing a field involves merely a Rabbinic prohibition, stringency was not enforced. and bring them to it, for [the presence of] his animal indicates his [intent].57That he is seeking to provide his animal with food and not clear his field. Similarly, if his cooking range is located there, he may gather everything58The Radbaz states that this leniency is granted only when the owner takes both the large and small pieces. If he takes only small pieces, it is forbidden because he is obviously intending to clear his field. and kindle it, for [the presence of] his range indicates his [intent].
If a person cuts down a tree or two to use as wood,59See Chapter 5, Halachot 17-18, which restricts cutting down trees for kindling once they have begun to grow fruit. he may dig out their roots.60Even though it involves work with the land, since he desires the wood, it is permitted. If he cuts down three or more next to each other, he should not dig out their roots, because then he is improving his land.61The place where three trees can grow is significant and can be used for planting. Thus by removing the stumps, it is as if he is clearing a field for himself [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:4)]. Instead, he should cut off the portion above the earth and leave the roots in the ground.When does the above apply? In one's own field. In one's colleague's field, by contrast, it is permitted to dig out the roots.62The intent is not that one has uninhibited license to cut down a colleague's tree even in the Sabbatical year. Instead, if the tree has been cut down, one may uproot the stump.
When a person is chopping [branches from] an olive tree63This law also applies to other species. See Sh'vi'it 4:5 and the gloss of the Ra'avad. for wood, he should not cover the place [where the branches grew] with earth, because this involves performing work [with the tree].64This is forbidden by Scriptural Law. He may, however, cover it with stones or with straw.
One who trims the ends of branches of vines and cuts down reeds, may cut them in his ordinary pattern with a hatchet, a sickle, or a saw, or with any other utensil he desires.65In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 4:7), the Rambam explains that there is no need for a deviation in the way he trims the branches, because he is not intending to trim the tree. To explain his statements: Although trimming is one of the activities forbidden by Scriptural Law, this refers to trimming the top of the tree, not the ends of its branches (Tifferet Yisrael to the above mishnah).
One should not chop wood from a wild fig tree from which wood has never been cut before66Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:5)]. in the same way as one cuts wood from it in other years, because trimming a tree is [one of the forbidden] tasks involved with trees, for through trimming the tree, it will grow and increase. If he needs its wood, he should trim it in an unusual manner.
How should he trim it? [He should cut either] the branches close to the ground or those higher than ten handbreadths.67For cutting these branches is not that beneficial to the tree (Bava Batra 80b).When a tree is split,68Here, also, our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:5)], which quotes I Samuel 15:33 as support. it can be tied together in the Sabbatical year. [The intent is not that] it will mend,69I.e., that the split will be healed. This is forbidden, because this would be improving the tree. but that [the split] will not increase.70This is permitted, because this is maintaining the tree.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
A person should not remove waste materials from his courtyard and place them in his field in the Sabbatical year, because it appears that he is fertilizing his field so that it will be improved for him to sow it.1As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 4, fertilizing is a task forbidden by Rabbinic Law. If he did remove them, but made a waste heap, it is permitted.2Because it does not appear that he is preparing to fertilize his field immediately.He should not make a waste heap in his field until the time when it is common to fertilize the fields as is done when tilling the land passes, i.e., when the bitter3Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 3:1)]. There he explains that although matok, the name the Mishnah uses, means "sweet," this fruit has a bitter taste and that term is used as a euphemism. Some have identified this species with the colocynth, a wild gourd with a very bitter flavor. The Radbaz identifies it with a bitter species of grass. [apples] become [very dried out and] knotted. He should not make a waste heap that contains less than 150 se'ah of waste, so that it will be obvious that it is a waste heap.4Any thing smaller might convey the impression that he is fertilizing his field. If he wishes to add to it, he may. If he has a small amount [of waste matter placed in his field before the beginning of the Sabbatical year], he can continue to increase it [throughout the Sabbatical year]. One should not make more than three waste heaps in an area large enough to sow a se'ah of grain.5Hilchot Shabbat 16:3 defines an area in which a se'ah of grain is sown as 50 cubits by 50 cubits. In this instance as well, if he makes more than three waste heaps, it might appear that his intent is to fertilize the field.
When a person desires to make waste heaps throughout his entire field, three in each area large enough to sow a se'ah, he may.6I.e., we are not concerned that an onlooker might think that he is fertilizing his field. If he desires to combine his waste into one large waste heap,7I.e., create one very large waste heap that encompasses a greater area than the three waste heaps in a 2500 sq. cubit area. he may.
When a person would place waste on a rock, dug out three handbreadths of the earth and then made a heap of waste, or built [a platform] three handbreadths high above the earth and placed the waste upon them, there is no required measure. Even if he made several waste heaps in an area large enough to sow a se'ah of grain, it is permitted. [The rationale is] it is obvious that his intent is not to improve the land,8By fertilizing it, for the waste is not in direct contact with the earth. but rather to collect his waste.9For use after the Sabbatical year.
A person is permitted to remove waste from a corral of sheep and place it in his field as [is permitted to] all those who collect waste.10I.e., according to the guidelines established in the previous halachot. Those halachot dealt with removing waste from one's home and courtyard. In this halachah, the Rambam is adding that the same rules also apply with regard to the waste from corrals. To establish this conceptual flow, the Rambam changes the order of the clauses in the mishnah (Sh'vi'it 3:4). The Radbaz offers this explanation to rebut the Ra'avad's objections.When a person makes a corral in his field in the Sabbatical year,11The Ra'avad cites the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 3:4) which emphasizes that the person's intent should not be to fertilize his field, but to take care of his sheep. When he does that, he can have a portion of his field fertilized as a by-product. he should not make it larger than an area it takes to sow two se'ah.12100 by 50 cubits. [When it is that size,] he may bring his sheep into it. When they have fertilized the entire corral, he may leave one wall of the corral and make another corral on its side, [and then bring his sheep there]. In this manner, he can fertilize a portion of his field large enough to sow four se'ah.
If, however, his entire field was only large enough to sow four se'ah, he should leave a portion [unfertilized], because of the impression that might be created.13I.e., when an observer will see that the entire field was not fertilized, he will realize that the person did not fertilize it by hand, because then there would be no purpose in leaving part of it unfertilized. [In this way,] everyone will know that the sheep deposited their wastes there and fertilized it and they will not say that the person fertilized his entire field in the Sabbatical year.
A person should not open a quarry in his field14The Radbaz explains that the Rambam's ruling applies whether the quarry is open or underground. There are, he explains, other opinions that maintain that if the quarry is open, there is no obligation to begin extracting the stones before the Sabbatical year. at the outset in the Sabbatical year, lest it be said that he intended to improve his field by removing the rocks from it. If he began before the Sabbatical year and quarried from it 27 blocks - each block being one cubit by one cubit and one cubit high or larger - from a group of stones that were three cubits by three cubits and three cubits high, it is permitted to extract from it all one desires during the Sabbatical year.15Provided one's intent is genuinely to quarry stone and not to improve the field (Radbaz).
[The following rules apply when there is] a stone wall that is ten handbreadths or more high and one desired to remove all the stones. If it contained ten or more stones, each one at least [large enough to require] two people to carry it, he may take them,16I.e., all the stones, even those smaller than the size specified. for an observer will know that he is taking them because he needs the stones.17When a person is taking many stones of this size, the effort involved clearly indicates that he is intending to use them for building and not merely to improve his field. If the wall was less than ten handbreadths high, there were less than ten stones or the stones were smaller [and did not require] two people to carry it, he may take them, but must leave [a row] a handbreadth high above the ground.18So that he will not have prepared his field by removing the stones.
When does the above19That he must leave a row of stones a handbreadth high above the earth. apply? When he intends to improve his field20By leaving an additional area that he could sow in the following year. or he began to remove the stones in the Sabbatical year. If, however, he did not intend to improve his field21The Radbaz asks: We see that our Sages forbade certain activities because of the impression that an observer might derive. If so, what does the owner's intent matter? An observer may think that he is intending to clear his field. For this reason, he explains that the owner must perform an activity that makes it obvious that he is intending to use the stones for building, for example, using them for construction that is presently being performed on his property. or began removing them before the Sabbatical year,22This indicates that he was not using the Sabbatical year to perform whatever work that was possible in his field. he may take everything he desires23I.e., even small stones and even when he tears down a wall that is less than ten handbreadths high. during the Sabbatical year, clearing away [the stones] until he reaches the earth. Similarly, if he was removing the stones from a colleague's field, even though he was a contractor,24I.e., a person who hires out the field for his own purposes. See Halachah 12 and the Rambam's commentary to its source (Sh'vi'it 3:9). he may clear them away until he reaches the earth.25Because he would not take the stones unless they would benefit him. Needless to say, one may not destroy a wall in a colleague's field at whim. Thus even when the owner knows that the wall is being torn down, as long as it is being torn down to be used for building, it is permitted to do so.
[The following rules apply when, in a field, there are] stones that would be dislocated by a plow or which were covered [by earth] and then uncovered. If there are two stones that are each large enough to require two people to carry them, it is permitted to remove them.26For, as above, the size of these stones indicates that they will be used for building. The implication is that not only is the person allowed to remove these two large stones, he is allowed to remove all the stones in the field (Radbaz). Needless to say, this leniency is granted only when he genuinely intends to use the stones for construction, not when he desires to clear his field.One might ask: Why are only two stones required to be of this size in this instance, while in Halachah 8, ten large stones are required?Among the answers given is that in this instance, since the stones are scattered over a larger area, their removal is less likely to be noticed by an observer. In Halachah 8, by contrast, since the stones are all located in one place, an observer will see that they have been removed (Pe'at HaShulchan). If they are smaller than this, he should not take them.27Lest an observer think that he is intending to clear his field.
When a person removes stones from his field because he needs the stones [for construction], he should remove the upper ones and leave those in contact with the earth. Similarly, if he has a pile of pebbles or of stones in his field, he should take the upper one's and leave those in contact with the earth. If there is a large rock or straw beneath them, he may take all of them.28For if he desired to clear his field, he would take the large stone or straw that is beneath them as well.
A person should not fill a groove in the ground with earth or level it with earth, because he is improving his land.29And such work is forbidden in the Sabbatical year. He may, however, make a divider before the groove, [separating it from the remainder of his field].30Our translation and the bracketed addition are based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 3:8). He may take any stone [in the groove] that he can pick up if he stretches out his hand while he is standing at the edge of the groove.31If, however, he must descend into the groove to pick up a stone, it is forbidden to remove it, lest an impression be created that the person is seeking to improve his field and make the groove fit for sowing (ibid.).The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, offering a different interpretation of his source (Sh'vi'it, loc. cit.). [The Ra'avad's interpretation is paralleled by Rabbenu Shimshon's understanding of that mishnah.] The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer different explanations that reinforce the Rambam's understanding.
It is permitted to bring stones carried on one's shoulder - i.e., two or three are carried on one's shoulder at a time - from any place, whether from a colleague's field or from one's own field. Similarly, a contractor32A person who had hired the field. See Halachah 8. may bring stones, even small ones, from any place whether from the field he hired33Even though he hired the field, it is not his own and we do not suspect that he will transgress to improve it. The Ra'avad understands Sh'vi'it 3:9, the Rambam's source differently, seeing it as interrelated to the concepts mentioned in the previous halachah. or from a field that he did not hire.
[The following laws apply when there is] an open space [in a wall separating one's property from the public domain] that was filled with earth.34I.e., rather than being rebuilt with stone. If its [stones] do not create an obstacle block for people in the public domain, it is forbidden to rebuild it.35For an onlooker will think that the person is rebuilding it for the purpose of improving his field and enabling him to sow it the following year. See the explanations in the notes to the following halachah. If they create a stumbling block for people36For an observer will understand that he is rebuilding it to remove an obstacle for people at large. (Alternatively, when there are obstacles for people at large, we do not enforce restrictions instituted only because of the possibility that an observer will derive a mistaken impression.) or it was not filled with earth, but instead open to the public domain,37In this situation, by closing it, he is creating a divider between his field and the public domain. it is permitted to rebuild it.38The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that since there is a gap in the fence separating his field from the public domain, he is allowed to rebuild it in all instances. The Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh note that the Jerusalem Talmud (the conclusion of ch. 3 of Sh'vi'it ) supports the Rambam's position.
It is forbidden for a person to build a wall between his field and his colleague's field in the Sabbatical year. He may, however, build a wall between his field and the public domain.39Building a wall between one's own field and a colleague's is prohibited lest an onlooker think that one is preparing the land in order to sow one's field. Alternatively, we fear that the person may change his mind and sow the land (Radbaz). A person is, however, permitted to build a wall between his own field and the public domain to set off his property from the public domain. Alternatively, it is not common to sow the land next to the public domain, so there is no need for the above suspicions.In the previous halachah, repairing a wall between one's field and the public domain is prohibited when the open space is filled with earth. Here, since it is entirely open, a wall may be built, as in the latter clause of that halachah. [When he builds the wall,] he is permitted to dig deeply until he reaches a stone.40Since he digs until a stone, but does not remove the stone, it is clear that his intent is not to improve his field, for one cannot sow on a stone. He may remove the earth and gather it in his field41But not in the public domain. See Sh'vi'it 3:10. in the same manner as waste is gathered.42See Halachot 1-3. Similarly, if a person dug out a cistern, a trench, or a storage cavity in the Sabbatical year, he may gather the earth in the same manner as all those who dig.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
It is a halachah conveyed to Moses at Sinai1I.e., a tradition conveyed by the Oral Law, for which there is no explicit reference in the Written Law. that it is forbidden to work the land2The Rabbis debate whether this prohibition applies to work with the land alone or also to work with trees. See Halachah 9 and notes. in the last 30 days of the sixth year, just before the Sabbatical year, because one is preparing for the Sabbatical year. This concept - i.e., the prohibition [to work the land] established by tradition - applies in the era of the Temple [alone]. Our Sages [extended that prohibition], decreeing that one should not plow an orchard in the year preceding the Sabbatical year in the era of the Temple after Shavuot, nor a field of grain after Pesach. In the era where the Temple does not stand, we are permitted to perform agricultural work until Rosh HaShanah, as [permitted by] Scriptural Law.3In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 1:1), the Rambam explains that Rabban Gamliel released this prohibition after the destruction of the Temple, because he maintained that the prohibition applied only when the Temple was standing.
What is meant by an orchard?4Which is allowed to be plowed until Shavuot. Any place where there are three trees in an area large enough to sow a se'ah of grain.5I.e., 50 cubits by 50 cubits. Whether these are fruit-bearing trees or not and even when they belong to three different people, we consider them as if they were fig trees.6I.e., we estimate whether a fig tree with dimensions similar to this tree would produce 60 maneh of figs. If they were fit to produce a mass of dried figs of a weight of 60 maneh,7A maneh is one pound in contemporary measure (Shiurei Torah, p. 118). Rav Kehati (Sh'vi'it 1:2) considers it to be 400 grams, a slightly smaller measure. we may plow the entire field because of them. [This applies] provided there is sufficient distance between them that cattle can pass through together with their implements.8Our Sages determined this to be four cubits. The rationale is that if they are grouped closer together the cattle will uproot them when trying to pass. See Bava Batra 83a.
[Different laws apply] if there were less than three trees in an area fit to sow a se'ah or there were three, but [only] one was fit to produce 60 maneh or more and the other two were not fit to produce [a significant amount]9Although the one tree produced the amount required of the entire orchard, since the other trees are not fit to produce any produce at all, they are not considered significant. or there were two fit to produce even 100 maneh and one is not fit to produce [a significant amount]. We may plow only the portion of the field necessary for [these trees], i.e., [an area whose radius is the space in which could stand] a person picking figs together with his basket.
If there were between three and nine trees and they were fit to produce 60 maneh, we may plow the entire field for their sake, even though there are some trees that are not fit to produce [a significant quantity of] fruit.10The Rambam interprets this as referring to a situation where all the trees together are fit to produce 60 maneh, although some individual trees are not fit to produce a significant amount. The Ra'avad offers a different interpretation of Sh'vi'it 1:3, the Rambam's source. Rabbenu Shimshon also interprets the mishnah in that manner and the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh agree that, at first glance, their interpretation fits the wording of the mishnah more easily than the Rambam's.
When there are ten or more trees in an area fit to sow a se'ah, whether they are fit to produce [the above quantity of fruit] or not, we may plow the entire area for their sake [until Shavuot].11For even if they are not fit to produce fruit, such a large amount of trees is significant. If there were ten plantings12Saplings that were recently planted [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 1:6)]. See also Halachah 7. spread out13Since they are saplings, they do not derive nurture from as wide an area as mature trees with longer roots do. Hence unless the saplings are spread out, this leniency is not granted (Radbaz). in an area fit to sow a se'ah, we may plow the entire area for their sake until Rosh HaShanah.14More leniency is granted with regard to the saplings, because they need greater care (ibid.). This is a halachah conveyed to Moses at Sinai.
If [the plantings] were planted in a row or in a semi-circle,15Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 1:6). we may only plow what is necessary for each of their needs.16For they will not derive nurture from the entire field and it would appear that one is plowing the field for its own sake (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). If there are squash plants together with the plantings, they can be counted in the sum of ten [plantings].17In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:7), the Rambam quotes the Jerusalem Talmud which states that this applies only to a Greek squash plant which is large like a tree. The Radbaz states that the majority of the ten must be saplings.
What is meant by a planting? A sapling for as long as it is called a planting.18This is Rabbi Akiva's opinion in (Sh'vi'it 1:8). Others maintain it is given that status until three years (or seven) years have passed.
[The following rules apply when] a tree was cut off and a new tree grew from its stump. If it was cut off a handbreadth or more above the ground, it is considered as a tree. If it was cut off lower than a handbreadth, it is considered as a planting.19In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam states that this view is accepted, because it is supported by a Tosefta. The commentaries have questioned which Tosefta the Rambam is referring to.The Rambam's ruling has also attracted attention, because it appears to contradict his ruling in Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 10:13 which states: "When a tree was cut down from above the earth and [a new tree grew from its roots], the prohibition of orlah applies." The implication there is that as long as the stump of the tree is above the earth, the laws of orlah do not apply. Only when it is cut down from below the earth is it considered like a new tree. Here, by contrast, even a handbreadth above the ground is considered as an existing tree.The rationale for the distinction can be explained as follows: In this context, we follow the figures of speech employed by people at large. As long as the stump is within a handbreadth of the ground, people will consider any new growth as a new entity. When, by contrast, the stump is more than a handbreadth, it is significant and any new growth is considered as an extension of the existing plant (Rav Yosef Korcus).
All of the above applies in the era of the Temple, as we stated.20Halachah 1. In the present era, by contrast, we are permitted to work the land until Rosh HaShanah. [Moreover,] even in the era of the Temple, it is permitted to remove stones from fields and fertilize them21These and the following activities are forbidden in the Sabbitical year itself only by virtue of Rabbinic decree. Our Sages were not overly stringent and did not enforce these prohibitions in the months preceding the Sabbatical year. and to hoe22For hoeing is not plowing. in zucchini and squash gardens23Our translation for these and the following terms are derived from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:1-5). Many of the activities mentioned were described in Chapter 1, Halachah 5, and notes.The Tosafot Yom Tov (Sh'vi'it 2:2) explains that this leniency was granted in gardens where these plants grow and not in fields at large, because in the instance of these plants, the hoeing benefits the plants directly and not merely the field. and in parched land until Rosh HaShanah. Similarly, one may fertilize saplings,24The first clause dealt with work with the land that is permitted in the latter months of the sixth year. This clause mentions work with trees. From this halachah it appears that the prohibition conveyed as a halachah to Moses at Sinai mentioned in Halachah 1 does not apply to work with trees. remove dried leaves and branches from them, apply dust to them, smoke under them, rip off stalks, trim their far-spreading branches, and apply foul-smelling matter to them. We may wrap their branches, trim them, make shelters around them,25To protect them from rain or sun. place water upon them, apply oil to the unripened fruit and perforate them. All of these tasks are permitted in the year preceding the Sabbatical year until Rosh HaShanah of the Sabbatical year even in the era of the Temple.
When unripened fruit from the sixth year enter the Sabbatical year or such fruit from the Sabbatical year enter the eighth year, we may not26Note Rav Kappach's edition of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:5) which states that the text of that source also reflects this ruling. (He maintains that there is a printing error in the standard published text of that source. According to his view, the Rambam did not reverse his opinion regarding this law as some maintain.) apply oil to them or perforate them.27Even though the fruit reaches a third of its growth before the Sabbatical year begins or does not reach that point of growth until after the the Sabbatical year ends, this restriction is still applied, because of the impression the performance of these tasks will create. In the era of the Temple, one may not build steps at the entrance to valleys in the sixth year after the rains cease, because he is preparing for the seventh year.28I.e., it might appear that the steps are being built so that a person will be able to descend and irrigate his fields in the valley in the Sabbatical year.
Even in the present age, we may not plant trees, graft trees, or extend vines29I.e., replant the head of a vine or the trunk of a tree in the ground so that it will develop new roots and another source of nurture. Thus new growths will emerge from it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:6)]. in the sixth year unless there is time for the planting to become rooted30Our translation is taken from the above source. and remain after taking root thirty days before Rosh HaShanah of the Sabbatical year. Usually, it takes two weeks [for a plant] to take root.This is forbidden at all times, because of the impression that might be created, lest an observer think that they were planted in the Sabbatical year.31Rabbi Akiva Eiger explains the basis for such a supposition. If the tree is not planted before 44 days preceding the new year, we count the beginning of its orlah years from Rosh HaShanah (Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 9:10). Thus it will be considered halachically as if the tree was planted in the Sabbatical year. Thus if a person planted, grafted, or extended [a tree or vine] in the sixth year, 44 days before Rosh HaShanah, he is allowed to maintain it. If he did so for a lesser time, he must uproot it. If he did not uproot it, however, the fruit it produces is permitted. If he dies before he uprooted it, we obligate the heir to uproot it.32I.e., the heir must also help prevent the misimpression from being created. For this reason, the leniency shown in Chapter 1, Halachah 13, is not shown here.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
All produce that grows from the earth1As opposed to fruit; see Halachah 3. in the Sabbatical year:2As indicated by Halachah 9, this refers to produce that reached the stage of growth that obligates the separation of tithes - i.e., one third of its growth - after Rosh HaShanah of the Sabbatical year. If the produce reached this stage of growth beforehand, it is permitted to be harvested in the Sabbatical year. whether it grew from seeds that fell into the earth before the Sabbatical year, it grew from roots whose plants were harvested previously, but nevertheless grew again - in both instances [such produce] is referred to with the term safiach3This term is generally translated as "aftergrowth." - or grasses and vegetables that grew on their own accord [in the Sabbatical year], is permitted to be eaten according to Scriptural Law,4There is an opinion that such produce is forbidden according to Scriptural Law, but the Rambam's view follows the opinion of Menachot 5b. as [Leviticus 25:6] states: "And [the produce that grows] while the land is resting shall be yours to eat." Even when a field was plowed thoroughly5Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 4:2, based on the Jerusalem Talmud). in the Sabbatical year, and produce grew in it, that produce is permitted to be eaten. The statement [ibid.:] "Do not reap the aftergrowth of your harvest" means that one should not reap it in the same manner as one does every year.6Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 222) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 328) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. If one reaps it according to the ordinary manner, he is worthy of lashes. For example, he harvested the entire field, set up a grain heap, and threshed it with cattle or harvested it for the sake of tilling the land as we explained.7I.e., harvesting produce will enable the land to generate better produce in the future. This apparently is the intent of Chapter 1, Halachah 1. Instead, he should reap it little by little, beat it,8To separate the grain from the chaff. and partake of it.
According to Rabbinic decree, all the sifichim are forbidden to be eaten. Why was a decree established concerning them? Because of the transgressors, so that they could not go and sow grain, beans, and garden vegetables in one's field discretely and when they grow, partake of them, saying that they are sifichim. Therefore the Sages prohibited all the sifichim that grow in the Sabbatical year.
Thus we have learned that the only produce of the Sabbatical year of which one may partake are fruit from trees9For fruit will grow from trees without any effort on man's part. and herbs that are not sown by most people,10Since they are not sown by most people, there is no reason to forbid them from being reaped in the Sabbatical year, for it is unlikely that anyone would plant them. e.g., rue, amaranth,11Both of these are fragrant herbs. Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:1). and the like. With regard to vegetables that most people sow in their gardens and species of grains and beans, by contrast, anything that grows from these species is forbidden according to Rabbinic decree. One who gathers them12The Radbaz questions the Rambam's statement, for seemingly, the Rabbinic decree was against eating, not gathering. He, however, states that from the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 9:1), it would appear that the decree also included gathering the aftergrowth. is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct.
When sifichim grow in an underdeveloped field,13In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 2:1), the Rambam defines this term as a field left desolate and untilled. a field that was plowed, a vineyard, and a field where crops had been sown,14Apparently, this refers to a field where crops had been sown in the sixth year and they reached more than a third of their growth in that year. Hence, it is permitted to harvest them in the Sabbatical year. they are permitted to be eaten.Why was the above decree not applied to these places? Because a person will not sow these fields. [He will not sow] an underdeveloped field, because no one pays attention to it. When a field has been plowed, [the owner] desires that it remain lying fallow. With regard to a vineyard, no person will cause his vineyard to become forbidden.15For that would bring about the violation of the prohibition of kilayim, mixed species in a vineyard, and cause the vineyard to become forbidden. See Hilchot Kilayim 6:1. And when a field has been sown, the aftergrowth will spoil it. Similarly, straw that grows in the Sabbatical year is permitted in all places; no decree was issued against its use.16Although it is not forbidden, it must be treated with the holiness of the Sabbatical year (Ra'avad; see Chapter 5, Halachah 19-20, 23).
When sifichin from the Sabbatical year17I.e., that attained one third of their growth in the Sabbatical year. enter the following year, they are forbidden to be eaten.18If the aftergrowth of the Sabbatical year was allowed, it is possible that transgressors would sow their fields at the end of the Sabbatical year and then say that the crops that are growing are merely an aftergrowth. We may not uproot them by hand. Instead, one should plow [the land] in its ordinary fashion or [let] an animal pasture in its ordinary fashion.19And in that way, destroy the crops. We are not concerned with the fact that they will fertilize the field or serve as food for his animals, for there is no prohibition against benefiting from the aftergrowth.
Until when are the sifichin of the Sabbatical year forbidden in the eighth year? From Rosh HaShanah until Chanukah. From Chanukah and onward, they are permitted.20For by that time, the majority of the produce will have grown in the eighth year. The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's source. The commentaries maintain that it follows the wording of the version of the Jerusalem Talmud, Demai 2:1, possessed by the Rambam. When a person sows the sifichin of the Sabbatical year after the Sabbatical year, the produce that grows from this is permitted.21The rationale is that this produce is brought about by a combination of two factors: one (the earth) which is permitted and one (the aftergrowth) which is forbidden. In such situations, the produce is permitted. See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 10:21.
When onions of the Sabbatical year enter the eighth year, they are permitted when there is enough time for produce of that size to have grown [in the eighth year].22For it is possible that these are onions of the eighth year. And if they are from the Sabbatical year, it is possible that they increased their size to the extent that the majority of their growth took place in the eighth year (Radbaz). If not, they are forbidden.23Lest one be partaking of an onion that grew in the Sabbatical year.Similar concepts apply with regard to other produce. They should not be purchased in the eighth year24From a person who is suspect of violating the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year. until produce of that size could have grown in the eighth year. When, in the eighth year, the produce which grows rapidly reaches [the size of the produce which grew in the Sabbatical year], the prohibition is lifted from the produce that remains.25Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 6:4). It is permitted to purchase garden vegetables in the eighth year immediately.26See Halachot 12-13.
When is a person permitted to purchase wild onions in the eighth year? When the new produce exceeds [the old].27The Radbaz quotes the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 5:5) as explaining that this refers to after the Pesach festival.
The first of Tishrei is Rosh HaShanah with regard to the Sabbatical and Jubilee years.28The year is considered to begin from that date. See also Chapter 10, Halachah 4. [The following rules apply with regard to] produce of the sixth year that enters the Sabbatical year. Grain, legumes, or fruit29The mention of fruit is somewhat problematic, because, as stated in Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:2, the fifteenth of Shvat is "the New Year of the Trees." The Radbaz, however, explains that there is no contradiction. Each "new year" is considered in its own context. With regard to the calculation of the cycle of the tithes and the laws of orlah, the fifteenth of Shvat is "the New Year of the Trees." With regard to the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year, by contrast, the new year begins on Rosh HaShanah.The Shelah, however, states that even with regard to the Sabbatical year, the fifteenth of Shvat is the Rosh HaShanah of the Trees and wit regard to them, the laws of the Sabbatical year begin from that date. This is the present practice in Eretz Yisrael. that reached the stage when tithes are required to be separated30I.e., one third of its growth. before Rosh HaShanah [of the Sabbatical year] are permitted [to be reaped]. Even though they are gathered in the Sabbatical year, they are considered like produce of the sixth year in all regards.31It is permitted to harvest them and partake of them without any restrictions. Nor are they endowed with the holiness of the crops of the Sabbatical year. Similar laws apply with regard to the separation of tithes (ibid.). If they did not reach the stage when tithes are required to be separated until after Rosh HaShanah, they are considered as produce of the Sabbatical year.32As explained in the following halachah.
Grain and legumes are forbidden to be eaten33And harvested. as sifichin and the fruit of trees must be eaten with consideration for the holiness of the Sabbatical year.34See Chapters 5-6.
When rice, millet, poppy seeds, sesame seeds, and Egyptian beans are sown to produce seed,35From Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:8), it appears that the intent is that his purpose is to use the kernels as seed and not to partake of them. Others, however, interpret the Rambam's Commentary as meaning that he desires to eat the seeds and not the pods. Were the person concerned with eating the pods - or even the kernels according to the first interpretation - the plants would be considered like vegetables; see Halachah 14. [the ruling depends on] when the produce completes its growth.36I.e., they are not considered like vegetables, in which the time when they are gathered determines the ruling (Halachah 12), because they are not gathered immediately after their growth is completed, but rather left growing in the earth so that they dry. Nor are they considered like grain or beans in which instance, the time when they reach one third of their growth determines the ruling (Halachah 9), because they complete their growth at different times. See also Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:8 which sets these species aside from others. If its growth is completed before Rosh HaShanah, these [seeds] are permitted [to be harvested] in the Sabbatical year like the produce of the sixth year. If their growth is completed after Rosh HaShanah, even though [the plants] took root before Rosh HaShanah, they are forbidden as sifichin.
[The ruling regarding] vegetables [depends] on the time they were harvested.37It is bound by the agricultural laws governing the year in which it was reaped (ibid.:4).With regard to an esrog, even if it was the size of a bean before Rosh HaShanah [of the Sabbatical year] and grew to the size of a loaf of bread in the Sabbatical year, it is obligated to be tithed like the produce of the sixth year.38The produce of the Sabbatical year need not be tithed. Nevertheless, as a stringency, the ruling governing an esrog is dependent on when the fruit first budded (Rosh HaShanah 15b). Hence, it is necessary to tithe such an esrog. Compare to ibid. 1:6. [Conversely,] even if it had reached the size of a loaf of bread in the sixth year, since it was reaped in the Sabbatical year, it is considered as the produce of the Sabbatical year.39And must be eaten with consideration shown for the special holiness of that year (Radbaz). As a stringency, the tithes are separated like the produce of the sixth year.
Similarly, when the produce of the Sabbatical year is reaped in the eighth year: With regard to grain, legumes, and the fruit of the trees, [the ruling depends on when the produce reached] the stage when tithes are required to be separated.40As in Halachah 9. Thus if they complete one third of their growth before the advent of the eighth year, they are considered as produce of the Sabbatical year. When rice, millet, poppy seeds, sesame seeds, and Egyptian beans are sown to produce seed, [the ruling depends on] when the produce completes its growth.41As in Halachah 11. I.e., whether in the Sabbatical year or in the eighth year. [The ruling regarding] vegetables [depends] on the time they were harvested.42As in Halachah 12. The Rambam does not mention the laws pertaining to an esrog, because since it is reaped in the eighth year, it is considered entirely as the produce of the eighth year. None of the restrictions of the Sabbatical year apply and tithes must be separated.
When one sowed Egyptian beans for seed in the sixth year and the produce was completed before Rosh HaShanah of the Sabbatical year, both its vegetables and its seed are permitted in the Sabbatical year.43Since it was sowed for seed, that intent determines the ruling, and the laws stated in Halachah 11 apply. Since as a whole, the plant is considered as the produce of the sixth year, even if part of the plant is harvested as a vegetable, we are not concerned about when it was harvested and it is still considered as produce of the sixth year. If one sowed it to use as a vegetable44The ruling is governed by that intent and the laws mentioned in Halachah 12 apply, even to the seeds. and it entered the Sabbatical year, both its vegetables and its seed are forbidden like the sifichin of the Sabbatical year. Similarly, if he sowed it both for its seed and to use as a vegetable, it is forbidden.45Because of the impression that might be created. With regard to this question, the standard published text of the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 5:5) states that the seed is permitted and the vegetable is forbidden. The Radbaz maintains that the Rambam's ruling should be interpreted in the same manner (as might be understood from the conclusion of the following halachah). The Kessef Mishneh suggests that perhaps the Rambam had a different version of the Jerusalem Talmud.
[The following rules apply if] one transgressed and sowed [such beans] in the Sabbatical year, [their growth was completed in the Sabbatical year,] but they remained [in the ground] until the eighth year: If they were sown for seed,46The ruling is determined by when the growth of the produce was completed, in this instance, the Sabbatical year. Hence, it is forbidden as are the other sifichin of that year (Halachah 5). both the seed and the vegetables are forbidden in the eighth year like other sifichin. If one sowed it to use as a vegetable, since it was harvested in the eighth year, both its vegetables and its seed are permitted.47For the ruling concerning vegetables depends on when they were harvested.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that there is no room for leniency with regard to produce that was sown in the Sabbatical year. The Radbaz justifies the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that it is based on a passage from the Jerusalem Talmud. Rav Yosef Corcus explains that even though sowing the land involves a transgression and in the Sabbatical year, the crops should be uprooted, if that did not happen, the vegetables are not forbidden. If he sowed it both for its seed and to use as a vegetable, its seed is forbidden as sifichin and its vegetables are permitted.
Since white figs48Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:1). take three years before their growth is completed, if they reach the stage when tithes are required to be separated before Rosh HaShanah of the eighth year,49As stated in Halachah 9, this is the determining factor with regard to fruit from trees. Hence they are considered as fruit of the Sabbatical year. they should be eaten in the second year of the seven year cycle according to the restrictions50I.e., in a manner which acknowledges their holiness. governing fruit of the Sabbatical year.
Onions that will not produce scallions51Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:9). The term seris means "eunuch." It is used in this instance because generally, onions produce scallions if they are left in a moist place after being uprooted from the earth. Just as a eunuch cannot produce seed, this species does not produce scallions. and Egyptian beans from which water was withheld for 30 days before Rosh HaShanah and onions that do produce scallions52Here too our translation is based on the above source. from which water was withheld for three irrigation periods53In that age, when water pumps and piping did not exist, irrigation was a much more complicated matter and plants would be irrigated at specific periods. When a farmer would like to harvest his produce, he begins withholding water from it beforehand, so that it will begin to dry. before Rosh HaShanah are considered as the produce of the sixth year.54Even if they are harvested in the Sabbatical year, for it is considered as if their growth was completed in the sixth year. If water was withheld from them for a shorter period, they are considered as sefichin from the Sabbatical year.55For it is considered as if they were still growing at the end of the sixth year.
[The following laws apply with regard to] gourd plants which were maintained [in the ground] to produce seed. If they became hard56They dried out [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:10)]. before Rosh HaShanah and thus were unfit for human consumption, it is permitted to maintain them in the Sabbatical year, for they are from the produce of the sixth year.57For they did not grow in the Sabbatical year. If not,58And thus they grew in the Sabbatical year. they are considered as sefichin from the Sabbatical year.59And they must be destroyed, for it is forbidden to take produce of the Sabbatical year and set it aside to be used for seed in future years (ibid.).Similar [laws apply with regard to] vegetables. Any ones that become hard before Rosh HaShanah are permitted to be maintained in the Sabbatical year.60For they did not grow in the Sabbatical year. If they were soft,61And thus they grew in the Sabbatical year. it is forbidden to maintain them, as [is the law regarding] sefichin.62The Tosefta, Sh'vi'it 2:11 explains that the prohibition stems from the impression that might be created. An onlooker might think that they were planted in the Sabbatical year (Kessef Mishneh).We do not require a person to uproot wild onions. Instead, we allow him to leave them in the ground as they are.63Wild onions grow in the ground for up to three years. Hence, there is no question about what an onlooker might say, for the majority of the produce will have grown at a time when it is permitted. If they grow in the eighth year, they are permitted. Similarly, we do not require him to uproot an artichoke plant.64Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Uktzin 1:6). Our text follows the version of the Mishneh Torah published by Rav Shabse Frankel. The standard printed text offers a slightly different version. Since the artichoke plant grows primarily in the ground and that portion is not visible, it need not be uprooted. All that is necessary is to cut off its leaves.65This is necessary. Because the leaves are soft and edible, we are concerned with the impression an observer might receive. If it grows again in the eighth year, it is permitted.
Wild onions [grown]66The Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:4) states that we are speaking about onions that have reached the stage that all that is necessary is to dig them out and uproot them. in the sixth year, summer onions,67Which become dried out (ibid.). and madder68A plant which produces a powerful red dye. which completed their growth before the Sabbatical year may be uprooted in the Sabbatical year with metal hatchets. This is not considered as tilling the land.69Although using the metal hatchets would overturn the earth, this is not considered as tilling the land, because one's intent is obviously to harvest the produce (Radbaz).
When, in the Sabbatical year, rain descended upon onions70We are speaking about onions that had completed their growth before the Sabbatical year, but had been left in the ground. and they sprouted leaves, the leaves are permitted as long as they are light green.71As long as the leaves are green, they are considered as if they come from the onion itself [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 6:2)]. If they have turned dark,72As the leaves grew, the onion produces roots. As the roots grow, the leaves turn dark green. it is considered as if the plants were planted in the earth and those leaves are forbidden as sefichin. In both situations, the onions themselves remain permitted.73For their growth was completed before the advent of the Sabbatical year.
When an onion was uprooted in the Sabbatical year and replanted in the eighth year and its growth exceeded its original size, the additional growth elevates the original mass74The onion becomes permitted when the majority of its mass is permitted. The new growth nullifies the forbidden matter. and the entire [onion] is permitted. [The rationale is that] since the prohibition of the Sabbatical year comes about via the earth,75I.e., growing in the earth in the Sabbatical year. it can be removed via the earth.76Increasing its size in the eighth year.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, noting that the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 6:3) appears to imply that the leniency is granted only when the leaves of the onions were bent over. Otherwise, the onions remain forbidden. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's ruling, stating that it reflects the treatment of the subject in the Babylonian Talmud (Nedarim 59b). Moreover, even the Jerusalem Talmud can be interpreted in this manner.
Fruits produced by a tree in the Sabbatical year should not be reaped in the same manner as they are reaped every year,77The prohibition does not prevent us from reaping the fruits of the trees during the Sabbatical year. On the contrary, the fruits are ownerless and are meant to be eaten by people at large, as Leviticus 11:39 states, "[The fruit produced as] the land rests shall be yours to eat." The point of the mitzvah is that one may not reap in the same manner that he usually does [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 8:6)]. as [Leviticus 25:5] states: "The grapes you had designated you shall not gather."78Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 223) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 329) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. One who reaps grapes to improve the vine or in the ordinary manner of reaping is liable for lashes.
How should one conduct himself?79I.e., what changes should be made to the usual manner of reaping. Figs of the Sabbatical year should not be set out to dry in the place where they are usually set out to dry. They can, however, be left to dry in a ruin.80Our translation of this halachah is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 8:6). We may not crush grapes81To produce wine. in a vat, but they may be crushed in a kneading trough. Olives should not be crushed82To extract their oil. in a press, but they may be squeezed and placed in a very small press. One may grind them83After olives were pressed once and the higher quality of oil extracted, the olives would be ground and pressed again to produce more oil. Compare to Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 7:8. in the oil press and place them in a small press. Similarly, with regard to other matters, [the fundamental rule is]: One should deviate from the norm in whatever way possible.
It is a positive commandment84Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 134) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 84) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.The Rambam's wording implies that the commandment is incumbent on the person; he must consider his property ownerless. Other commentaries note that Bava Metzia 39a speaks of "the land being declared ownerless by the King," i.e., that automatically, the person's right to his produce is removed from him by Divine order. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XVII, p. 287ff., which clarifies the difference between these perspectives. to divest oneself from everything that the land produces in the Sabbatical year, as [Exodus 23:11] states: "In the seventh [year], you shall leave it untended and unharvested."Anyone who locks his vineyard or fences off his field in the Sabbatical year has nullified a positive commandment.85The Kessef Mishneh quotes the Mechilta which explains that according to Scriptural Law, it would appear that one should rip down the fences around his fields. Our Sages did not require that. They did, however, forbid erecting new fences. This also holds true if he gathered all his produce into his home. Instead, he should leave everything ownerless. Thus everyone86The rich as well as the poor. has equal rights in every place, as [ibid.] states: "And the poor of your people shall partake of it." One may bring a small amount into one's home, just as one brings from ownerless property,87I.e., although the owner of the land does not have greater privileges than others, he does not have lesser privileges either and may take some of the produce. e.g., five jugs of oil, fifteen jugs of wine.88For this is an ordinary amount which a person would store for immediate use. To set aside produce for long term storage is forbidden in the Sabbatical year. If he takes more than that, it is permitted.89For ultimately, he has not treated the field as his own, but has left it ownerless.
[The laws of] the Sabbatical year are observed only in Eretz Yisrael alone, as [Leviticus 25:2] states: "When you will come to the land...."90Implying that these mitzvot are observed only in that land. It is observed while the Temple is standing and when the Temple is not standing.91For this reason, the laws of the Sabbatical year were observed even before the Temple was constructed (Radbaz).Although the laws of the Sabbatical year are not dependent on whether or not the Temple is standing, they are dependent on the presence of the majority of the Jewish people in Eretz Yisrael, as stated in Chapter 10, Halachah 9. As stated in Halachah 8 of that chapter, after the exile of the tribe of Reuven and Gad, slightly more than a hundred years before the destruction of the First Temple, this criterion was not met and the Sabbatical year and many other mitzvot are observed only because of Rabbinic decree.(As will be explained in the notes to that source, there is some difference of the opinion concerning both the actual ruling and the Rambam's stance on that issue.)
In the entire area taken possession of by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia until Kziv,92As the Rambam explains in Hilchot Terumah, ch. 1, and Hilchot Beis HaBechirah, ch. 6, when the Jews conquered Eretz Yisrael after the exodus from Egypt, the land became holy and all the agricultural laws incumbent on it took effect. After the exile of the tribes of Reuven and Gad, these laws no longer applied according to Scriptural Law. When Ezra led the people back from the Babylonian exile, he sanctified the land a second time according to Rabbinic decree. At this time, however, the people settled in a much smaller area than they had originally lived. Kziv was the northern boundary of that area and is considered outside the area. See the maps accompanying Hilchot Terumah, loc. cit. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 6:1). it is forbidden to work the land and the sifichin that grow there are forbidden to be eaten. In the entire area that was taken possession of only by the Jews that ascended from Egypt, i.e., from Kziv to the River [of Egypt]93According to the Radbaz (Hilchot Terumah 1:9), this refers to Wadi el Arish and not the Nile. There are, however, other sources which identify "the River of Egypt" as the Nile. and to the Umanum Mountains,94A mountain range in Northern Lebanon. This represents the boundaries of the land conquered by the Jews after the Exodus from Egypt. As the Rambam explains, our Sages imposed certain restrictions on this land as well. even though it is forbidden to till [the land] in the Sabbatical year, the sifichin that grow there are permitted to be eaten. From the River [of Egypt] and from the Umanum Mountains [onward], one may till [the land] in the Sabbatical year.95This area is considered as part of the Diaspora and none of the agricultural laws relating to Eretz Yisrael apply there. The Umanum Mountains themselves are part of the Diaspora.
Although the Sabbatical year is not observed in Syria96"The lands which [King] David conquered outside of the Land of Canaan, e.g., Aram Naharaim, Aram Tzovah, Achlab [which are located slightly north of Eretz Yisrael]... before he conquered Eretz Yisrael entirely." See Hilchot Terumah 1:3 and the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 6:11). according to Scriptural Law, [our Sages] decreed that it would be forbidden to till it in the Sabbatical year like Eretz Yisrael, so that [the Jewish people] would not abandon Eretz Yisrael and go and settle permanently there. In Ammon, Moab,97Countries to the southeast of Eretz Yisrael. Egypt, and Babylonia, by contrast, though the tithes must be separated according to Rabbinic Law,98See Hilchot Terumah 1:6. the Sabbatical year is not observed.
The Sabbatical year is observed in Transjordan by Rabbinic decree.99Transjordan refers to the area extending outward from the eastern bank of the Jordan. The tribes of Reuven, Gad, and half the tribe of Menasheh settled there. Rav Yosef Corcus maintains that according to Scriptural Law, the Sabbatical year never had to be observed there (see Sifra, the beginning of Behar), because it is not part of Eretz Yisrael in certain contexts. Others maintain that according to Scriptural Law, in the era of the First Temple, the Sabbatical year was to be observed there. All agree that our Sages required its partial observance. The sifichin of Syria and Transjordan are permitted to be eaten.100The Radbaz explains that this applies even if the Jews returning from Babylon had settled in a portion of this territory, the sificihin are not forbidden. [The restrictions in] these lands need not be more stringent than those in [the portions of] Eretz Yisrael that were inhabited by the people ascending from Egypt.
When a gentile purchases land in Eretz Yisrael and sows it in the Sabbatical year, the produce is permitted.101I.e., we are allowed to purchase this produce and partake of it. This applies even in the portion of the land where the Sabbatical year is observed according to Rabbinic decree.The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh refer to the Kaftor VePerach who states that seemingly, although produce grown by a gentile in Eretz Yisrael in the Sabbatical year is permitted, it would have to eaten with respect to its holiness, as described in the following chapter. For as the Rambam states in Hilchot Terumah 1:10: "When a gentile purchases land in Eretz Yisrael, he does not cause it to be absolved from [the observance of] the mitzvot. Instead, its holiness is still intact." Thus although there is no reason to forbid one from partaking of the produce grown by a gentile, seemingly, it should be considered "holy."They note that in their time this was not the common practice, (nor is it the practice in Eretz Yisrael today). They justify this conduct on the grounds that, according to certain views (see Chapter 10, Halachah 9, where this subject is discussed) that in the present era, the observance of the Sabbatical year is a Rabbinic ordinance (and not of Scriptural authority). And our Sages did not impose any restrictions on produce grown by gentiles. For our Sages decreed that sifichin should be forbidden only as a safeguard against transgressors and the gentiles are not commanded to observe the Sabbatical year. Thus there is no need to institute a safeguard for them.
In the cities of Eretz Yisrael that are close to the border, we appoint a trustworthy watchman so that the gentiles will not spread [through the land] and take the produce of the Sabbatical year.102In addition to the material motive involved, there is a ritual dimension to this restriction. We are forbidden to allow a gentile to partake of the produce of the Sabbatical year (Chapter 5, Halachah 13). The Radbaz questions if watchmen should be appointed to guard the fields of Jews in Eretz Yisrael that are not located on the border, but are near areas where gentiles are located and there is a possibility that they will take the produce that is left ownerless.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
The produce of the Sabbatical year is designated for the sake of eating, drinking,1Drinking is considered as eating (Yoma 76b). smearing oneself [with oil],2See Hilchot Sh'vitat Esor 1:4-5; Hilchot Terumot 11:1, Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 3:10 which equate smearing oneself with oil and drinking. kindling lamps, and dyeing. According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that the word tihiyeh3Leviticus 25:7 states: "And for the animal and the beast in your land shall (tihiyeh) be all the produce to eat." The Sifra derives the above concept from this verse. implies that it may be used even for kindling lamps, and dyeing.4For these activities also bring direct benefit to man.
What is meant by [the license to use the produce of the Sabbatical year] for eating and drinking? One should eat those foods that are normally eaten and drink the beverages that are normally drunken, as is the law with regard to terumah and the second tithe.5See Hilchot Terumah, ch. 11, and Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni, ch. 3, for more particulars concerning these laws.
He should not change the natural function of produce as he does not with regard to terumah and the second tithe, i.e., something that is normally eaten raw should not be eaten cooked. Something that is normally eaten cooked should not be eaten raw. For this reason, animal fodder6Which is usually eaten raw. should not be cooked, nor should one press himself to eat a cooked dish that has spoiled or bread that has become moldy, as he does not eat such foods that are terumah or the second tithe.7See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 3:11 which states: "We do not require a person to eat bread that has become moldy or oil that has become rancid. Instead, as soon as it has become spoiled to the point that it is not fit for human consumption, its holiness has departed from it."
We do not cook vegetables from the Sabbatical year in oil that is terumah lest it disqualify it.8In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 8:7), the Rambam describes this concept as follows: When terumah becomes ritually impure, it is disqualified and forbidden to be eaten. Now if the oil becomes ritually impure, it will disqualify the vegetable that was cooked in it and require that it be destroyed. Thus one will have caused the produce of the Sabbatical year to be destroyed unnecessarily. If one cooked a little and ate it immediately, it is permitted,9The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam's wording should not be interpreted as implying that only after the fact, once one has cooked the vegetable in the oil, one may partake of it. Instead, this is permitted at the outset. because he did not leave it aside so that it become disqualified.
Produce that is set aside for human consumption should not be fed to domesticated animals, beasts, and fowl. If an animal went under a fig tree under its own initiative and began eating the fruit, we do not require [the owner] to bring it back, for [Leviticus 25:7] states: "And for the animal and the beast in your land shall be all the produce to eat."10Implying that the produce of the Sabbatical year may be eaten by animals.
What is meant by [the license to] smear oneself [with produce from the Sabbatical year]? One may smear oneself with produce with which it is common to smear oneself. He should not smear wine or vinegar, but he may smear oil.11Even though oil is primarily used as food, it is also common to smear it on one's flesh (Radbaz). Wine or vinegar, by contrast, are generally not applied as ointments. See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni, loc. cit. We do not place fragrant herbs in oil,12Because doing so removes it from the category of food and makes it oil for smearing (Hilchot Terumah 11:3). nor should one apply oil in a bathhouse.13For applying oil that is holy in a place where people are unclothed is an act of disrespect. He may, however, apply oil outside and then enter.14Since the oil is already absorbed in one's skin.
Oil from the Sabbatical year should not be used to seal an oven or a range,15For this will be using it for a purpose other than a person's direct physical benefit. nor should it be applied to a shoe or a sandal.16This strengthens the sandal, but does not provide a person with direct physical benefit. One should not apply [such oil] with impure hands.17The intent is not necessarily impure hands, but any hands that one has not watched carefully to make sure that they are pure. For if one touches oil with such hands, it becomes impure by Rabbinic decree (Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTuma'ah 8:8-10). Making the oil impure would reduce the number of people who could partake of it. Hence, it is improper to do so. If the oil fell on his flesh, he may rub it in with impure hands.18For once the oil has been applied to one's flesh, there is no difficulty in it becoming impure, because its sacred quality is divested. See parallels in Hilchot Terumah 11:7. One should not apply [such] oil to his foot while it is in a shoe,19Because the oil will be applied to the shoe directly. He may, however, smear [such oil] on his foot and put on a shoe or smear his entire body and then roll on a new [leather] mat.20Even though the oil will be applied indirectly to the shoe or the mat, that does not present a difficulty, because as above, once it has been applied to his flesh, its sacred quality is divested.
What is meant by [the license to] kindle a lamp [with produce from the Sabbatical year]? One may kindle a lamp with oil from the Sabbatical year itself. If one sold [oil from the Sabbatical year] and used the proceeds21As stated in Halachah 12, it is permitted to sell produce of the Sabbatical year that is fit for human consumption and use the proceeds to purchase other food. One may not, however, use such proceeds for other purposes even though they benefit man. to purchase other oil or exchanged [oil from the Sabbatical year] for other oil,22In which instance, the oil for which the oil from the Sabbatical year was exchanged receives the status of produce of the Sabbatical year (see Chapter 6, Halachot 6-7). they are both forbidden to be used for kindling, for we may not use money received in return for the produce of the Sabbatical year for kindling.23One may use oil from the Sabbatical year for kindling, because this is a function for which that produce is ordinarily used. Nevertheless, oil is considered primarily as food fit for human consumption. Hence, the proceeds from its sale or exchange may be used for that purpose alone.One should not place oil directly into a fire.24It is not common practice to pour oil into a fire. Hence, although license is given to kindle with oil, one may do so only in the ordinary manner. Instead, one should light it in a lamp.25For this is the ordinary practice.
What is meant by [the license to use produce from the Sabbatical year] for dyeing? Produce which is ordinarily used as dye even though it is also used as food for people may be used as dye for man's sake.26As the continuation of the Rambam's words imply, the dye is then considered as imbued with the holiness of the Sabbatical year. We may not, however, use the produce of the Sabbatical year - even animal fodder - as dye for the sake of an animal. For the holiness of the Sabbatical year does not rest on dye for animals.
The holiness of the Sabbatical year falls on [natural] detergents - e.g., borit and ehel,27Two plants with natural alcalic properties that make them fit for use as detergents. - and we may launder with them,28For this is their primary use. as [Leviticus 25:6] states: "And [the produce that grows] while the land is resting shall be yours," i.e., for all your needs. Nevertheless, the fruit of the Sabbatical year should not be used as a detergent,29Since fruit is primarily used as food, it is improper to use it for any other purpose. nor should it be used to produce a compress,30In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 8:1), the Rambam explains the derivation of the word milugma. It is a composite of the words molei lugma, meaning "cheekful." It was common to chew kernels of wheat, figs, or other produce, and then place them on wounds. Since the primary use of such produce is food, it cannot be used for these purposes. for [the above verse] states: "...shall be yours to eat,"31The explanation is dependent on the principle stated in the following halachah. i.e., and not for a compress, nor to sprinkle,32Liquids were occasionally sprinkled over wounds to induce clotting. induce regurgitation, soak flax, or use as a detergent.
A great principle was stated with regard to the produce of the Sabbatical year: Whatever is distinguished as being for human consumption, e.g., wheat, figs, grapes, and the like, should not be used as a compress or a bandage, even for a person, as implied by the phrase: "yours to eat," i.e., whatever is distinguished as being for you, should be used as food33And for no other purpose, even if it is beneficial to man. and not for medicinal purposes. Anything that is not distinguished as being for human consumption, e.g., soft thorns and brambles, may be used as a compress for a person, but not for an animal.34I.e., it may be used for a purpose that brings man benefit.If it is not distinguished as being for either of the above purposes - e.g., za'ater, oregano,35Our translation is based on Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). Others render it as "hyssop." and thyme,36In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that these are herbs that are used both as spices and for medicinal purposes. [the ruling depends] on the person's intent. If he thought to use it as kindling wood, it is considered as kindling wood.37And the holiness of the Sabbatical year does not rest upon it. If he intended that it be used as food [for humans], it is considered as produce.38And is infused with that holiness.If it is distinguished as being for both of the above purposes, we treat it with both the stringencies incumbent on food for humans - and compresses are not made with it - and those incumbent on animal fodder - that they may not be cooked.39This represents a change in the Rambam's thinking from his initial version of his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.) in which he states that the stringency involved with animal fodder is that it can only be eaten during the time the produce is available in the field. In the final version of the Commentary to the Mishnah, he adopts the position stated here that is based on the Jerusalem Talmud.
It is permitted to sell food for humans and animal fodder and use the proceeds to purchase food for humans. We may not, however, sell animal fodder to purchase other animal fodder.40As stated in the notes to Halachah 8, when the produce from the Sabbatical year is sold, the proceeds from the sale may be used only for the purchase of food for humans. Needless to say, we may not sell food for humans to purchase animal fodder. If [animal fodder] was purchased with [such produce] or food for humans was exchanged for animal fodder, [the animal fodder] is considered like food for humans and it may not be used to make a compress for a person.
The produce of the Sabbatical year may not be transported from Eretz Yisrael to the Diaspora, not even to Syria.41This is a decree imposed so that there will not be a dearth of produce in Eretz Yisrael. See Chapter 7, Halachah 12, which states what should be done if such produce is brought to the Diaspora. It cannot be fed to a gentile,42This is derived from Leviticus 25:6 which states that the produce of the Sabbatical year "shall be yours to eat." Implied is that it is for "you" and not for gentiles. nor to a hired worker.43This is referring to a worker hired only for a day(s). Since he is hired for only a short time, it appears as if the person is paying his debt with the produce of the Sabbatical year which is forbidden, see Chapter 6, Halachah 11. If he was hired for an entire week, an entire year, or an entire month or an agreement regarding his food was established, he is considered as a member of one's household and he may be fed [the produce of the Sabbatical year]. We may feed a guest44Rav Yosef Corcus states that this and the above clause even refer to a gentile guest or worker. the produce of the Sabbatical year.45This is not considered as paying a debt.
The court does not allot produce of the Sabbatical year to a woman,46This halachah is referring to a woman whose husband traveled to a distant place without leaving his wife adequate support. If she approaches the court, the court expropriates property belonging to her husband and sells it to provide for her support. See Hilchot Ishut 12:16. because this is considered as paying a debt with the produce of the Sabbatical year.47For the husband is liable for her support. She may, however, take her livelihood from [produce of the Sabbatical year] in her husband's possession.48Since she has access to the household provisions, it is not considered as if someone is paying the debt to her (Rav Yosef Corcus).
We do not harvest the produce of the Sabbatical year when it is not yet ripe.49I.e., before it reaches one third of its growth. Until that point, they are unfit to be eaten [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 4:7)]. [This is derived from Leviticus 25:12 which states:] "And you shall partake of its produce," [implying that the fruits] may not be eaten until they are considered as produce.50I.e., until they have ripened. One may, however, partake of a small amount of them in the field while they are underdeveloped, as one partakes [of such produce] in other years.51For it is also common practice to taste a small amount of fruit in the field even in its very early stages of ripening (ibid.). One should not bring the produce into one's home until it reaches the stage when the obligation to separate tithes takes effect.52I.e., until the produce reaches one third of its development (Hilchot Ma'aserot 2:3). That would reflect a further stage of development.
From when is it permitted to partake of the fruit of trees in the field in the Sabbatical year? With regard to underdeveloped figs, when their surface will become shiny,53At that time, their surface becomes smooth and there is a certain amount of sap inside them [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 4:7)]. At this stage of development, it is ordinary practice for a person in the field to taste a small amount of the fruit. he may eat his bread with them in the field. The same applies in all analogous situations With regard to underdeveloped grapes,54Our translation of the terms in this clause is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 4:8). when sap flows in them, they may be eaten in the fields. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.With regard to olives, when a se'ah of olives would produce a revi'it of a log55A revi'it of a log is 86 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 150 cc according to Chazon Ish. of oil, one may break them open56This is the ordinary way in which olives are eaten [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 4:9)], for there is a bitter liquid beneath this covering. and eat them in the fields.57At this stage of development, the amount of oil produced is not significant enough for one to smear himself with it. [If such an amount of olives] would produce half a log [of oil], one may crush them and smear oneself in the field. [If they reach the stage where they] produce one third [of the amount they ordinarily produce], it is permitted to bring them to his home, because they have reached a third of their growth.
It is permitted to cut down trees for their wood in the Sabbatical year, before they produce fruit. Once they have begun to produce fruit, however, they should not be cut down, for doing so spoils [the fruit], and [the fruit of the Sabbatical year is granted] "to eat,"58Leviticus 25:6. As stated in Halachah 10, this phrase is also an exclusion, preventing the use of the produce for other purposes. and not to spoil.59In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 4:10), the Rambam writes that cutting the trees down at this stage of the fruits' development is forbidden, because it is tantamount to theft. For the fruit was granted to people at large and by cutting down the tree, other people are prevented from harvesting it. If it produced fruit and they reached the stage at which an obligation to separate tithes exists, it is permitted to cut them down, for it has already produced its fruit and the laws of the Sabbatical year no longer apply to it.60It was permitted to harvest the fruit from this stage of development. Since people already had the opportunity of harvesting it and failed to do so, it is not forbidden to destroy the tree.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam clarifies that we are speaking about a situation where the tree does not produce a large amount of produce and hence, it is permitted to cut it down and use it for wood. Otherwise, it is forbidden to cut down a fruit tree. See Hilchot Melachim 6:8-9.
From when is it forbidden to cut down a tree in the Sabbatical year?61I.e., when does the initial stage of development mentioned in the previous halachah begin for various types of fruit. For carobs, when a chain of carobs will be formed.62The interpretation of this clause offered by standard published text of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.) is somewhat confusing. See Rav Kappach's translation. It is the source for our translation of the following clauses. For grapes, when the fruit produces seeds. For olives, when they bud. For all other fruit trees, when they produce underdeveloped fruit.It is forbidden to cut off underdeveloped clusters of dates63Our translation is dependent on the gloss of the Radbaz and Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:9). in the Sabbatical year, because one is spoiling the fruit. If these clusters will not produce dates, merely buds, it is permitted to cut off those clusters.64The Radbaz explains that this is referring to a species of dates that never produces edible fruit, but the clusters themselves are eaten like hearts of palms.
We may not use hay and straw of the Sabbatical year for kindling,65The Kessef Mishneh explains that this license is derived through a process of deduction. Shivi'it 9:7 states that the hay and straw of the Sabbatical year may not be used for kindling until the second rain of the eighth year descends. Thus one can obviously conclude that it was forbidden to use them previously. because it is fit for animal fodder.66Hence it should be used for that purpose; see Halachah 3. We may, however, use the wastes of olives and grapes of the Sabbatical year for fuel.67For they are not useful for any other purposes.
When a bathhouse has been heated with hay and straw of the Sabbatical year, it is permitted to bathe there68Seemingly, this halachah contradicts the preceding one. Since it is forbidden to use hay and straw from the Sabbatical year for kindling, one would think that it is forbidden to bathe in water heated through such a fire. Why then is bathing in such a bathhouse permitted?The Kessef Mishneh first states that license to use the bathhouse is only granted after the fact. At the outset, one should not use such hay and straw for this purpose. Alternatively, he explains - as does the Radbaz - that there is no difficulty in using such hay and straw for this purpose, for just as animal fodder of the Sabbatical year can be used to make a compress for a person (Halachah 11), it can be used to heat a bath for him. [even] when payment is required.69The Kessef Mishneh offers this interpretation, resolving the question posed by the Ra'avad who had objected to granting license to use such hay and straw when payment is taken, for that resembles selling the produce of the Sabbatical year as merchandise which is forbidden (Chapter 6, Halachah 1). The Kessef Mishneh explains that the prohibition against selling the produce of the Sabbatical year involves only selling food. An important person, however, is forbidden to do so, lest they also mix other [herbs]70That are fit to be eaten [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 8:11)]. into the kindling for him, so that it will produce a fragrant scent.71The Rambam is explaining the rationale for the restriction stated in the above mishnah. Others maintain that the rationale is that an important person should not rely on the leniency and, instead, should be stringent not to derive even such benefit from the produce of the Sabbatical year. Thus they will destroy the produce of the Sabbatical year.72Instead of using them as food.
The holiness of the produce of the Sabbatical year does not fall on the types of shells and seeds that are permitted to non-priests with regard to terumah.73See Hilchot Terumah 11:10-11. The Radbaz explains that this can be derived from a logical inference. If leniency was granted with regard to terumah which is punishable by death, surely, it should be granted with regard to the Sabbatical year, for its prohibitions are not punishable as severely. Instead, they are considered like wood, unless they are fit for dyeing.74In which instance the holiness of the Sabbatical year falls upon them, as stated in Halachah 9. The holiness of the Sabbatical year falls on the hearts of palms.75For there are many who eat this type of produce as food, while it is soft. See Hilchot Berachot 8:6. Needless to say, if it hardens to the point it is no longer edible, it is considered as mere wood (Radbaz).
[The following rules apply when a person] places spices from the Sabbatical year in a wrapping and inserts them into cooked food. If their flavor is nullified,76Since the spices were placed in a wrapping, they could be removed from the food after it was cooked. Their status depends on whether their flavor is retained or not. they are permitted.77The holiness of the Sabbatical year does not rest upon them, for they no longer are considered as food. If they retain their flavor, the holiness of the Sabbatical year is still invested in them.
Straw and hay from the Sabbatical year should not be placed in a pillow or in mud.78I.e., to use the mud for building. Since the straw and hay are fit for use as animal fodder, it is improper to use them for purposes that do not bring direct benefit to man or animals. If one did place them there, they are considered as if they have been destroyed.79Because they are no longer suitable for use as animal fodder. The Ra'avad [based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Shivi'it 9:7)] states that one must actually sleep on the pillow, for the status of the straw to change. The commentaries note, however, that the Tosefta (Shivi'it 5:11) does not make such a qualification. When an oven has been heated with straw and hay from the Sabbatical year, it should be allowed to cool.80I.e., one should not cook in it while it is hot, so as not to benefit from the kindling of the produce of the Sabbatical year. The license granted in Halachah 20 is not appropriate here, because in this instance, the person is not receiving direct benefit from the burning of the straw (Radbaz).Once the second wave of rains81In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 8:1), the Rambam explains that, in Eretz Yisrael, there is one wave of rain at the end of the summer. Afterwards at the beginning of the winter - i.e., depending on the year, between the seventeenth of Cheshvan and the first of Kislev, there is a second wave of rains which are very important for the success of the crops of that land. descend in the eighth year, we are allowed to benefit from straw and hay of the Sabbatical year and use it for kindling.82The Jerusalem Talmud (Shivi'it 9:7) explains that from the time the rain descends, the straw in the field is no longer fit for an animal to eat. Therefore, there is no longer any restriction on using the straw in one's home.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
We may not use the produce of the Sabbatical year for commercial activity.1Avodah Zarah 62a derives this insight from the exegesis of Leviticus 25:6. The fact that the Rambam does not mention that prooftext here has raised a question among the commentaries: Does he consider the prohibition against using the produce of the Sabbatical year as merchandise as Scriptural or Rabbinic in origin? If one desires to sell a small amount2Enough for three meals (Kessef Mishneh). of the produce of the Sabbatical year, he may.3For selling a small amount is not considered as using the produce as merchandise. The money he receives [in return] has the same status as the produce of the Sabbatical year. He should use it to purchase food4For humans (see Chapter 5, Halachah 12). and eat that food according to the restrictions of the holiness of the Sabbatical year.5Sukkah 40b derives this from the exegesis of Leviticus 25:12: "It shall be holy for you." Just as the sanctity of articles that are "holy," consecrated to the Temple, is transferred to the money received for them, so too, the holiness of the produce of the Sabbatical year is transferred to the money received for it. The produce that was sold retains the holiness it possessed previously.6See Halachot 6-7.
[In the Sabbatical year,] one should not reap vegetables from a field7These refer to vegetables that grow under the circumstances described in Chapter 4, Halachah 4, or the like. Otherwise, the vegetables would be forbidden as sifichin. See the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh to Halachah 12. and sell them, nor should one charge a fee for dyeing with shells [from produce] of the Sabbatical year, because this is using the produce of the Sabbatical year for commercial activity.8This is forbidden even if one intends to use the proceeds to purchase food which he will eat according to the requirements of the holiness of the Sabbatical year [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 7:3)]. If one reaped vegetables to partake of them and some were left over, he may sell the remainder.9For it is obvious that he gathered the vegetables for his own personal use. The proceeds are considered as the produce of the Sabbatical year. Similarly, if a person reaped vegetables for himself and his son or grandson took some of them and sold them, [the sale] is permitted10Since the person who reaped the produce was not the one who sold it, there is no prohibition involved (Radbaz). and the proceeds are considered as the produce of the Sabbatical year.
When the produce of the Sabbatical year is sold, it should not be sold by measure, nor by weight, nor by number, so that it will not appear that one is selling produce in the Sabbatical year. Instead, one should sell a small amount by estimation to make it known that [the produce] is ownerless.11The Radbaz states that one should also sell the produce at a lower price than usual. And the proceeds of the sale should be used to purchase other food.
One may package those entities that are usually packaged to bring home to sell in the market by estimation in the manner that one packages produce to bring home,12When a person packages produce to take home from his field, he is not precise with regard to the amount he takes. not like one packages it for the market13When a person packages produce to sell in the marketplace, he is careful to package an exact amount, so that the sale will be honest.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that as long as the type of produce is packaged to bring home, it can be packaged for sale. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's interpretation, explaining that when produce is packaged for sale, it is possible for an onlooker to appreciate that this is the intent from the way that it is packaged. so that one will not sell in a constrained manner. Produce that is packaged only for the marketplace should not be packaged.
Produce from the Diaspora which were brought into Eretz Yisrael should not be sold by measure, nor by weight, nor by number. Instead, they should be sold by estimation like the produce of Eretz Yisrael.14For an onlooker will not understand that the produce is from the Diaspora and will think that the produce of the Sabbatical year is being sold in an ordinary manner. If it was obvious that it was produce from the Diaspora, it is permitted [to sell it in the ordinary manner].
There is a stringency that applies to the produce of the Sabbatical year and not to articles consecrated [to the Temple]. When one redeems consecrated articles, the consecrated article loses its sacred status and that status is conveyed to the money.15See Hilchot Arachin 6:4. This is not so with regard to the produce of the Sabbatical year. When one sells the produce of the Sabbatical year, the status of the produce is conveyed to the money.16And it must be used to purchase food which will be eaten with the stringencies befitting the holiness of the produce of the Sabbatical year. The produce itself, however, does not lose its status and it is not considered as produce of the other years. [This is derived from] the use of the word tihiyeh17Leviticus 25:12. See the Sifra to this verse. [in the command regarding the produce of the Sabbatical year. That term implies that the produce] will be in its state at all times. And since the produce of the Sabbatical year is described18Leviticus 25:12. See the Sifra to this verse. as "holy," its status is conveyed to the money paid for it.19As is true with regard to the money used to redeem consecrated objects. Thus the final [object purchased]20I.e., the food to be eaten; see the following halachah, for an explanation. receives the status of the Sabbatical year and [the status of] the produce itself remains as before.
What is implied? A person purchased meat with the produce of the Sabbatical year or the proceeds from its sale. The meat is given the status of that produce and must be eaten [as befits the holiness of] the produce of the Sabbatical year. And one must rid oneself of it when one one must rid oneself of that produce.21See Chapter 7, Halachah 1, which speaks about this subject. If one used that meat or the proceeds from its sale to purchase fish, the meat is considered as ordinary food and [the holiness of the Sabbatical year] is conveyed upon the fish. If one used that fish or the proceeds from its sale to purchase oil, the fish is considered as ordinary food and [the holiness of the Sabbatical year] is conveyed upon the oil. If one used that oil or the proceeds from its sale to purchase honey, the oil is considered as ordinary food and [the holiness of the Sabbatical year] is conveyed to the honey. One must rid oneself of the original fruit and the honey as one must rid oneself of the produce of the Sabbatical year. Neither of them may be used to make a compress, nor may they be ruined, as is the rule with regard to the produce of the Sabbatical year.
The holiness of the produce of the Sababtical year may be transferred only through a sale. When does this apply? With regard to the original produce. With regard to the produce received [in exchange for that produce], its holiness can be transferred through a sale or through a process of transfer.22I.e., one says: "The holiness of this produce is transferred to this other produce."
When one is transferring the holiness of produce that was exchanged [for produce of the Sabbatical year], one may not transfer it to a domesticated animal, fowl, or beast, that is alive,23Note the parallel to Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 4:6. There it is stated that if one makes such a transfer, it is not effective. The commentaries state that the same law applies in the present instance. lest they be left alive and one raise herds [of animals imbued with the holiness of the Sabbatical year]. Needless to say, this24That the holiness may not be transferred to a living animal. applies with the produce of the Sabbatical year itself. One may, however, transfer the holiness of this produce to animals that have been slaughtered.25For the abovementioned difficulty does not apply.
Money received for produce of the Sabbatical year may not be used to pay a debt.26This is considered similar to using it to purchase merchandise. Nor may one use it to repay shushbinut27Shushbinut refers to a custom where a person sends money to a friend as a present at the time of the friend's wedding. Afterwards, when the person himself marries, his friend is expected to send a similar sum to him as a present. The money is considered as a debt and if he fails to so, he can be sued in court. See Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah, ch. 7. or return a favor.28I.e., the person once lent him money. He may not use money received in return for the produce of the Sabbatical year to offer that person a loan (Radbaz, Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 6:17). One should not use it to pay a pledge of charity for the poor in the synagogue.29Since the person pledged money, satisfying his obligation with the produce of the Sabbatical year is comparable to using it to pay a debt. One may, however, send it for purposes associated with the acts of kindness,30I.e., providing that person with the meal of comfort at the time of bereavement (ibid.). but one must notify the recipients.31So that they treat it with the appropriate holiness and rid themselves of it when required. Also, the recipient will realize that he need not be overly grateful, for he was not given produce of full value.Similarly, it may not be used to purchase servants, landed property, or a non-kosher animal.32For as mentioned above, such money may only be used for the purchase of food. If it was used for those purposes, one should purchase ordinary food with a commensurate sum and partake of it [as befits the holiness of the Sabbatical year],33Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 8:8). as was explained with regard to the second tithes.34See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 7:17. One may not purchase pairs of doves for [the sacrifices of] zavim, zavot, or women after childbirth,35As explained in Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah, ch. 1, these individuals are required to bring pairs of doves as part of their sacrifices to emerge from impurity. or sin-offerings or guilt offerings.36In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:7), the Rambam explains that money from the second tithes - and thus by extension, money from the Sabbatical year - may not be used for these sacrifices, for they are not eaten by their owners. If he purchased [these offerings with these funds], he should purchase food with a commensurate sum and partake of it [as befits the holiness of the Sabbatical year]. One should not apply oil from the Sabbatical year to utensils or hides.37For then, he is not receiving direct physical benefit from the oil. See Chapter 5, Halachah 7. If one did so, one should purchase food with a commensurate sum and partake of it38But not use it for smearing. See Chapter 5, Halachah 12, and notes. [as befits the holiness of the Sabbatical year].
[This money] should not be given to a bathhouse attendant, a blood-letter,39Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 9:3). a person who sails a boat, or another craftsman.40For, as stated, above, they may not be used for a purpose other than food. He may, however, give them to a person who draws water from a well to provide him with drinking water.41For that is like using the money to purchase drinking water [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 8:5)]. He may not, however, give it to him to draw water for other purposes (Radbaz). It is permitted to give the produce of the Sabbatical year or money received in return for it to a craftsman as a present.42Even though the craftsman will be receiving a present and will return the favor to the person in some way, that is permitted. See Halachah 15 and notes.
When a person tells a worker: "Here is an isar.43A coin of small value used in the Talmudic period. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 8:4), the Rambam states that this was the cost of inexpensive vegetables in the Talmudic era. Gather vegetables44This refers to vegetables that grow in the manner described in Chapter 6, Halachah 4 (Kessef Mishneh). for me today," his wage is permitted. It is not considered as money received in return for produce of the Sabbatical year. Instead, he may use it for whatever he desires.45I.e., it is not restricted to being used for eating or drinking as is money received in return for produce of the Sabbatical year. The worker was not penalized46See the rationale given in the following halachah. in that his wage would be considered as money received for the produce of the Sabbatical year. If he told him: "Gather a vegetable for me today for it," [his wage] is considered as money received in return for produce of the Sabbatical year.47The wording used by the employer clearly establishes such a connection. As the Radbaz explains, in the first instance, it appears that he is hiring him to work that day. In the second instance, it appears that he is hiring him to reap vegetables. He may use it only for eating and drinking like the produce of the Sabbatical year.
When donkey-drivers perform work with the produce of the Sabbatical year that is forbidden - e.g., they bring more than the [minimal amount] of produce48While it is permitted to bring a small amount of produce in the Sabbatical year from the fields as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 24, these donkey-drivers brought oversized loads as they would do in other years. - their wages are considered as money received in return for produce of the Sabbatical year.49And may only be used for food and drink. This stringency applies even if their employer hired them using wording that would be permitted when hiring a worker. This is a penalty imposed upon them.Why was a penalty imposed on the wages of a donkey-driver and not on the wages of a hired worker? Because the latter receives a minimal wage. Hence, he was not penalized so that [he could earn] his livelihood.
When a person purchases a loaf of bread from a baker for a pundiyon,50A coin of the Talmudic period that was twice the worth of an isar. and tells him: "When I harvest vegetables [grown in the Sabbatical year] from the field, I will bring them to you for it."51I.e., rather than pay him now, he promises that he will pay him in the future by bringing him vegetables. this is permitted.52The purchaser is not considered to be paying a debt with the produce from the Sabbatical year. Instead, since at the time he took the loaf of bread, he already stipulated that the exchange would be made, this is considered as an exchange for the produce of the Sabbatical year, which is permitted [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 8:4)].The commentaries explain that this concept is alluded to by the Rambam's addition of the word bo, meaning "for it." This implies that the purchaser is clearly stipulating that he is making an exchange. The loaf of bread is considered as the produce of the Sabbatical year.53For it was received in exchange for produce of the Sabbatical year. If he purchases the loaf without making any qualifications,54And does not pay him immediately. he should not pay him with money received for the produce of the Sabbatical year, because one should not use that money to pay debts.55As stated in Halachah 10. This applies even to debts incurred from purchasing food.
One may partake of the produce of the Sabbatical year [in expectation56Or even in return for having perfomed a favor. that the recipient will return] the favor and when there are no such expectations.57The Rambam is adding this point, to emphasize that we do not follow the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah who maintains that the School of Hillel permitted a person to partake of the produce of the Sabbatical year that belongs to a colleague only in expectation of favors (see Ediyot 5:1). Rabbi Yehudah's rationale is that it is not desirable for any person to have free access to a colleague's field and enter it at all times. What is implied [by the idea of eating in expectation of the return of the favor]? One may give a colleague the produce of the Sabbatical year as if he had already performed a favor for him58In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 4:1), the Rambam explains that the person tells a colleague: "Reap in my field and then I will reap in your field." or invite him into his garden to eat as one who performed a favor for him.When a person was given the produce of the Sabbatical year as a present or he inherited it, he should partake of it in the same manner as if he gathered this produce from the field himself.59There is a difference of opinion regarding this issue in Shivi'it 9:9 and the Rambam's ruling does not follow either of the views mentioned there. Nevertheless, it can be explained that the mishnah is speaking according to Rabbi Eliezer's perspective and Rabbi Eliezer follows the opinion of the School of Shammai. The Rambam's ruling reflects the position that would be given by the School of Hillel, whose opinion is accepted as halachah.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
We may only partake of the produce of the Sabbatical year as long as that species is found in the field. [This is derived from Leviticus 25:7]: "For the animal and the beast in your land will be all the produce to eat." [Implied1See the Sifra to that verse.From the fact that a verse from the Torah is brought as support, the Minchat Chinuch concludes that the obligation of biyur is of Scriptural origin. The P'nei Yehoshua (Pesachim 52b), however, maintains that the verse is merely an asmachta, a support brought by the Rabbis for their own ordinance, and in truth, the obligation is Rabbinic. He supports this thesis by the fact that, otherwise, it would have been appropriate for the Rambam to consider the obligation as one of the mitzvot. is that] as long as a beast2I.e., a wild animal which you are not obligated to feed. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 9:2). [can be] eating from this species in the field, one may eat from [what he has collected] at home. When there is no longer any [of that species] for the beast to eat in the field, one is obligated to remove that species from his home. This is the obligation of biyur which applies to the produce of the Sabbatical year.
What is implied? If a person has dried figs at home, he may partake of them as long as there are figs on the trees in the field. When there are no longer figs in the field, it is forbidden for him to partake of the figs he has at home and he must instead remove them.3As the Rambam states in the following halachah.
If he had a large amount of produce, he should distribute4On the day of the biyur. a quantity that can be eaten in three meals to every person [he desires]. It is forbidden - both for the rich and the poor5There is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in the mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:3, 9:8). - to partake of it after the time of biyur. If he is not able to find people to eat at the time of biyur, he should burn it with fire or cast it into Mediterranean Sea,6This is how the Rambam [in the conclusion of his Commentary to the Mishnah, et al], interprets the phrase yam hamelech. See also Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 2:2. Others interpret it as referring to the Dead Sea. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:2), he mentions only casting the produce into the sea. or destroy it through any other means.7Thus the Rambam interprets the word biyur as meaning "destruction." After the time of biyur, the produce must be destroyed. The Ramban (in his commentary to the Torah) and other Rishonim, however, interpret it as "removal" and maintain that after the biyur, all that is necessary is to renounce one's ownership over the produce and thus remove it from one's domain. Rav Yosef Corcus states that this view can be relied upon in the present era and, indeed, this is the practice in Eretz Yisrael today.
If one had raisins from the Sabbatical year and there were no longer any grapes left in the fields,8In a later addition to his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:4; see Rav Kappach's notes), the Rambam states that fields within a city are considered like gardens. Here he is speaking of those in the outlying areas. the gardens, and the orchards which are ownerless,9I.e., regarded as ownerless in the Sabbatical year. even though there are still grapes on the vines in the courtyards, he may not partake of the raisins because of the grapes in the courtyard, because they are not accessible to a wild beast.10I.e., a homeowner will not leave his courtyard open so that a wild beast can enter it at will. (He must, however, regard even the produce growing in his courtyard as ownerless and allow another person to enter and pick it.) If, however, there are very firm grapes that do not mature until the end of the year [still growing in the field], one may partake of the raisins [he has stored] because of them. Similar laws apply in all analogous instances.
When a tree produces fruit twice a year and one still possesses fruit from its first crop, he may partake of it as long as the second crop is still in the field. For [the requirement that] this species be [available] in the field [is met]. We do not, however, [continue to] partake [of stored fruit] because of fruit that grows in the fall,11Since this fruit grows in the rainy season, which begins well after Rosh HaShanah, it is considered as the produce of the eighth year and not of the Sabbatical year. because it is considered as the produce of a different year.
When a person pickles three types of produce in one barrel, if one of these types of produce is no longer available in the field, that type of produce should be removed from the barrel.12And eaten or destroyed, as stated in Halachah 3. He is not, however, obligated to remove the other two types of produce. Although the one type of produce that is now forbidden has imparted its flavor to the other two types, that does not cause them to be forbidden. If he began partaking of [the pickled produce], the entire [mixture] is considered as having been removed.13Our translation is based on the interpretation of Mareh HaPonim (a gloss to the Jerusalem Talmud, Sh'vi'it 9:5). He explains that once a jar of pickled vegetables were opened (in pre-refrigeration eras), the vegetables would spoil rapidly. Hence, it is considered as if the entire batch was already removed from his possession.Just as one is obligated to remove food [stored for] human consumption, so too, must he remove animal fodder from his home and he may no longer feed it to an animal if that type of produce is no longer available in the field.14In this context, there is no difference between the laws applying to food for humans and animal fodder.
Just as one must remove the produce of the Sabbatical year, so too, one must remove the money [received in exchange for it].15For as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 6, the holiness of the produce is transferred to the money received for it. What is implied? One sold pomegranates of the Sabbatical year and used the money received in return for them [to purchase] food. When there are no longer any pomegranates on the trees in the field, but he remains in possession of the money he received for selling them, he is obligated to remove it from his possession.
What should he do? He should purchase food with this money and distribute it, [providing] three meals to every person [he desires].16As above, these activities should be performed on the day the obligation of biyur takes place. The Radbaz explains that the person is required to purchase food with the money. It is not sufficient for him to distribute the money itself and tell the recipients to purchase food, for perhaps they will fail to do so. Alternatively, if he does not find people to partake of such food, he should cast the money into the Mediterranean Sea.
[Eretz Yisrael is divided into] three lands [with regard to the obligation of] biyur:17I.e., as the Rambam proceeds to explain, Eretz Yisrael is not considered a single entity with regard to this obligation, for different conditions apply in each of the three regions. Each of those regions individually, however, is considered as a single integral entity although different conditions apply in each of its districts.a) the entire land of Yehudah, its mountainous portion, its plain, and its valley, is all one region.18I.e., this region - as well as the other two - is subdivided into three districts.b) the entire [West] Bank of the Jordan,19The term Ever HaYarden, literally Trans-Jordan, is most commonly used to refer to the areas on the Eastern bank of the Jordan, as mentioned at the conclusion of the Book of Numbers, throughout the Book of Deuteronomy, and in many places throughout the Mishnah. There are many authorities (among them, Rabbenu Shimshon and Rabbenu Tam) who therefore consider that as the proper interpretation in this instance as well. In this instance, however, the Rambam understands the term differently. His view is accepted by Rabbenu Asher, Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura, and explained by Kaftor UPerach. See also the gloss of Rav Akiva Eiger. [including] the plain of Lod, the mountains [around] the plain of Lod, [the area of] Beit Choron, with the sea, is all one region; andc) the entire Galilee, the upper [Galilee], the lower [Galilee], and the area of Tiberias, is one region. In each of these three regions, one may partake [of a species of produce stored at home] until the last [traces of that produce] cease [to exist in the entire region's fields].
What is implied? If one possesses produce in the land of Yehudah, one may partake of it as long as this species is found [in the fields of] the entire land of Yehudah.20Even if it is no longer available in the particular district in which one is located. See Sh'vi'it 9:2-3. Similar laws apply if he possesses produce from the Galilee or from the [West] Bank of the Jordan.
These three regions are considered as one entity with regard to carobs, olives, and dates.21And one may eat these species in one region even though they are no longer available in that entire region, as long as they are available in other portions of Eretz Yisrael. Among the reasons given for the distinction between these species and other fruits is that there is little difference between the times these fruits grow in one region of Eretz Yisrael and another. Also, these species remain on the tree after they have ripened for longer than most fruits. Hence, there is added reason for seeking a common date. One may eat dates [throughout Eretz Yisrael] until the last dates are no longer available in Tzo'ar.22A village near Jericho, a region renown for its dates. They grow there later than in other places in Eretz Yisrael. From when are they no longer available? Purim. We may eat olives until Shavuot and grapes until Pesach of the eighth year. Dried figs may be eaten until Chanukah.23The commentaries have questioned the Rambam's statements with regard to figs and grapes, for they imply that there is a universal time for the biyur of these species and yet they are not mentioned together with the three species at the beginning of the halachah. The Radbaz resolves this question by saying that the dates mentioned by the Rambam are the latest applicable in all of the three regions.
When a person transports produce of the Sabbatical year from a region in which it is no longer available [in the field] to a region where it is available, or from a region where it is available to a region in which it is no longer available, he is obligated in biyur. [The rationale is that] we place upon him the stringencies of the place from which he departed and those of the place to which he journeyed.24This is a general principle applied in several different contexts in Torah law to maintain unity within the Jewish community; see Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 8:20. With regard to the matter at hand, since the obligation of biyur has already taken effect in one of these regions, he is obligated to observe it.When the produce of Eretz Yisrael has been brought to the Diaspora, it should be destroyed in its place.25I.e., it need not be brought back to Eretz Yisrael to be destroyed there as required by one opinion in Sh'vi'it 6:5. As stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 13, as an initial preference, the produce of the Sabbatical year should not be brought to the Diaspora. It should not be transported from one place to another.
A great general principle was stated with regard to [the produce of] the Sabbatical year: Whenever [produce] is [used as] food for humans, animal fodder, or as one of the dyes, if it will not be maintained in the earth, the laws of the Sabbatical year apply to it and to money received for it and the requirements of biyur apply to it26For it is maintained in the earth only for a specific time. and to money received for it, e.g., the leaves of wild onions, mint, and endives, are considered as food for humans, brambles and thorn are considered as animal fodder, and woad27Which produces a bluish dye. and safflower are considered as dyes. If the species is maintained in the earth, e.g., madder28Which produces a red dye. and dyer's rocket from the dyes,29The Rambam does not mention food for human's or animal fodder, for all species of these types of produce reach a point where they are no longer available in the field and the obligation of biyur takes effect at that time. even though the laws of the Sabbatical year apply to it and to money received for it. The requirements of biyur do not apply to it or to money received for it, because it is maintained in the earth.30And thus is continually available to an animal. Instead, one may benefit from it and use it as dye until Rosh HaShanah.31I.e., until the end of the Sabbatical year. Some commentaries maintain that the text should read "after Rosh HaShanah," for the plants that grew in the Sabbatical year will continue growing into the eighth year. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 7:2), the Rambam states: "We continue to use them and benefit from them until they cease [growing in the field]." The Radbaz follows this understanding, but maintains that after Rosh HaShanah, these plants should be declared ownerless. That fulfills the requirement of biyur with regard to them.
Whenever a plant is not set aside to be [used as] food for humans, animal fodder, or as one of the dyes, since it is not used as kindling fuel,32The laws of the Sabbatical year do not apply to kindling fuel, as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 21. the laws of the Sabbatical year apply to it and to money received for it,33Since a person has chosen to benefit from it, he must treat it as the produce of the Sabbatical year. but the requirements of biyur do not apply to it34Since it is not considered as food or animal fodder, there is no limit until when it would normally be used. or to those monies. [This applies] even if it will not be maintained in the earth. Instead, we may benefit from it and the money received for it until Rosh HaShanah.35The Rambam does not mention food for human's or animal fodder, for all species of these types of produce reach a point where they are no longer available in the field and the obligation of biyur takes effect at that time. Examples [of this category include] the roots of wild onions and mint and the scorpion-like herb.
The laws of the Sabbatical year apply to the peels and the buds of pomegranates, the shells of nuts,36The Radbaz maintains that this refers to the inner shell which is useful as a dye. The hard outer shell, by contrast, is useful only for kindling and the laws of the Sabbatical year do not apply to it. and the seeds [of other fruits] and to the money received for them,37For they are useful as dyes (Radbaz). but the requirements of biyur do not apply to them or to those monies.The laws of the Sabbatical year apply to the tips of the branches of grape vines38When these branches are soft, they are occasionally cut off, pickled, and served as food [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 7:5)]. and carob trees and to the money received for them, as do the requirements of biyur.39The requirements of biyur apply, because the tips of these branches will ultimately fall from the tree (Radbaz). The laws of the Sabbatical year apply to the tips of the branches of the evergreen oak, the pistachio tree, and the box thorn bush40Apparently, these branches are also pickled on occasion. and to the money received for them, but the requirements of biyur do not apply to them.41From the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), it would appear that the rationale is that these branches continue growing on the tree. The requirement of biyur does apply to their leaves.42Because they fall from the branches and thus are not maintained in the earth (ibid.).
When is the time for biyur? For leaves, it is when they wither and fall from the tree.43For at this point, they are no longer accessible to an animal in the field. The leaves of olive trees, reeds, and carob trees do not have a time of biyur, because they never wither and fall away.
Until when does a person have the license to gather fresh grass in the Sabbatical year? Until the bitter44Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 3:1)]. There he explains that although matok, the name the Mishnah uses, means "sweet," this fruit has a bitter taste and that term is used as a euphemism. Some have identified this species with the colocynth, a wild gourd with a very bitter flavor. The Radbaz identifies it with a bitter species of grass. [apples] become dried out.45When these gourds have dried, fresh grass will no longer be available in the field for animals. He may gather dried grasses46For animal fodder. until the second rains of the eighth year.47For the rains will spoil the grasses and they will no longer be available in the fields (Radbaz). In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:6), the Rambam explains that these rains usually come between the seventeenth of MarCheshvan and the first of Kislev.
Until when are the poor48Or for that matter the rich, for everyone is allowed to gather the fruit of the Sabbatical year (Radbaz). permitted to enter the orchards in the eighth year to gather the fruits of the Sabbatical year?49In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:7), the Rambam explains that this concept also applies to the poor gathering the presents of leket, shichachah, and pe'ah in other years. Until the second rains descend.50From this point on, there are no longer fruits available in the fields.
The laws of the Sabbatical year apply to roses, cloves, and chestnuts and to the money received for them.51For these are all considered as fruit. The laws of the Sabbatical year do not apply to balsam sap that flows from trees, from their leaves, and their roots.52Because this sap does not come from the fruit of the tree, but from the tree itself. They do apply to [sap] that flows from underdeveloped berries53For these are fruit. and the money received for it.
When does the above apply? When the tree produces edible fruit. If, however, the tree is not fruitbearing, the sap that flows from its leaves and roots is considered as its fruit54For this is its sole product. and the laws of the Sabbatical year apply to it and to the money received for it.
When a person pickles a rose from the Sabbatical year in the oil of the sixth year, he may gather the rose55And treat it with the holiness of the Sabbatical year. and it is permitted [to use] the oil [in an ordinary manner].56In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 7:7), the Rambam explains that since the oil is aged and the rose is fresh, the oil will not absorb the flavor of the rose unless it is left within it for a long time. Accordingly, the oil is considered as the produce of the sixth year. If he pickles [a rose] in the oil of the eighth year,57Since the rose is aged, its flavor will be absorbed by the oil immediately (ibid.). he is obligated to perform biyur with the oil. [The rationale is] at that time, the rose is dry and the obligation of biyur has already fallen upon it.
When carobs of the Sabbatical year were left to soak in the wine of the sixth year or in the wine of the eighth year, biyur must be performed with the wine, because it has absorbed the flavor of the produce of the Sabbatical year.58The wine absorbs the carobs' flavor immediately (ibid.). This is the general principle: When the produce of the Sabbatical year becomes mixed with other produce of the same species,59E.g., the wine of the Sabbatical year with the wine of other years (ibid.). even the slightest amount [causes the entire mixture to be considered as the produce of the Sabbatical year]. When it becomes mixed with other species, [the ruling depends on whether it has] imparted its flavor [or not].60If it has imparted its flavor to the mixture, the mixture must be treated as produce of the Sabbatical year. If it has not, those stringencies do not apply. The concept stated here is a general principle applying in other contexts. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:8.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
Just as it is forbidden to work the land in the Sabbatical year,1As stated in Chapter 1. so too, it is forbidden to reinforce the hands of the Jews who do till it2They should not be given verbal encouragement. Needless to say, they should not be given assistance. Compare to Halachah 8. or to sell them farming tools, for it is forbidden to strengthen the hands of transgressors.3In this context, the Rambam writes in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:6):God declared (Leviticus 19:14 : "Do not place a stumbling block before the blind." The intent is that when someone has been blinded by desire and his bad character traits should not be assisted in his blindness to add to his warped conduct.
These are the utensils which a craftsman is not permitted to sell in the Sabbatical year to someone who is suspect [to violate the laws of] the Sabbatical year:4One may, however, sell these utensils to someone who is not suspect of violating the laws of the Sabbatical year, as stated in Halachah 4. a plow and all of its accessories, a yoke [for a team of oxen], a winnowing fork, and a mattock.5A long pronged tool. This is the general principle: Any [utensil] that is exclusively used for a type of work that is forbidden in the Sabbatical year is forbidden to be sold to a person suspect [to violate the laws of] the Sabbatical year. [If it is used for] a type of work that may be forbidden or which might be permitted, it is permitted to be sold to a person suspect [to violate the laws of] the Sabbatical year.6As long as there is a possibility that the person will use it for a permitted purpose, we assume that this is his intent (Avodah Zarah 15b).
What is implied? He may sell him a sickle and a wagon and all of its accessories. For if he uses it to harvest a small amount of produce and he brings a small amount of produce on the wagon, it is permitted.7See Chapter 4, Halachot 1, 24. If, however, he harvests in the ordinary manner of reapers or brings all the produce of his field, it is forbidden.8See Chapter 4, Halachot 1, 24.
It is permissible to sell [a utensil] - even one which is exclusively used for tasks forbidden in the Sabbatical year - to someone who is not suspect [to violate the laws of] the Sabbatical year9The person does not have to establish a reputation as an observer of the Sabbatical year. As long as he is not known to violate its laws, one may sell to him. without any stipulations, because it is possible that he purchased the article in the Sabbatical year to perform work [with it] after the Sabbatical year.
A potter may sell a person five jugs for oil and fifteen jugs for wine.10For these are the amounts each person is permitted to store (Chapter 4, Halachah 24). It is permitted to sell a larger amount to a gentile.11Even in Eretz Yisrael (Sh'vi'it 5:7). One need not suspect that perhaps he will sell them to a Jew. One may sell many jugs to a Jew in the Diaspora. One need not suspect that perhaps he will bring them to Eretz [Yisrael].12To sell there. In both these instances, since it is possible that the Sabbatical laws will not be broken, we do not suspect that they will [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:7)].
One may sell a cow that plows to a person suspect [to violate the laws of the Sabbatical year] in the Sabbatical year, because it is possible to slaughter it. One may sell such a person a field, for it is possible that he will leave it fallow.13As an agricultural measure, without considering the holiness of the Sabbatical year. He may not, however, sell him an orchard unless he stipulates that [the purchaser] does not have a share in the trees' [produce].14For otherwise, the person will certainly violate the laws of the Sabbatical year, by harvesting all the fruit of the orchard. He may lend him [a measure of] a se'ah even though he knows that he has a granary,15Where he could measure the produce of the Sabbatical year. As mentioned in Chapter 6, Halachah 3, one should not measure the produce of the Sabbatical year. Even when selling it, one should sell it by estimation. because he might use it to measure in his house. And he may exchange money for him even though he knows that he has workers [employed in violation of the laws of the Sabbatical year]. In all these instances, [if the purchaser states] explicitly [that he is intending to use the article in violation of the laws of the Sabbatical year, it] is forbidden.16For then his actions would obviously be considering as rendering assistance to the violation of the laws of the Sabbatical year.
Similarly, a woman may lend a sifter, a sieve, a mill, and an oven to a friend who is suspect [to violate the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year],17The Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:9) states that these leniencies are granted only "because of darchei shalom ('the paths of peace')," i.e., to establish unity and brotherhood among the Jewish people. but she may not sift or grind with her.18For it is logical to assume that the other woman would be using the produce of the Sabbatical year and working with her would be considered as encouragement.
We may encourage the gentiles [working] in the Sabbatical year, but only verbally. For example, if one sees one plowing or sowing, he should tell him: "Be strong," "Be successful," or the like, because they are not commanded to let the land rest. One may not physically assist them.19Even in a matter that does not involve the violation of the laws of the Sabbatical year. It is permitted to remove honey from a beehive with them and one may enter a sharecropping agreement with them for land whose ground was broken [in the Sabbatical year],20And thus the Jew will receive some benefit from the work performed by the gentile in the Sabbatical year. for they are not obligated to observe [these restrictions]. [Hence,] they are not penalized [for their violation].21If, by contrast, a Jew breaks the ground of his field in the Sabbatical year, it is forbidden to hire his field from him, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 13.
In Syria,22Which is not part of Eretz Yisrael and hence, is not covered by the Scriptural prohibitions against work in the Sabbatical year, but where working the land in that year was forbidden by the Rabbis, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 27. it is permitted to perform labor with produce that has been harvested,23Even though the produce was grown in the Sabbatical year. but not with produce that is still connected to the earth. What is implied? One may thresh produce, winnow it, squeeze grapes, and make sheaves out of grain,24For all of these activities are permitted even in Eretz Yisrael according to Scriptural Law, it is only Rabbinic Law that prohibits them. but one may not harvest grain, grapes, olives, or perform any similar activities.
Just as it is forbidden to engage in business transactions with the produce of the Sabbatical year25Chapter 6, Halachah 1. or to store them [until after the obligation of biyur has been incurred],26The bracketed addition is based on the gloss of the Radbaz. Alternatively, to guard the produce in his field so that it will not be taken during the Sabbatical year (Kin'at Eliyahu). so too, it is forbidden to purchase them from a common person. [The rationale is that] we do not give even the slightest amount of money exchanged for the produce of the Sabbatical year27For when one pays for the produce, the holiness of the produce is transferred to the money, as explained in Chapter 6, Halachot 6-7. to a common person, lest he not partake of [food purchased with it] in a manner that befits the holiness of the Sabbatical year.28Thus by purchasing the produce and giving him money, one would be - at least indirectly - causing him to violate the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year. Although in many of the instances mentioned in the previous halachot, we followed the principle that as long as there was a possibility that he would not transgress, we do not restrict transactions with people who might violate the laws of the Sabbatical year, in this instances, it is very likely that a transgression will occur. Hence, we are more stringent.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:1), the Rambam mentions a different reason for the prohibition against purchasing fruit from a common person, because he is likely to have harvested them and stored them in violation of the laws of the Sabbatical year.
When a person purchases a lulav from a common person in the Sabbatical year,29I.e., a lulav to use for the fulfillment of the mitzvah on Sukkot. This sale is permissible, because the laws of the Sabbatical year do not apply to a lulav, for it is part of the tree and not a fruit [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:9)]. he should give him an esrog30Which is a fruit and hence, may not be sold. as a present. If he does not give it to him,31But instead, desires payment. he should have the price of the esrog included in the price of the lulav.32And thus, he will be paying for the lulav and not for the esrog.
When does the above33Prohibition against purchasing even the slightest amount of produce from a common person. apply? When a person sells types of fruit that are usually protected, e.g., figs, pomegranates, or the like. If, however, he sells fruit which we could assume is ownerless, e.g., rue, amaranth, moss rose, coriander34Both of these are fragrant herbs. Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:1). and the like, it is permitted to purchase from them a small amount, merely the worth of three meals. [This leniency was granted to allow] the seller to earn his livelihood.35These fruits and herbs grew naturally and are not cultivated. Hence, we do not assume that the person stored them away and therefore there is room for limited leniency (Radbaz).
Similarly, any species from which the tithes are not obligated to be separated, e.g., exceedingly powerful garlic, the onions of Rikpah,36Which are also very pungent tasting. Our definition of terms is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 5:9). a pearled Cilcilian bean, Egyptian lentils,37These types of beans and lentils are of abnormal shape and grow wild (ibid.). and the like, and also the seeds of plants when [the seeds] are not eaten, e.g., those of turnips, radishes, and the like, may be purchased from any person in the Sabbatical year.38Since these species are not usually eaten as food, they are not bound by the Scriptural prohibitions of terumah and the tithes (Hilchot Terumah 2:3). Hence there is also room for leniency with regard to the Sabbatical year.
When does the above apply? To an ordinary common person.39Whose reputation vis-à-vis the observance of the Sabbatical year has not been established. When, however, one is suspect to carry out transactions with the produce of the Sabbatical year or to guard his produce and sell it, we may not purchase anything from him that has any connection to the Sabbatical year. [Similarly,] we may not purchase flax - even combed out flax40The reason that it is forbidden to purchase flax from such a person is that flax seeds are sometimes considered as food. Even though the flax has been combed to some degree, there is still the possibility that it contains some seeds that are useful as food. - from him. One may, however, purchase [flax] that has been spun and twisted [into threads].41At this stage of processing, the flax will never be used as food.
A person who is suspect [to sell produce of] the Sabbatical year is not necessarily considered as suspect to [sell produce of the second] tithe. [Similarly,] one who is suspect [to sell produce of the second] tithe is not necessarily considered as suspect [to sell produce of] the Sabbatical year even though they are both Scriptural commandments.42As the Rambam states in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 4:10), generally when two prohibitions are of the same degree of severity, if one is considered suspect to violate one, he is considered as suspect to violate the other. Nevertheless, this instance is an exception for the reasons stated by the Rambam. [The rationale is that each possesses a stringency which the other lacks.] The [second] tithe must be brought to [Jerusalem]43Literally, the Rambam's words mean "the place," recalling Deuteronomy 12:11: "the place which God... will choose to cause His name to dwell." See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 2:1. This stringency does not apply with regard to the produce of the Sabbatical year which can be eaten in any place. and this does not apply with regard to [the produce of] the Sabbatical year. [Conversely, the produce of] the Sabbatical year cannot be redeemed44I.e., even after its redemption, it remains holy (Chapter 6, Halachah 6). In contrast, once the produce of the second tithe is redeemed, it is considered as ordinary produce (Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 4:1). and this does not apply with regard to [the produce of] the second tithe.
A person who is suspect [of selling impure food as if it were] ritually pure is not suspect [to sell produce of the second] tithe or [that of] the Sabbatical year. For the impure food that was sold as being ritually pure imparts impurity to others only according to Rabbinic Law45As stated in Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 8:10. and one who is suspect [of causing the transgression] of Rabbinic Law is not suspect [of causing the violation] of Scriptural Law.46Since the Scriptural prohibitions are more severe, we assume that the person will respect them.
Whenever a person is suspect [of selling entities in violation of a prohibition], even though his word is not accepted with regard to his own property, his word is accepted with regard to [the property of] others. We operate under the assumption that a person will not violate a prohibition for the sake of others. Therefore even though a person is suspect with regard to a given [prohibition], he may judge and offer testimony regarding this matter.47As stated in the notes to Hilchot Ma'aser 12:17, the Ra'avad does not accept this principle and maintains that if someone is considered as suspect regarding a particular issue, he is not accepted as a judge or witness concerning such matters. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's view.
Priests are considered suspect with regard to [the prohibitions of] the Sabbatical year.48I.e., we fear that they will not remove the produce of the Sabbatical year from their possession at the time of biyur, but instead will store it and sell it afterwards. [The reason is that] they rationalize their conduct saying: Since the terumot are permitted to us even though they are forbidden to non-priests [and this violation is punishable] by death,49At the hand of heaven (Hilchot Terumah 6:5-6. certainly, the produce of the Sabbatical year is permitted to us.Therefore when a se'ah of terumah falls into 100 se'ah of the produce of the Sabbatical year, a se'ah should be separated.50And given to the priests. They must partake of it as if it were terumah, as stated in ibid. 13:1. As explained there, this act is necessary in order to enable non-priests to partake of the entire mixture. And since we permit the entire mixture to non-priests, we do not suspect that the priests will keep the produce beyond the biyur. If it fell into less than 100 se'ah, the entire mixture should be left to rot instead of being sold to priests as other produce which is miduma,51As stated in ibid. 13:2, when terumah falls into less than 100 se'ah of ordinary produce, the presence of the terumah is not nullified. Instead, the entire mixture is considered as miduma and is sold to the priests as if it were terumah (which is sold at a significantly lower price than ordinary produce). In this instance, we do not follow that ruling, because of the suspicion stated by the Rambam. because they are suspect to violate the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year.
Painters and cattle-raisers52People who fatten animals. may purchase bran53Bran is used to provide body for paint and also to fatten cattle. from any source. They need not suspect it is sefichin of the Sabbatical year.54The rationale is that the prohibition against benefiting from sefichin is only Rabbinic in origin. Hence, we do not employ a safeguard because of a doubtful situation.
In the Sabbatical year, the collectors of the kupah55The city-wide charitable fund to which donations are made for the sustenance of the poor (see Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 9:1). were not careful [to refrain from entering] the courtyards of those who partake [of the sefichin] of the Sabbatical year. If they gave a loaf of bread, it is permitted [for the poor to partake of it].56The Radbaz maintains that this is speaking of individuals whom we merely suspect that they violate the laws of the Sabbatical year. If we know with certainty that they violate those laws, we may not take any produce from them. We do not suspect that perhaps it is from the sefichin of the Sabbatical year.57We do not suspect that a person will do a mitzvah - giving charity - in a manner that will cause a transgression - causing another Jew to violate the laws governing produce of the Sabbatical year [Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 8:2)]. For the Jews were not suspect to give [the produce of the Sabbatical year to charity], only money received for the produce of the Sabbatical year or eggs which were purchased with money received for the produce of the Sabbatical year.58In these instances as well, we do not suspect that the person intentionally gave the money received for the produce for the Sabbatical year (or eggs received for that produce). Instead, we suspect that because he was a common person, he was not aware of the relevant laws (Radbaz).It is permitted to borrow the produce59The borrower must have such produce in his possession. Otherwise, it is forbidden to borrow the produce as a safeguard to the prohibition against taking interest (ibid.). of the Sabbatical year from the poor.60This leniency is granted only as consideration for the needs of the poor (ibid.). He may not purchase it from him, for in that instance, the money would become money received for produce of the Sabbatical year. We are afraid that the common person will not purchase food with that money and eat it before the obligation of biyur takes effect. They should be repaid with produce in the eighth year.61They should not be repaid with the produce of the Sabbatical year, because the produce of the Sabbatical year should not be given to a common person. We do not say the produce with which he repays him is produce received for produce of the Sabbatical year, because the exchange was not made in that year.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 141) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 477) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Rambam's wording implies that the nullification of the debt comes as a result of the person's action. It is not automatically nullified at the conclusion of the seventh year. For that reason, the Rambam states in Halachah 28, when a person comes to pay a debt after the conclusion of the seventh, the creditor must say that he is nullifying the debt (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XVII, p. 289ff.). to nullify a loan in the Sabbatical year, as [Deuteronomy 15:2] states: "All of those who bear debt must release their hold." A person who demands payment of a debt after the Sabbatical year passed2For, according to the Rambam, the debt is not nullified until the conclusion of the Sabbatical year (Halachah 4). violates a negative commandment,3Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 230) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 475) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as it is stated [ibid.]: "One shall not demand [payment] from his friend and his brother."
The nullification of debts applies according to Scriptural Law only in the era when the Jubilee year is observed4As stated in Chapter 10, Halachah 9, after the exile of the tribes of Reuven and Gad, the laws of the Jubilee year no longer applied according to Scriptural Law. and [the sale of] land is also nullified, for the land [that has been sold] returns to its original owners without financial payment.5See Chapter 10, Halachot 13, 15, for details regarding this concept. This matter was conveyed through the chain of tradition. Our Sages declared:6Gittin 36a. In the era when you nullify [the sale of] land, you nullify debts everywhere, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in the Diaspora. In the era when you do not nullify [the sale of] land, you do not nullify debts anywhere, even in Eretz Yisrael.
According to Rabbinic Law, the nullification of debts applies in the present age in all places,7I.e., according to the Rambam's interpretation of Gittin, loc. cit., the nullification of debts applies in the present era, even in the Diaspora. His view is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 67:1). In his gloss to that text, the Rama quotes different opinions among the Ashkenazic authorities. Some maintain that the Rabbis did not ordain the observance of this law in the present age. Others maintain that it should be observed as a custom. Significantly, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Halvaah 34, follows the Rambam's view. even though the Jubilee year is not observed.8I.e., even according to Rabbinic Law (see Tosafot, Gittin, loc. cit.). [This is a decree, instituted] so that the concept of the nullification of debts will not be forgotten by the Jewish people.
The Sabbatical year does not nullify debts until its conclusion. [This is derived as follows: Deuteronomy 15:1-2] states: "At the end of seven years, you shall effect a remission. This is the matter of the remission." And [Deuteronomy 31:10] states:9With regard to the Hakhel ceremony. The interrelation of these verses has its source in the Sifri. "At the end of seven years, at the time of the Sabbatical year, during the holiday of Sukkot." Just as in that instance, [the event takes place] after the seven [years], so too, the nullification of the debts takes place after the seven [years].Therefore if one lent money to a colleague in the Sabbatical year itself, he may demand payment of his debt for the entire year.10According to other authorities, although the debt is not remitted until the end of the Sabbatical year, from the beginning of the Sabbatical year, the creditor is forbidden to demand payment. See Shulchan Aruch HaRav, loc. cit. 36. When the sun sets on the night of Rosh HaShanah of the eighth year,11I.e., the sunset marking the advent of Rosh HaShanah. the debt is nullified.12Because it is forbidden to demand its payment (Likkutei Sichot, loc. cit.).
If one slaughtered a cow and divided it13Since the people considered the day as a festival, the recipients of the meat could not pay for it in an ordinary manner. Hence they promised to pay for their shares later, considering the money as a debt [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:2)]. under the supposition that today would be [declared as] Rosh HaShanah,14When the laws of the annulment of debts would no longer apply. The Rambam is speaking about a situation that could have occurred in the time the new month was sanctified based on the testimony of witnesses (in contrast to the present era, when we follow a fixed calendar). In that era as well, the court had a presupposition of the day when Rosh HaShanah would fall and the people celebrated it as a holiday in anticipation of its sanctification. Nevertheless, the moon was not actually sanctified - and thus the holiday officially declared as such - unless witnesses came. Now it was possible, especially if the night was cloudy, that witnesses did not see the moon and hence could not go to the court to give testimony. Hence the day could not be declared as Rosh HaShanah. but instead, a day was added to Elul and thus that day was the final day of the Sabbatical year, the money is lost, for the Sabbatical year ended while the debt was extant.15The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, based on the principle (stated in Halachah 11), that a debt stemming from money owed on account to a grocer is not nullified at the end of the Sabbatical year. Indeed, the source for this law (the Jerusalem Talmud, Sh'vi'it 10:1) states that it follows the opinion that maintains that such an account is nullified by the Sabbatical year. The Radbaz, however, explains that the situations are not identical. For it is common practice for a grocer to sell on account. A butcher, by contrast, expects immediate payment. A similar distinction is suggested by the Kessef Mishneh.
The Sabbatical year nullifies a loan, even a loan supported by a promissory note which creates a lien on one's possessions.16I.e., once a loan is recorded in a promissory note, in the event the debtor does not pay, the creditor can use the promissory note to collect the debt from the landed property belonging to the debtor at the time of the loan (even if it was subsequently sold to others). Since the property is on lien, one might think that the situation is comparable to a loan supported by security (Halachah 14), which is not nullified by the Sabbatical year. That law, however, does not apply in the present instance, because although the lien applies to the debtor's property, it is not associated with a specific property. If, however, the borrower designated a field [to serve as payment] for the loan, it is not nullified.17Since the land has been designated as payment, it is as if the loan has already been paid. The Sabbatical year also nullifies the obligation to take an oath,18For example, a person claimed that a colleague owed him 100 zuz and the colleague admitted only to owing 50. In such an instance, the colleague is required to take an oath regarding the other 50 zuz. If he fails to take the oath before the conclusion of the Sabbatical year, that obligation is nullified. for [the prooftext] states: "He shall not demand," i.e., neither payment, nor an oath.
When does the above apply? With regard to an oath imposed by the judges19This is a specific term that, as explained in Hilchot Sh'vuot 11:5-6, refers to oaths administered because of the denial of a specific and definite claim that would create a monetary obligation were the defendant to have admitted to it. and the like, i.e., obligations that were he to accept them, the Sabbatical year would nullify them. But oaths taken by watchmen or partners20See Hilchot Sh'vuot, loc. cit., which explains that these individuals can be compelled to take an oath even though the plaintiff does not have a definite claim against them. and the like, i.e., oaths that were he to admit [the obligation], he would be required to pay [after the Sabbatical year],21With regard to a watchman, the explanation is that - unlike a loan - the property being watched is considered as always being in the possession of the owner. Hence, the obligation for it is not nullified by the Sabbatical year (see Radbaz). A partner is considered as a watchman (Bava Batra 42b). he is required to take the oath after the Sabbatical year.
If a person gave a colleague a loan and then demanded payment, [the colleague] denied the obligation and remained in denial when [the conclusion of] the Sabbatical year arrived and then he admitted his obligation or witnesses came [and testified to that effect] after the Sabbatical year [was concluded], the obligation is not nullified.22The rationale is that the obligation was not firmly established before the conclusion of the Sabbatical year, for until the borrower's admission of the debt or the substantiation of the claim by witnesses, the creditor cannot press for payment in a court of law. Hence, the end of the year does not lead to the nullification of the debt. See the Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 10:1). The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, but it is supported by the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh and quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 67:7). Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch does add to the Rambam's wording the concept that the debtor took an oath to support his denial. In his gloss to the Tur, the Darkei Moshe explains that addition, stating that unless the debtor has taken an oath to support his denial, then we are speaking of an ordinary loan and the conclusion of the Sabbatical year nullifies both the loan and the obligation of an oath to support one's denial, as stated in Halachah 6.
When a person lends money to a colleague and sets [the time of payment] in ten years time, it is not nullified [by the Sabbatical year. The rationale is that] although [ultimately, the command,] "Do not demand [payment]" will apply,23For in ten years time, he will demand payment of the debt. at present, he may not demand payment.24For the loan has not become due. And as long as there is no payment demanded, the debt is not nullified, for the Sabbatical year only nullifies a debt for which payment is called for (the Responsa of Rabbenu Asher, sec. 86). If he stipulated that he would not demand payment, [the debt] is nullified by the Sabbatical year.25The Radbaz and Rav Yosef Corcus explain that even though the collector has promised not to demand payment of the debt, since there is a payment date before the end of the Sabbatical year, the borrower is under obligation to pay. Hence, it is as if payment is being demanded from him.
When a person lends money to a colleague and he stipulates with [the borrower] that [the debt] will not be nullified by the Sabbatical year, it is nullified, for he cannot negate the law of the Sabbatical year.26This is a general principle, applicable in many contexts. Whenever a person establishes a stipulation that runs contrary to the Torah's laws, his stipulation is nullified. For the Torah is not given over to man's will and no mortal can bend it to fit his whims (see Makkot 3b; Hilchot Ishut 6:9). If [the borrower] stipulates that he will not nullify this debt, even in the Sabbatical year, the stipulation is binding, for any stipulation made regarding financial matters is binding. Thus this person took on a financial obligation which the Torah did not obligate him in.27The difference between this clause and the previous one can be explained as follows: In the previous instance, the person was attempting to postulate that the Torah's laws should not apply. This is not within a mortal's power. In the second clause, by contrast, the person is saying that although the laws of the Sabbatical Law do apply, he asks the borrower to accept an obligation even though the Torah releases him from it. Torah Law does not prevent him from accepting such an obligation. See the parallels in Hilchot Mechirah 11:15.See also the comments of Beit Yosef (Choshen Mishpat 67), that one is permitted to make such a stipulation. It is not merely that, after the fact, one is bound by it.Based on this principle, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Halva'ah:35 draws the following conclusion:At present, in these countries, it is not customary [to employ] a pruzbol. [Some] have explained the custom [as follows]: Since it has become customary to collect all debts after the Sabbatical year, even without a pruzbol, and the borrower knows of this practice, it is as if the lender made a stipulation at the time of the loan that [the loan was being given] on condition that the borrower never nullify this debt, even in the Sabbatical year. Thus [the borrower] made himself liable for a financial obligation not required of him by the Torah in which instance, his stipulation is binding and he is obligated according to Scriptural Law.Nevertheless, that text continues, stating that "any G‑d-fearing person will be stringent with regard to his own conduct and make a pruzbol, [for] it is something that does not involve a loss and is easy to arrange."
An account at a store is not nullified by the Sabbatical year.28In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:1), the Rambam explains that until a summary of an account is made, it is not considered as a debt. Instead, the seller trusts the purchaser and is willing to wait for payment. Thus all of the different transactions are considered as one sale. The Kessef Mishneh explains that since it is not customary for the seller to demand payment of such accounts, the account is not bound by the prohibition: "Do not demand payment." Hence, the mitzvah to nullify the obligation also does not apply.Similar concepts are reflected in the treatment of the subject by Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Halva'ah, subsec. 39, which states: "Since a storekeeper usually extends credit for a year or two and it is unusual for him to demand payment immediately, it is as if he set a time for payment after the Sabbatical year." If it is established as a debt,29The Rama (Choshen Mishpat 67:14 offers two explanations for "establish[ing it] as a debt":a) setting a time for payment;b) totaling up the account to arrive at a sum. it is nullified.30For in such an instance, it is no different than any other debt. The wage of a worker is not nullified.31Here also the Kessef Mishneh explains that since it is not common for a worker to demand payment of his wages immediately, until he does so, they are not considered as a debt. If it is considered as a debt, it is nullified.
The fines for a rapist,32See Deuteronomy 22:28-29, Hilchot Na'arah, ch. 1. a seducer33See Exodus 22:15-16, Hilchot Na'arah, ch. 1. and one who spreads a slanderous report [about his wife]34See Deuteronomy 22:13-21, Hilchot Na'arah, ch. 3. are not nullified by the Sabbatical year.35In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:2, the Rambam explains that debts are obligations which a person accepts upon himself. Hence they can be nullified. These obligations, by contrast, are penalties imposed upon the transgressor by God. Hence, he cannot absolve himself from them unless he makes payment.The Kessef Mishneh questions this explanation, for the Torah also requires a person to satisfy the monetary obligations he takes upon himself. He therefore explains that the intent is that since these penalties are written in the Torah, it is as the debts were handed over to the court in which instance, they are not nullified by the Sabbatical year, as stated in Halachah 15.Rambam LeAm explains the difference between the two on the basis between the distinction between mamon, a financial obligation between men, which a man can release, and k'nas, a penalty required by God from the transgressor that although paid to the person violated is not an obligation to him. If they are considered as debts,36The Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 67:16) defines "establish[ing] as a debt" as calling the defendant to court. Sefer Meirat Einayim 67:31 emphasizes that once the court's decision is written up, it is considered as if the debt has been handed over to the court. they are nullified. When are they considered as a debt? When the matter was brought to court.
When a person divorces his wife before the Sabbatical year, [his obligations to her by virtue of] her ketubah37The money he agrees to pay in the event of a divorce (or which his estate must pay in the event of his death). are not nullified by the Sabbatical year.38Since the obligation need not be paid until the woman demands payment, it is not considered as a debt that could be nullified by the Sabbatical year. If she impaired the legal power [of her ketubah]39I.e., she admitted that a certain portion of the money owed her had already been paid. See Hilchot Ishut 16:14. or considered it as a debt, it can be nullified.
When a person lends money in exchange for security, the debt is not nullified by the Sabbatical year,40Kiddushin 9b states: "A creditor acquires the security given him." Thus when the loan is given in return for security, it is as if he transferred ownership of the security for the loan until it is repaid [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 9:2)]. Thus it is as if there is no outstanding obligation for the Sabbatical year to nullify. provided the security is equal in value to the debt. If the debt exceeds the value of the security, the extra amount is nullified by the Sabbatical year.41For this amount is not in his possession. The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.) quote other opinions which do not accept this view and maintain that this portion of the debt is not nullified. In his Kessef Mishneh, however, Rav Yosef Caro elaborates in support of the Rambam's position.
When a person hands over42Giving them the actual promissory note, not merely assigning it to them (Rav Yosef Corcus, explaining why this is acceptable according to Scriptural Law, while a pruzbol is merely a Rabbinic institution). his promissory notes to the court, telling [the judges]: "Collect my debt for me," the debts are not nullified by the Sabbatical year. [This is derived from Deuteronomy 15:3]: "[a debt] that you have from your brother."[Implied is that debts demanded by "your brother," a private individual, are nullified by the Sabbatical year. [Payment for] these [debts, by contrast,] is being demanded by the court.Similarly, if the court rendered a judgment, writing: "So-and-so, you are obligated to give this person this-and-this amount," [the debt] is not nullified. Such [a debt] is considered as if it has already been collected and entered [the creditor's] possession. It does not resemble a loan.
When Hillel the Elder saw that the people would refrain from lending to each other and thus violated the Scriptural charge [Deuteronomy 15:9]: "Lest there be a wicked thought in your heart,"43The verse continues: "The Sabbatical year is drawing near and you will look negatively at your brother and refrain from giving him." See Halachah 30 which discusses this charge. he ordained a pruzbol44In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:3), the Rambam cites the interpretation of this term in Gittin 37a: "the amendment of a matter." so that debts would not be nullified and people would lend to each other.A pruzbol is effective only with regard to the nullification of debts in the present era which are a Rabbinic institution.45As stated in Halachah 2, the nullification of debts in the present era is a Rabbinic injunction. And since it is a Rabbinic institution, Hillel and his court had the power to institute a provision to reduce its application. Were it to have the power of a Scriptural Law, the Rabbis would not be able to institute such a provision. A pruzbol is not effective with regard to the nullification of debts by Scriptural Law.46The Ra'avad differs with this concept, explaining that it applies even when the Sabbatical Law is observed according to Scriptural Law. The difference between the two authorities reflects a difference between the two Talmudic Sages, Abbaye and Rava, the Rambam follows Abbaye's understanding and the Ra'avad that of Rava. This, however, is slightly problematic, for the Bava Metzia 22b states that, with the exception of six specific instances, whenever there is a difference of opinion between these two Sages, the halachah follows Rava's understanding.The Radbaz explains the Rambam's viewpoint, stating that our Sages' preference for Rava's position applies only when these Sages are arguing concerning their own logical conclusions. When, by contrast, they are arguing about the interpretation of another Sages' position as in the present instance, the halachah can follow Abaye's view.
A pruzbol should be composed only by very great Sages like the court of Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Assi,47They were the heads of the leading courts in Eretz Yisrael shortly at the beginning of the post-Mishnaic era. Similarly, the court composing a pruzbol must be one of the leading courts in its region and in its era (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). for they are suitable to release financial [obligations due] others.48Gittin 36b explains that the institution of a pruzbol depends on the principle hefker beit din, hefker; "When the Jewish court absolves a person's ownership, the absolution is binding." As proof of this principle, it cites examples of actions taken by Ezra the Scribe and Joshua. The Rambam understands the Talmud to be saying that even when a financial obligation is Rabbinic in origin, to absolve it, one must have authority comparable to that of Ezra and Joshua. (Significantly, in Hilchot Sanhedrin 24:6 - where the Rambam describes the above principle - and in Hilchot Nachalot 6:12 - where he shows another application of it - he does not state that the courts involved must be made up of judges of unique distinction.) Other courts [of lesser authority] may not compose [a pruzbol].49The Tur (Choshen Mishpat 67) does not accept the Rambam's ruling and maintains that a pruzbol may be composed by any court. The Ramah (loc. cit.:18) states that this leniency can be accepted. Note also the contrast between this law and Halachah 27.
This represents the body of a pruzbol: "I am notifying you,50Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:4). so-and-so and so-and so51The Rambam is quoting the wording of the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:4). Although Rabbenu Nissim interprets this to mean that the Rambam accepts the view (Gittin 33a) that two judges are sufficient to compose a pruzbol, most authorities require that there be at least three judges on a court which officiates over a pruzbol, as indicated by the statement of the law in the Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 67:19). the judges in this-and-this places, [that I reserve the right] to collect all the debts [owed] to me52The creditor is not transferring the actual promissory note to the court - in which instance a pruzbol would not be necessary, as stated in Halachah 15. Instead, he is making a formal notification of the matter to the court. See Sefer Meirat Einayim 67:39. at any time I desire."53I.e., even after the Sabbatical year passes. The judges or the witnesses should sign below.54In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that this wording teaches us that a judge may also serve as a witness. This is not allowed in questions involving Scriptural Law, but in questions involving Rabbinic Law, leniency is granted.
A pruzbol may be composed only when [the borrower possesses] land.55The rationale is that when the borrower possesses land, the creditor's debt is secured, because he may expropriate the land in payment (Radbaz). Even though the land does not appear to be worth the full value of the debt, we follow the principle (see Hilchot Mechirah 13:8) that the land may never be considered overpriced (Sefer Meirat Einayim 67:41). If the borrower does not possess land, the lender should grant56Our text follows the manuscript copies and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text reads slightly differently.The lender may transfer this property to the borrower without his knowledge, but not against his will [Shulchan Aruch and Ramah (Choshen Mishpat 67:22)]. the borrower even the slightest amount of land - even enough to grow a cabbage stalk57Even if he possesses only a flowerpot with a hole in it.- in his field. [Even if] he lent him place for an oven or a range, a pruzbol may be composed.58Since the borrower is entitled to use the land, he is considered to have sufficient rights to it to enable a pruzbol to be written. If [the borrower] owns a field that was given as security, a pruzbol may be composed on that basis.
[A pruzbol] may be composed against a man59I.e., the man referred to here is the borrower. based on property owned by his wife60Since he is entitled to the benefit from this property, it can be used for a pruzbol. or against orphans on property owned by their guardian.61I.e., when a guardian took out a loan for the sake of orphans, if the guardian possesses land a pruzbol can be composed because the guardian is considered like a guarantor. If [the borrower] does not possess land, but the guarantor does, we can compose a pruzbol because of it.62Because ultimately, the guarantor's property is also on lien to the loan. If [a borrower] is owed a debt by a colleague and the colleague owns land - since that land is on lien [to the first borrower] - we may compose a pruzbol because of it.
When one person borrows from five others, each one must have a pruzbol composed.63For each one must entrust his debt to the court. When five people borrow from one, one pruzbol is sufficient for him for all the debts.64For in the one pruzbol, he entrusts all of his debts to the court.
When a person has a pruzbol composed and then he makes a loan, it is not effective. Instead, the loan will be nullified unless he composes [another] pruzbol after giving the loan. Thus one can conclude that any loan which precedes a pruzbol is not nullified because of this pruzbol. If the pruzbol precedes the loan, it is nullified [despite] this pruzbol.65This halachah, based on Sh'vi'it 10:5, was the subject of much review and rethinking within the Rambam's own mind. He rewrote his commentary to this mishnah four times, each time, changing his thought somewhat.At first, he wrote that only a pruzbol written before a loan prevents it from being nullified. Once a loan has already been given, the laws of the Sabbatical year apply to it, and a pruzbol cannot nullify it. It was not until his second revision of his commentary that he changed it, amending it to read like his conclusion in the text above.
Accordingly, a pruzbol that is predated is valid, while one that is postdated, is invalid.What is implied? One wrote a pruzbol in Nissan and predated it to Adar, it is valid, for he has impaired its legal power, for [only the loans given] until Adar are not nullified.66Since that is the date on the pruzbol, its legal power takes effect from that date even though it was written later and it could have included the loans that were given until the date when it was actually composed. If, however, he postdated it and dated it in Iyar, it is invalid, for he has strengthened its legal power, for [were it to be effective] the loans given until Iyar would not be nullified. This is unlawful, because it is only [the loans given] until Nissan that are not nullified, for that [is when] the matters were conveyed to the court.
When a person produces a promissory note after the Sabbatical year without it being accompanied by a pruzbol, the debt is lost.67For it is nullified by the Sabbatical year. If he says: "I possessed [a pruzbol] and it was lost, his word is accepted.68In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ketubot 9:7), the Rambam explains that the lender's word is accepted based on the principle that a person will not sin when he could achieve the same result in a permitted manner (Gittin 37b). Since he could easily preserve the debt by composing a pruzbol, we assume that he did so rather than transgress the prohibitions of the Sabbatical year, as stated in Halachah 26. For from the time of the danger69I.e., in the Talmudic era, the Roman's passed many decrees with the intent of stamping out the observance of the mitzvot. One of them was a prohibition to make a pruzbol (for by doing so, they would undermine the observance of the Sabbatical year). Failure to observe these decrees led to very severe punishment. In fear, many people would compose a pruzbol so that they could collect their debts, but destroy it lest it cause them danger (Kessef Mishneh). onward,70The Kessef Mishneh explains that even though the danger passed, the Rabbis never rescinded the leniency granted to allow for a uniformity in Jewish practice. a creditor was allowed to collect his debt [after the Sabbatical year] without a pruzbol.Moreover, when a creditor would bring the promissory note [to court] or would come and demand payment of a loan supported by a verbal commitment [alone], [the court] tells the defendant: "Pay him." If the defendant claims: "Where is his pruzbol?", the court asks the plaintiff: "Did you have a pruzbol that was lost?" If he answers affirmatively, his word is accepted.71Gittin, loc. cit. explains that this is like "opening the mouth of the dumb," i.e., offering support to a litigant to enable him to collect what is due him. If he admits that he did not have a pruzbol, the debt is nullified.Orphans72Below the age of majority [Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 67:28)]. do not require a pruzbol.73The Radbaz cites (Gittin 37a) which states that the Jewish court is considered as "the father of the orphans" and we assume that they do not want to impose Rabbinic decrees in a situation that will harm the orphan's interests. This applies both to loans that they themselves made or that their father made and which are due to his estate (Sefer Meirat Einayim 67:50).
[When the plaintiff] produces a pruzbol, the defendant claims: "The loan for which he is demanding payment was made after the pruzbol,"74And thus the loan would be nullified by the Sabbatical year, as stated in Halachah 22. and the plaintiff retorts: "It was made before the pruzbol," the plaintiff's word is accepted. [The rationale is] were he to have claimed: "I had [a pruzbol] and it was lost," his word would have been accepted75Based on the principle of migo, i.e., had he desired to lie, he would have told a more effective lie. This argument is reinforced by the accepted presumption mentioned previously: that if a person has a permitted way to perform a function, he will not use a forbidden path, i.e., he would make the loan with a valid pruzbol, rather than rely on an invalid one.Generally, a migo is an accepted argument in its own right. Nevertheless, in this instance, the migo must be reinforced by the assumption, for migo is usually employed as an argument in defense of one's position and not to expropriate money and here the plaintiff is seeking to employ it to expropriate money (Biurei HaGra 67:58). even though we do not know the date of the pruzbol that was lost.
If the defendant claims: "I owe him a debt," and the plaintiff states: "No, it is an account from a store which is not nullified [by the Sabbatical year], because I have not yet considered it as a loan,"76See Halachah 11. his word is accepted, for were he to desire,77To lie, i.e., here too, we are relying on the principle of migo, as reinforced by the assumption the Rambam proceeds to mention. he could say: "It was a loan, but I had a pruzbol and it was lost." [Leniency is granted in these instances,] because once the Sages instituted [the concept of] pruzbol, we operate under the assumption that a person will not forgo something permitted78Lending with a pruzbol. and partake of something that is forbidden.79Lending without a pruzbol.
When Torah Sages offer loans to each other80The Rambam's wording implies that both the lender and the borrower must be Torah scholars. His ruling is quoted verbatim by the Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 67:20). The Rama, however, rules that not only Torah Sages, but even ordinary individuals can benefit from this leniency.This leniency is part of the rationale, for the observance of the concept of pruzbol by the Ashkenazic community. Since all that is necessary to preserve a loan is a verbal statement made in the presence of three knowledgeable people, it is proper for everyone to do so (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, Hilchot Halva'ah:35). and one conveys his words to his students,81The Ra'avad (as understood by the Kessef Mishneh) objects to the Rambam's ruling, for, as stated in Halachah 17, the Rambam maintains that a pruzbol must be composed by a leading court, while here, he seems to imply that any few students are acceptable. The Kessef Mishneh resolves the apparent contradiction by saying that the students the Rambam refers to here are in fact distinguished judges, and there is no difference in practive between the subjects of the two halachot. Rav Yosef Corcus (in his gloss to Halachah 17) states that as long as the important court approves of such an act, the actual pruzbol may be made in the presence of lesser scholars. saying: "I am notifying you [that I reserve the right] to collect all the debts [owed] to me at any time I desire," he does not have to compose a pruzbol.82As stated in Halachah 18 [The rationale is that Torah scholars] know that the nullification of debts in the present era is a Rabbinic decree and it can be negated verbally.
[Whenever] anyone returns a debt [despite the fact] that the Sabbatical year has passed,83And thus, according to law, the debt is nullified and need not be repaid. This halachah is speaking about an instance where a pruzbol was not composed. the spirits of our Sages are gratified because of him.84I.e., they approve of this step and consider it pious behavior. The Sages thought it desirable for a debt to be returned, for in this way, people will continue lending each other money in the future. [When receiving the payment,] the lender must say to the one who is making restitution: "I am nullifying [the debt] and your [obligation] to me has been released."85For according to law, he can no longer collect the debt. If the debtor says: "Nevertheless, I desire that you accept it," he should accept it. For the Torah states: "One shall not demand [payment]," and payment was not demanded.86And thus, by accepting it, he is not violating the Torah's commandment to nullify the debt. Indeed, he has fulfilled the commandment to release the debt, for the Deuteronomy 15:2 introduces this commandment with the phrase: "This is the matter (d'var) of remission." D'var, translated as "matter," also relates to the word dibbur meaning "speech," implying that it is sufficient to make a statement of remission to fulfill the mitzvah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 10:8)].[The debtor] should not tell [the creditor]: "I am giving them to you as [payment of ] my debt. Instead, he should tell him: "[The money] is mine,87For the debt has been absolved. and I am giving it to you as a present."
If [a debtor] returned a debt, but did not make the above statements, [the lender] should turn the conversation to the point where the debtor says: "[The money] is mine, and I am giving it to you as a present." If [the debtor] does not make such statements, [the creditor] should not accept it from him.88Because it would resemble accepting payment for a debt. Instead, [the debtor] should take his money and depart.
One who refrains from lending money to a colleague before the Sabbatical year lest [the repayment] of the debt be delayed and it be nullified, violates a negative commandment, 89Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 231) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 480) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. See also Halachah 16 above. as [Deuteronomy 15:9] states: "Be careful [lest there be a wicked thought in your heart....]" It is a severe sin, for the Torah warned against it with two adjurations, for it is written: "Be careful lest," and whenever the Torah uses the expressions "Be careful," "lest," or "Do not," it is communicating a negative commandment.90Zevachim 106a; Sifri to the above verse. The fact that this commandment employs two such terms indicates that it is a severe prohibition. The Torah objected to this evil thought and called it "wicked" and the verse continued warning and commanding one not to refrain [from lending], but to give [the loan], as [ibid.:10] states: "You shall certainly give him and your Heart should not regret giving him." [Indeed,] the Holy One, blessed be He, promised that the reward for this mitzvah will be granted in this world,91As opposed to many other mitzvot for which reward is granted only in the World-to-Come. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 1:1) for a discussion of this matter. as [the verse continues:] "Because of this God will bless you."

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
It is a positive commandment to count sets of seven years1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 140) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 330) includes the commandment to count the sets of years among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. As the Rambam states in Sefer HaMitzvot the mitzvah is not to count a 50 year cycle, but rather to count seven sets of seven year cycles. and to sanctify the fiftieth year,2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 136) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 332) includes the commandment to sanctify the fiftieth year among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam explains that the sanctification of the year is reflected in considering the produce of that year ownerless. as [Leviticus 25:8-10] states: "And you shall count seven years for yourselves... and you shall sanctify the fiftieth year." These two mitzvot are entrusted to the High Court3The Sanhedrin, the court of 71 judges which served as Judaism's supreme Rabbinic authority. alone.4I.e., their fulfillment is not incumbent on each person individually, but on the people as a whole, and hence, on the High Court, who acts as their agent.
When did the counting begin? After the fourteen years following the entry into Eretz [Yisrael]. [This is derived from Leviticus 25:3]: "Six years shall you sow your field and six years shall you trim your vineyard." [Implied is that] each person must recognize his [portion of the] land. [The people] took seven years to conquer the land and seven years to divide it.5Zevachim 118b derives the fact that it took the Jews seven years to conquer Eretz Yisrael from the statements of Caleb quoted in Joshua 14:7 and it postulates that the division also took seven years. Thus the counting began after the 2503rd year after the creation, from Rosh HaShanah,6Avodah Zarah 9a states that the Torah was given in the year 2448, when the forty years the Jews wandered in the desert and the fourteen years that the land was conquered and divided are added, a total of 2502 are reached. Thus the counting began in the 2503rd year. after the conjunction [of the sun and the moon before the creation] of Adam, which was in the second year of the creation.7I.e., our counting begins from the creation of Adam which was on Rosh HaShanah, for Adam's creation superseded the creation that preceded his to the extent that Rosh HaShanah is considered the anniversary of creation and the beginning of the year and not the 25th of Elul even though that date was the first day of creation.Adam's creation is mentioned as occurring in the second year after creation, because any portion of a year is considered as a year. Thus the five days from the 25th of Elul until Rosh HaShanah are the first year referred to here. Hence, there is a theoretical conjunction of the sun and the moon for that year. See Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 6:8 and notes which mention the day and time of the first conjunction. They declared the [two thousand,] five hundred, and tenth year after the creation which was the 21st year after the entry into Eretz Yisrael as the Sabbatical year. They counted seven Sabbatical years and then sanctified the fiftieth year which was the 64th year after they entered Eretz [Yisrael].
The Jewish people counted 17 Jubilee years8I.e., they were in the midst of counting the seventeenth Jubilee as explained in the following note. from the time they entered [Eretz Yisrael] until they departed.9I Kings 6:1 relates that the first Temple was built 480 years after the exodus from Egypt. When the 40 years of wandering in the desert and the 14 years when Eretz Yisrael was conquered and divided is subtracted from that figure, 426 years remain. When the 410 years that the First Temple stood (as stated in Yoma 9a) are added, a total of 836 is reached. 836 divided by 50 equals 16. Thus the Jews were exiled in the 36th year of the seventeenth Jubilee cycle. Note the discussion of the Rambam's wording "17 Jubilees" by the Ra'avad, Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh and others based on Rosh HaShanah 9a. The year they departed, when the Temple was destroyed the first time, was the year following the Sabbatical year and the 36th year in the Jubilee cycle. For the First Temple stood for 410 years. When it was destroyed, this reckoning ceased.After it ceased, the land remained desolate for seventy years.10And for the 70 years of the Babylonian exile, the Jubilee year cycle was not followed. See Halachah 5. Then the Second Temple was built and it stood for 420 years. In the seventh year after it was built, Ezra ascended [to Eretz Yisrael]. This is referred to as the second entry.11See also Chapter 12, Halachah 15. From this year, they began another reckoning. They designated the thirteenth year of the Second Temple as the Sabbatical year12For they began counting from Ezra's arrival. and counted seven Sabbatical years and sanctified the fiftieth year. Although the Jubilee year was not observed in [the era of] the Second Temple,13See Halachah 8. The Rambam's intent is that the mitzvot of the Jubilee year were not observed. they would count it in order to sanctify the Sabbatical years.
It follows that the year in which the [Second] Temple was destroyed, [more precisely, the year] beginning from Tishrei that was approximately two months after the destruction14For the destruction took place on the ninth of Av. - for the reckoning of Sabbatical and Jubilee years begins in Tishrei - was the year following the Sabbatical year. It was the fifteenth year of the ninth Jubilee cycle.15The Second Temple stood for 420 years (Yoma, loc. cit.). Thus if the reckoning of the Sabbatical and Jubilee years began in its seventh year, there is a total of 414. Eight Jubilee cycles produce a total of 400 years. Thus the year following the destruction was the 415th year and it was the year following the Sabbatical year.According to this reckoning, this year which is the 1107 year after the destruction, which is the 1487th year according to the reckoning of legal documents,16In the Talmudic era, it was customary to date legal documents from the time of Alexander the Great's ascent to the throne. See Hilchot Gerushin 1:27. which is 4936th year after the creation,17This corresponds to 1176 C.E. This date is interesting in another context, for it gives us some insight into the Rambam's writing and editing of the Mishneh Torah. In his Introduction to the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam mentions the date of the composition of the work as 4937, and in Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 11:16, he speaks of the date 4938. Thus it is apparent that he worked on the text for several years, wrote the Introduction in 4937, and then edited and added to the work in 4938. is a Sabbatical year and it is the 21st year of the Jubilee cycle.18I.e., that date is 1121 years after the last Jubilee observed before the destruction of the Second Temple. Thus if that figure is divided by fifty, 21 years are left over. Hence, it is a Sabbatical year.
Nevertheless, all of the Geonim have said that they have received a tradition, transferred from teacher to student that in the seventy years between the destruction of the First Temple and the building of the Second Temple, they counted only Sabbatical years, not the Jubilee year. Similarly, after the destruction of the Second Temple, they did not count the fiftieth year. Instead, they counted only sets of seven from the beginning of the year of the destruction. [This interpretation] is also apparent from the Talmud in Avodah Zarah.19See Avodah Zarah 9b. This reckoning is a received tradition.
[The reckoning of] the Sabbatical year is well-known and renowned among the Geonim and the people of Eretz Yisrael. None of them make any reckoning except according to the years of the destruction.20For it is accepted that the year following the destruction was the beginning of a Sabbatical cycle, as stated in Halachah 4. According to this reckoning, this year, which is the 1107th year after the destruction is the year following the Sabbatical year.21I.e., when 1107 is divided by 7, there is a remainder of 1.We rely on this tradition and we rule according to it22The Radbaz states that this was the practice in his day and this is the present practice in Eretz Yisrael and throughout the world, for the Rambam's ruling is accepted by both the Beit Yosef and Rama (Choshen Mishpat 67:1). See Sefer Meirat Einayim 66:5. with regard to the tithes,23For the obligations of the second tithe and the tithe for the poor depend on the years of the Sabbatical cycle. the Sabbatical year, and the nullification of debts, for the received tradition and deed24I.e., the way the law has actually been observed. are great pillars in establishing [Halachic] rulings and it is appropriate to rely on them.
The Jubilee year is not counted in the set of Sabbatical years.25This applies whether the Jubilee year was observed in its full sense, as in most of the First Temple era, or it was merely counted as throughout the Second Temple era. Instead, the 49th year is a Sabbatical year and the fiftieth year is a Jubilee year. Then the 51st year is the first of the six years of the [next] Sabbatical cycle. This is true of every Jubilee year.
From the time the tribes of Reuven and Gad and half the tribe of Menasheh were exiled,26The tribes of Reuven and Gad and half of the tribe of Menashe were exiled approximately 18 years before the remaining seven and a half tribes. They in turn were exiled approximately 130 years before the destruction of the Temple and exile of the tribe of Judah. [the observance] of the Jubilee year ceased, as [implied by Leviticus 25:10]: "You shall proclaim freedom throughout the land to all of its inhabitants." [One can infer that this commandment applies only] when all of its inhabitants are dwelling within it. [Moreover,] they may not be intermingled, one tribe with another, but rather each tribe is dwelling in its appropriate place.27For each tribe was given an ancestral heritage of its own.When the Jubilee is observed in Eretz [Yisrael], it should also be observed in the Diaspora,28With regard to the freeing of Hebrew servants. as [implied by the phrase used in the above verse:] "It is the Jubilee," [i.e.,] in every place. [This applies] whether the Temple is standing or whether the Temple is not standing.29I.e., it is the presence of the Jewish people in the land and not the existence of the Temple which determines the land's sanctity.
When [the laws of] the Jubilee year are observed, the laws of a Hebrew servant are observed,30See Hilchot Avadim, ch. 1-2. as are the laws of homes in a walled city, the laws of a field given as a dedication offering, and the laws of ancestral fields.31The laws governing the latter three subjects are described in Chapters 12 and 13. We accept [a gentile as] a resident alien32I.e., if a gentile accepts the observance of the Seven Laws Given to the Descendants of Noah, he is granted the right to dwell in Eretz Yisrael. See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 10:6; Hilchot Melachim 8:10-11. and the Sabbatical year is observed in Eretz [Yisrael] and debts are nullified in all places according to Scriptural Law. In the era when the Jubilee year is not observed, none of these mitzvot are observed except the Sabbatical year in Eretz [Yisrael] according to Rabbinic Law and also the nullification of debts in all places according to Rabbinic Law, as we explained.33See Chapter 9, Halachah 3, with regard to the nullification of debts. With regard to the observance of the Sabbatical year, the Rambam's statements are the subject of a difference of opinion among the commentaries. Our translation follows the version of the text suggested by Rav Yosef Corcus which is accepted by Rav Shabsi Frankel. It is also the conception followed by the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 331). The Kessef Mishneh, however, interprets the text differently, reading the last line as: "with the exception of the Sabbatical year in Eretz [Yisrael] and, according to Rabbinic Law, the nullification of debts." Some commentaries have suggested that the Rambam's statements in Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 135) support this interpretation. Most other Rishonim follow the conception that the observance of the Sabbatical Law is a Rabbinic ordinance in the present era. See also Chapter 12, Halachah 16, and notes and Hilchot Terumah 1:26 and notes.
It is a positive commandment to sound the shofar on the tenth of Tishrei34Yom Kippur. in the Jubilee year.35Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 137) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 331) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This mitzvah also includes setting the servants free, as the Rambam mentions in his listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of these halachot.Sefer Hamitzvot, loc. cit., states that, thematically, this sounding of the shofar differs from the sounding of the shofar on Rosh HaShanah. On Rosh HaShanah, the shofar is sounded as "a remembrance before God." In the Jubilee, by contrast, the sounding of the shofar is the proclamation of freedom required by the Torah.The commentaries note that this difference is also reflected in the wording used to describe the commandments. With regard to the sounding of the shofar on Rosh HaShanah, the Rambam (Sefer HaMitzvot, positive commandment 170, Hilchot Shofar 1:1) states the mitzvah is to hear the sounding of the shofar, while here he states that the mitzvah is to sound the shofar. This mitzvah is entrusted to the [High] Court first,36I.e., first, the shofar is sounded in the High Court (the Sanhedrin of 71 judges) and then it should be sounded by every individual. as [Leviticus 25:9] states: "You shall sound a shofar blast. Each and every individual is also obligated to sound the shofar, as [the verse] continues: "and you shall sound the shofar."37I.e., the verse uses two forms, the first singular, and the second plural, for the same verb. On this basis, it is derived that first, the shofar is sounded by the court for the people as a unified entity, and then, it is sounded by each person individually. See Rosh HaShanah 30a, 34a.We sound nine shofar blasts in the same way as we sound them on Rosh HaShanah.38I.e., sounding three series of tekiah, shevarim, teruah, tekiah blasts. See Hilchot Shofar, ch. 3, for details. We sound the shofar throughout the boundaries of [Eretz] Yisrael.39The Or Sameach interprets this phrasing to mean that although the Jubilee is observed in the Diaspora, the shofar is not sounded there.
[The requirements] of shofar used for the Jubilee and Rosh HaShanah are the same in all matters.40See Hilchot Shofar 1:1. Both on Rosh HaShanah and in the Jubilee the tekiyot are sounded except in the Jubilee year, they are sounded41I.e., even when Yom Kippur falls on the Sabbath. both in the court that sanctifies the new moon42I.e., the Sanhedrin of 71 judges. and in a court that does not sanctify the moon.43I.e., an ordinary local court. [Moreover,] for the entire time the court is in session, every individual is obligated to sound [the shofar even] outside the presence of the court.
When Rosh HaShanah falls on the Sabbath, by contrast, [the shofar] would be sounded only in a court that sanctified the new moon. Every individual may sound [the shofar] only in the presence of the court.44See Hilchot Shofar 2:8-9.
[The observance of] three matters are of critical importance with regard to the Jubilee year:45I.e., if these three mitzvot are not fulfilled, the Jubilee year is not granted its sanctity (Rosh HaShanah 9b). the sounding of the shofar,46This would appear to refer to the sounding of the shofar by the High Court, and not its sounding by every individual. the release of servants,47A Hebrew servant is granted his freedom in the Jubilee year, whether he was sold into slavery on his own initiative or by the court and even if he willingly extended his servitude, as Leviticus 25:40 states: "Until the Jubilee year, he will work with you." See Hilchot Avadim, ch. 2. and the return of fields to their owners.48As described in the following chapter. This is referred to as "the release of land."
From Rosh HaShanah49Even though the laws of the Jubilee year do not take effect until the sounding of the shofar on Yom Kippur, the sanctity of the year begins on Rosh HaShanah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Rosh HaShanah 1:1)]. until Yom Kippur, servants would not be released to their homes,50Lest the shofar not be sounded in the court and thus the laws of the Jubilee year not apply, as stated in the previous halachah. nor would they be subjugated to their masters,51For the likelihood is that it will be sounded. nor would the fields return to their [original] owners.52Even though the laws of the Jubilee year do not take effect until the sounding of the shofar on Yom Kippur, the sanctity of the year begins on Rosh HaShanah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Rosh HaShanah 1:1)]. Instead, the servants would eat, drink, and rejoice, with crowns on their heads. When Yom Kippur arrives and the shofar is sounded in the court, the servants are released to their homes and the fields are returned to their owners.
With regard to the land being allowed to rest, the laws of the Jubilee year are the same of those of the Sabbatical year. Whatever agricultural labors53We have used this translation because both work with the land and work with trees are forbidden in the Sabbatical year. See Chapters 1 and 2 above. are forbidden54By both Rabbinic and Scriptural Law. in the Sabbatical year are forbidden in the Jubilee year. Whatever is permitted in the Sabbatical year is permitted in the Jubilee. Whenever the performance of a labor is punishable by lashes in the Sabbatical year,55See Chapter 1, Halachah 2.Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandments 224-226) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvot 333-335) include the prohibitions against working the land, harvesting the aftergrowth of crops, and harvesting fruit in the Jubilee year among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. it is punishable by lashes in the Jubilee year. [Similarly,] the laws governing the eating,56I.e., the respect given to the produce of the Sabbatical year, as explained in Chapter 5. sale,57See Chapter 6. and removal58See Chapter 7. of the produce of the Jubilee year are the same as those governing the produce of the Sabbatical year in all respects.
The Sabbatical year has an added dimension lacking in the Jubilee, for debts are nullified in the Sabbatical year,59As related in Chapter 9. and they are not nullified in the Jubilee. The Jubilee year has an added dimension lacking in the Sabbatical year, for in the Jubilee, servants are released and land is released. This refers to the laws regarding the sale of land in the Torah.60See Leviticus 25:23-28. This is a positive commandment,61Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 138) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 340) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This mitzvah is described at the beginning of the following chapter. as [Leviticus 25:24] states: "You shall grant redemption to the land.The Jubilee year releases land at its beginning,62On Yom Kippur, as stated in Halachah 14. while the Sabbatical year does not release debts until its conclusion, as explained.63As stated in Chapter 9, Halachah 4.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
[The portions of] Eretz Yisrael that were divided among the tribes1For the entire passage speaks about an "ancestral heritage," i.e., land given to a person's ancestors when the land was originally divided among the tribes (Radbaz). This excludes Jerusalem which was never divided among the tribes (Rambam LeAm). can never be sold permanently, as [Leviticus 25:23] states: "The land will not be sold in perpetuity." If one sells the land in perpetuity, both [the buyer and the seller] violate a negative commandment.2Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 227) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 339) include the commandment for the land not to be sold in perpetuity among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Their deeds are of no consequence,3For whenever a person acts in violation of Torah Law, his deeds are of no avail (Temurah 4b). Since their deeds are of no consequence, they are not punished by lashes (Mishneh LiMelech). and the land reverts to its [original] owner in the Jubilee year.
When a person sells his field for 60 years, it is not returned in the Jubilee.4Even though a Jubilee year will definitely fall within the span of the sale. For [the only property] that returns in the Jubilee year is property that is sold without qualification or property that is sold in perpetuity.
A person should not sell his home or his ancestral field even though it returns to him eventually, unless he becomes impoverished, as [Leviticus 25:25] states: "If your brother becomes indigent and sells his ancestral heritage." One is not permitted to sell [such property] and hold the money in his pocket, engage in commerce with them, or purchase utensils, servants, or livestock. [He is only allowed to] sell to provide himself with sustenance. [Nevertheless,] if one transgressed and sold [such property], the sale is valid.
Judgments are made with regard to a home in accordance with the laws of a walled city,5As explained in the following chapter. Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 139 and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 341) include the commandment to carry out the laws pertaining to a walled city among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. and with regard to a field in accordance with the laws of a field that is an ancestral heritage.6Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 138) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 340) include the command to enable a field to be redeemed or for it to be returned to its owner in the Jubilee year among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The laws of a person who sells a field that is an ancestral heritage [require] the calculation of the years remaining until the Jubilee. Whenever [the original owner] desires to redeem the field he should make a reckoning with the purchaser with regard to the years from which he benefited from the field and reduce that from the purchase price and return the remainder.7As the Rambam explains in the following halachah, the sale of such a field is considered as a rental agreement until the Jubilee year, with the purchase price being divided equally among the years remaining until the Jubilee. Thus each year has a set value. If the seller wants to redeem his field, he must pay back the money for the remaining years.
What is implied? There remained ten years until the Jubilee and a field was sold for 100 dinar.8Thus the right to use the field was sold for 10 dinar a year. The purchaser benefited from the field for three years and then the seller desired to redeem his field. He should give him 70 dinar and then [the seller] should return the field. Similarly, if he benefited from the field for six years, he should give him 40 dinar and then [the seller] should return the field. If he did not redeem it, but instead left it in the purchaser's possession until the Jubilee, and then it should return to the owner without money, as [indicated by Leviticus 25:15]: "According to the number of years of [its] crops, he will sell it to you."
If he sold it to him when it was filled with produce and then he redeemed it after two years, he cannot tell him: "Return it to me filled with produce as it was when I sold it to you." Therefore if he sold it to him filled with produce before Rosh HaShanah and redeemed it after two years, the purchaser will have benefited from three harvests in those two years. Nevertheless, [the reduction of the price] is calculated only according to two years, as [implied by ibid. 27:18:9Although this verse is speaking about the consecration of a field and its redemption from the Temple treasury, Arichin 29b-30a explains that the same principles should be applied to a sale to a private person. "the priest shall calculate the money...] according to the remaining years," [i.e., the calculation is made according to years,] and not according to crops.10As one might conclude from Leviticus 25:15 as cited in the previous halachah.
The shoots, the twigs, and the fruits from the wild fig trees contained within it belong to the purchaser like its other produce.11For these are considered as temporary benefits which the field regularly produces. If, however, [the branches of a tree] are cut down12Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Kilayim 2:5). See also the Kessef Mishneh to Chapter 1, Halachah 15. or it dries,13And thus it has value only to be cut down as firewood. they are both forbidden to benefit from it.14The purchaser is forbidden to benefit from it alone, because the tree is considered as part of the permanent features of the field and thus was not included in the original sale. On the other hand, the owner cannot take the entire benefit for himself, for the purchaser is entitled to benefit from it for the duration of his ownership of the property. What should be done? It should be sold and land purchased with the proceeds. The purchaser is entitled to benefit from that land until the [original] field is redeemed from him.
If a person purchases a field that is an ancestral heritage and plants trees15If, however, the body of the land itself increases in value, that increase is not granted to the purchaser. See Halachah 16. which increase the value [of the field], when it returns [to its original owner] in the Jubilee, we should evaluate the increase in value brought about by the trees in it and the owner of the field must pay this sum to the purchaser. [This is derived from ibid. 25:33]: "A home that was sold shall go out... [in the Jubilee]." [Implied is that the home] is returned, but not the increase in its value.
When a person sells his field in the era when the Jubilee year is observed as we explained, he is not permitted to redeem it in less than two years, as [ibid.:15] states: "According to the number of years16The use of the plural form implies that the sale must be for at least two years. of [its] crops, he will sell it to you." Even if the purchaser was willing [to return it earlier], it is forbidden, as [the same verse] states: "According to the number of years17If, however, the body of the land itself increases in value, that increase is not granted to the purchaser. See Halachah 16. after the Jubilee shall you purchase it from your colleague." [The purchaser must maintain possession for] at least two years from the date of the sale.18I.e., he cannot redeem it until the same date two years later. We do not count the years as beginning from Rosh HaShanah, but from the date of the sale.
The purchaser must benefit from two crops in these two years and then [the seller] may redeem it, for it is written "years of its crops." Therefore if one of the two years were the Sabbatical year19When it is forbidden to sow a field. or a year of windblast or blight,20Which prevented crops from growing in the entire land (Bava Metzia 106a). they are not included in the reckoning.
If, however, the purchaser left it fallow one year and then benefited from it in the second year or benefited from it one year and then lightly plowed it, but did not sow it in the following year, [these years] are included in the reckoning.21Since crops could have grown during those years, and he chose not to sow the land on his own, they are considered "years of its crops." The Kessef Mishneh states that this law also applies if the purchaser leaves it fallow for two years. The Radbaz, however, does not accept this conclusion. If he sold it in the Jubilee itself, the sale is not binding and the money should be returned to the seller.22Arachin 29b explains that this is a logical conclusion. If the advent of the Jubilee causes a field that was sold to be returned to its original owners, it will certainly prevent the sale of one that was not sold as of yet from taking effect.
If he sold it one year before the Jubilee, the purchaser benefits from it for a second year after the Jubilee,23As implied by the phrase "years of its crops," a sale must take effect for at least two years. Hence, the Jubilee does not nullify this sale and the land remains his for one year after the sale. Kin'at Eliyahu notes that since a Jubilee is always preceded by a Sabbatical year (when the purchaser cannot benefit from it), the land must have been sold two years before the Jubilee. as [implied by the phrase]: "years of its crops."
If he sold clefts that were filled with water or rocky [land] that was not fit to sow upon, he may redeem them in less than two years, as [implied by the phrase]: "years of its crops." One might infer that it is only a field that is fit to grow crops that is not redeemed in less than two years. [Nevertheless,] if the original owner did not redeem [this land], it returns to him in the Jubilee even though it is not fit to be sown.24For such land is still called "his ancestral heritage" (Arachin 14b).
If he sold [fruit-]trees,25The bracketed addition is based on the gloss of the Radbaz who explains that this law would not apply to non-fruit trees. They could be redeemed within the two years. He also explains that the seller must have specifically stated that the sale does not include the land. Otherwise, a certain amount of land is automatically included as stated in Hilchot Mechirah 24:1-2. See also the notes to Hilchot Arichin 4:25. they may not be redeemed in less than two years, for they are fit to produce crops. If he did not redeem them, they are not returned to the owner in the Jubilee, as [implied by ibid.:27]: "he shall return to his ancestral heritage." [This excludes] trees.26For the term "ancestral heritage" implies land.
If a person sold his field to one person, that person sold it to a second, the second to a third - even if there were 100 consecutive sales - in the Jubilee, it returns to its original owner, as [implied by Leviticus 27:24]: "In the Jubilee year, the field will return to the one from whom he purchased it, whose ancestral heritage it was."27Although the verse is speaking about the return of a purchased field that was consecrated, similar principles apply even if the field was not consecrated.
If [the owner] sold it to the first purchaser for 100 dinarim and [the latter] sold it to the second for 200, should the original owner desire to redeem it, he makes a reckoning only with the first purchaser, as [ibid. 25:27] states: "[And return the remainder] to the man to whom he sold it."28That purchaser must reimburse the person to whom he sold the field. Although the profit of the purchaser/seller is minimized according to the number of years remaining to the Jubilee, he still retains the profit for the years the sale was viable. If [the owner] sold it to a person for 200 and [the latter] sold it for 100, [the owner] makes a reckoning with the final [purchaser].29I.e., the owner need not compensate the purchaser/seller for his loss.Similarly, if he sold the field for 100 and it increased in value30This is referring to an increase that comes about because of market fluctuations and not as a result of improvements made by the purchaser as indicated by Halachah 8 (Radbaz). in the possession of the purchaser until it was appropriate to be sold for 200, the reckoning should be made according to the purchase price. If he sold it for 200 and its value diminished31Here also, the Rambam is speaking about a decrease as a result of market fluctuations. Needless to say, the same law would apply if the value of the land was reduced because of the purchaser's actions. and it is now fit to be sold for 100, the reckoning should be made according to its present value. [The general principle is:] We always augment the legal power of the seller of an ancestral heritage and weaken the legal power of the purchaser.
When a person sells a field that is an ancestral heritage, but he also possesses other fields and sells some of those other fields to redeem [his ancestral heritage] that he sold, his [request to redeem the field] is not heeded, for [ibid.:26] states: "And he attained enough to redeem it." [We can infer that] he must attain something that was not accessible to him at the time he sold it. Similarly, if he borrowed [money] to redeem [the field], his [request] is not heeded, for that verse states: "And he acquired." [Implied is that he must obtain the means on his own], not through a loan.
If he attained a small amount [of resources] and desired to redeem half the field he sold, his [request] is not heeded, for that verse states: "enough to redeem it." Either he redeems the entire [field] or he does not redeem at all.If a relative desired to redeem it, he may, as [ibid.:25] states: "And his redeemer who is related to him shall come...."32The classic example of this is the redemption of the field sold by Elimelech by his relative, Boaz, as described at the conclusion of the book of Ruth.
When a person gives his field away as a present, it returns to him in the Jubilee, as [ibid.:13] states: "Each man shall return to his ancestral heritage." This includes one who gave [it away as] a present.33As the Radbaz mentions, in several sources (e.g., Chapter 12, Halachah 4), we find the principle that a present is considered as a sale. [Kin'at Eliyahu asks: If so, why is the prooftext necessary?]
Brothers who divide [an inheritance] are considered as purchasers34I.e., we consider it as if they sold the share the other received in return for the share that they received. We do not apply the principle of bereirah, i.e., consider the portion received as the portion destined for them at the outset (Bechorot 52b). and each one should return his portion to the other in the Jubilee, but their division is not nullified.35I.e., there is no need to nullify the entire division and recalculate. Instead, it is sufficient to merely exchange portions (Kessef Mishneh). Similarly, a firstborn36Who receives a double share of the inheritance. From the wording of Deuteronomy 21:17, our Sages conclude that this double portion is given to the firstborn as a present. Hence, since a present is considered as a sale, the share is returned and the inheritance redivided [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 9:11)]. and one who performs yibbum with his brother's wife,37And is therefore given his brother's share of the inheritance (Hilchot Nachalot 3:7). He is also called a "firstborn" (Deuteronomy 25:6  and thus the concepts mentioned in the previous note apply to him. return the portion that they received in the Jubilee and take another portion instead of it.
[Different rules apply with regard to a husband] who inherits his wife's [property]. Although a husband's inheritance of this property is a Rabbinic ordinance,38See Hilchot Ishut 12:3; Hilchot Nachalot 1:8, 6:8. our Sages reinforced their decree as if it were of Scriptural origin and he is not required to return it [to the women's family] in the Jubilee year.39I.e., he is considered as a single heir and not as a purchaser. If he inherited a [family] cemetery from her, he should return it to her family members lest this blemish [the reputation of] the family.40As the Maggid Mishneh states in his gloss to Hilchot Mechirah 24:17, it is an embarrassment for the members of a family that their relatives will not be buried in the family plot. They should pay him its worth after deducting the value of his wife's grave, for he is obligated to bury her.41See Hilchot Ishut 12:2,4.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
A person who sells a house in a city surrounded by a wall1As stated in Halachah 15, it is not significant whether the city is surrounded by a wall at the present time. Instead, we are speaking about cities that were walled when Joshua conquered Eretz Yisrael. may redeem it throughout a twelve month period from the day2I.e., the year mentioned in the Leviticus 25:29 is not a calendar year, beginning on Rosh HaShanah, but a twelve month period beginning from the day of sale. he sold it whenever he desires, even on the day he sold it. When he redeems it, he returns all the money he received and does not deduct anything from the purchaser.3In contrast to the laws of a field that is an ancestral heritage, as mentioned in Chapter 11, Halachah 4. The return of the purchaser's money in full resembles a loan at interest - for the benefit he had in using the property is comparable to interest paid for the principal - nevertheless, because a sale is involved, there is no prohibition (Arichin 9:3).
Relatives may not redeem it,4In contrast to the law regarding an ancestral heritage (Chapter 11, Halachah 18). only the seller himself if he obtains the means. He may sell his property and redeem it,5In contrast to the law regarding an ancestral heritage (ibid.:17). but he may not borrow to redeem it, nor may he redeem it partially.6In this, the laws parallel those governing an ancestral field (ibid.:17-18).
If the purchaser dies, [the original owner] may redeem it from his son. Similarly, if the seller dies, his son may redeem it for the duration of the twelve months.7Arachin 32b derives these concepts from the exegesis of relevant verses.
If [the seller] sold it to one person and he sold it to another, the reckoning is made from [the date of] the first [sale]. When the first year is concluded, the house is established8Permanently, for it does not return to the owner in the Jubilee. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arichin 9:4). as the property of the [second] purchaser. For the [second] seller9Who was also the first purchaser. sold to the second [purchaser] all the rights that will accrue to him [with regard to this property].10The Rambam is referring to a difference of opinion in Arichin, loc. cit., whether after twelve months, the house remains in the possession of the second purchaser or reverts to the first. Although one might argue that the Torah specifies that if the house is not redeemed it becomes the property of the first seller, that rationale is not accepted for the reason the Rambam states. If twelve months pass and it is not redeemed, it is established as the property of the [second] purchaser.Similarly, if [a person] gave a house as a present and did not redeem it within these twelve months, it is established11Permanently, for it does not return to the owner in the Jubilee. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arichin 9:4). as the property of the recipient of the present.12For as indicated by Chapter 11, Halachah 19, a present is equivalent to a sale.
During a leap year, the permanent disposition of the property is not brought about until the end of the year,13I.e., until the end of a 13 month period. as [Leviticus 25:30] states: "Until a complete year is completed for it." [This wording indicates that] the extra month [of the leap year] is included.
[The following rules apply when a person] sold two houses, one in the middle of Adar 1 and the other on Rosh Chodesh Adar II. When the month of Adar arrives in the following year,14I.e., an ordinary year with only one Adar. the year for the house sold on Rosh Chodesh II is completed.15For it is a full twelve months after that sale and that sale was made after the extra month of the leap year had been completed. The year for the house sold in the middle of Adar I is not completed until the middle of Adar in the following year, for the purchaser took possession in the middle of the extra month [of the leap year].
If the final day of the twelfth month arrives and [the seller] cannot find the purchaser to redeem his field from him,16And if that day passes, he will not be able to redeem it. he may deposit his money in the court, break down the door, and enter his home.17This is an ordinance established by Hillel the Elder to protect the rights of the seller (Arachin 9:4). The rationale is that since the purchaser has no choice whether to accept the money or not, it is sufficient for the money to be deposited in the court for him (Arachin 32a). Whenever the purchaser comes, he may take his money.
When a person consecrates a house in a walled city and another person redeems it from the Temple treasury, when a year passes from the time that it was redeemed from the Temple treasury without it being redeemed by its [original] owner, it becomes established as the property of the one who redeemed it [from the Temple treasury].18We are not concerned with the date on which it was consecrated. Instead, it is the date from which it was redeemed from the Temple treasury which concerns us, for that is when it was sold and it is its sale that brings about a change in ownership. For the Temple treasury does not become the permanent owner, the purchaser does, as [implied by Leviticus 25:30]: "the one who purchases it for his generations."19I.e., for the sake of his descendants and the Temple treasury does not have descendants (Arachin 32b).
When a person sells a house in a walled city and the Jubilee arrives within the first year after the sale, the house does not revert to its owner in the Jubilee.20The statement (Leviticus 25:30 : "It shall not return in the Jubilee" applies both before the house becomes the permanent property of the purchaser and afterwards. Instead, it remains in the possession of the purchaser until the seller decides to redeem it throughout the year after its sale or it becomes established as the property [of the purchaser] after that year is completed.
When a person sells a home in a settlement or in a city that is not surrounded by a wall in the appropriate manner,21Again, what is significant is not the present state of the city, but its state at the time of Joshua's conquest, as stated in Halachah 15. he may redeem it according to the advantages that apply with regard to both the redemption of an [ancestral] field and the redemption of a home in a walled city.What is implied? If he desires to redeem [the home] immediately, he may,22Since the sale involves a house, the seller has this advantage over the seller of a field. as is the law with regard to a home [in a walled city]. If the twelve months pass and he does not redeem it, he may redeem it until the Jubilee, as is the law regarding a field.23For Leviticus 25:31 states that they will be considered as a field. When he redeems it, he makes a reckoning with the purchaser and subtracts the value of the benefit he received.24Arachin 33a [quoted by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arachin 9:7)] explains that since the above verse specifies that these homes can be redeemed and that they are returned in the Jubilee, we derive the concept that their redemption involves a reduction of the cost of the field. If the Jubilee arrives without having redeemed it, the house returns [to the owner] without payment, as is the law with regard to fields.
Any [residential property] within a city's wall, e.g., gardens, bathhouses, and dovecotes, is considered as a house,25I.e., it can be redeemed only within a year and does not return in the Jubilee. for [ibid.] states: "that are in the city." Fields that are located in the city may be redeemed according to the rules applying to fields outside the city, as [implied the phrase (ibid.)]: "And the house that will be within the city will be established." [This includes] houses and anything resembling houses, not fields.
When a house is not four cubits by four cubits, it does not become the permanent property of the purchaser like the houses in a walled city.26For a house is not considered a house unless it is at least four cubits by four cubits (Sukkah 3b). This concept applies in several different contacts, for example, the requirement to place a mezuzah (Hilchot Mezuzah 6:1) or to construct a guardrail (Hilchot Rotzeach 11:1). A house does not become the permanent property of a purchaser in Jerusalem.27As the Rambam states in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:14, Jerusalem was never divided among the tribes. For that reason, a person can never permanently acquire property there. Instead, houses there are bound by the laws that apply to houses in settlements (see Rashi. Arachin 32b; Bava Kama 82b). A house that is built in the wall is not considered as a home in a walled city.28Arachin 9:5 records a difference of opinion on this issue between Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Shimon. Both of them base their opinion on the exegesis of the Biblical story of Rachab's home in Joshua, ch. 2.
When the roofs of a city serve as its walls29Megillah 5b explains that this refers to a situation where the city is not surrounded by a wall, but instead, its houses are built next to each other, so that it appears that it is surrounded by a wall (Rav Yosef Corcus). or the sea serves as it wall,30For example, as in the instance of Tiberias which was surrounded by a wall on one side and the sea on the other.it is not considered as a city surrounded by a wall.31Instead, they are governed by the laws applying to homes in a settlement.
A city is not referred to as a walled city unless it has three or more courtyards and in each of the courtyards, it has two or more houses.32Otherwise, it is not large enough to be called a city. [Moreover,] it must have been surrounded by a wall first and then the courtyards were built in its midst. If, however, a place was settled and afterwards, surrounded [by a wall] or it did not have [at least] three courtyards with [at least] two houses [each], it is not considered as a walled city. Instead, its houses are like the houses of a settlement.33Interestingly, the Talmud also mentions these laws with regard to reading a Megilah in a walled city (Megilah 3b), but the Rambam does not quote them there, only here.
We rely only on a wall that surrounded [a city] at the time of the conquest of the land.What is implied? When a city was not surrounded by a wall at the time when Joshua conquered the land even though it is surrounded now, [the houses in it] are considered as the houses of a settlement. [Conversely,] if a city was surrounded by a wall at the time of Joshua,34Arachin 9:6 gives as examples: Ancient Yodefat, Gamla, Chadid, Gedod, and Ono. even though it is not surrounded at present, it is considered as walled.35The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that once a city's walls are destroyed, the city loses its unique status. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that the Rambam is referring to the situation in the First Temple era. If a city had a wall at the time of Joshua's conquest, but that wall was torn down, the status of the city did not change throughout that era. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arichin 9:6).When the Jews were exiled after the first destruction [of the Temple], the sanctity of the walled cities from Joshua's time were nullified.36And the sanctity of the land was nullified, as the Rambam states in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:15, Hilchot Terumah 1:26.. When Ezra ascended at the time of the second entry into the land, all of the walled cities of that time became consecrated. For the entry [into the land] at the time of Ezra, i.e., the second entry, was comparable to the entry at the time of Joshua. Just as [after] their entry at the time of Joshua, they counted Sabbatical years and Jubilees, sanctified the homes in walled cities and were obligated in the tithes, so too, [after] their entry in the time of Ezra, they counted Sabbatical years and Jubilees, sanctified the homes in walled cities and were obligated in the tithes.37As stated in those sources, in contrast to the sanctification in the time of Joshua, the sanctification of the land by Ezra was only Rabbinic in origin. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam states that the cities that were walled at the time of Ezra were given the status of walled cities. From the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, it appears that the cities that were given the status of walled cities by the people who returned with Ezra were cities that were considered walled cities in the era of the First Temple.
Similarly, in the Ultimate Future, upon the third entry to the land,38I.e., when the Jews return to Eretz Yisrael led by Mashiach. we will begin to count the Sabbatical and Jubilee years and sanctify the homes in walled cities, and every place that will be conquered will be obligated in [the separation of] tithes, as [Deuteronomy 30:5]: "And God your Lord will bring you to the land that your ancestors possessed as a heritage and you shall possess." [The verse] equates [the Jews' ultimate] possession with that of their ancestors. Just as when your ancestors took possession of the land as a heritage, they practiced the renewal of all these observances, when you take possession of the land, you should practice the renewal of all these observances.39The Ra'avad and others question the Rambam's statements, because he accepts the principal (see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, loc. cit.) that through Ezra's consecration, the land was consecrated until and including the ultimate future. Kina'at Eliyahu suggests a resolution based on the fact that the sanctification of the land by Ezra was only Rabbinic in origin, while the sanctification by Mashiach will have the power of Scriptural Law. Hence, a new sanctification will be necessary.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
Although the tribe of Levi does not have an ancestral portion within Eretz [Yisrael],1I.e, all the other tribes were given portions of the land as an ancestral heritage. Levi was not given such a portion. Indeed, as stated in Halachah 10, a Scriptural prohibition is involved in them receiving such a portion. the Jewish people were commanded to give them cities2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 183) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 408) include the commandment to provide cities for the Levites among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to dwell in3One might infer from this wording (borrowed from Numbers 35:2  that the cities do not belong to the Levites per se. They are merely given the right "to dwell" in them. Nevertheless, from the Rambam's rulings: a) (Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 11:17) that the Levites must recite the declaration after separating the second tithes for they possess these cities; andb) his ruling (Hilchot Rotzeach 8:10) that an accidental killer who flees to the cities of the Levites must pay rent, we can conclude that they are the owners of these cities in a way similar to the other tribes' ownership of their ancestral heritages (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XXV, p. 93). and [additional] residential property.4Our translation follows the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Arachin 9:8) which defines the term migrash as "the settlements close to the city which we refer to as outlying districts where shepherds and workers dwell." The cities include the six cities of refuge and 42 additional cities.5Numbers 35:2, 6 states: "Command the children of Israel that they shall give to the Levites... cities for dwelling and residential property.... The cities that you shall give the Levites are the six cities of refuge... and in addition, you shall give 42 cities." The names of these 42 cities are mentioned in Joshua, ch. 21.Based on Hilchot Rotzeach, loc. cit., Likkutei Sichot, differentiates between the Levites ownership of the 42 cities and their ownership of the cities of refuge. For in Hilchot Rotzeach, the Rambam states that an accidental killer who flees to the cities of refuge need not pay rent. With regard to these cities, the Levites are mere caretakers. When cities of refuge will be added in the era of Mashiach,6In Deuteronomy, ch. 19, the Torah commands the Jewish people to set aside three cities of refuge in the portion of Eretz Yisrael west of the Jordan and three in TransJordan. It then continues (Deuteronomy 19:8-9) states: 'When God will expand your borders... you must add three more cities.' In Hilchot Melachim 11:2, the Rambam refers to this command as a proof of Mashiach's ultimate coming, for "This command was never fulfilled. [Surely,] God did not give this command in vain." Ultimately, there will come an era, the era of Mashiach, when this command will be fulfilled and these cities will be separated. See also Hilchot Rotzeach 8:2-4, 9-10. all will be given to the Levites.
[The obligation to give] the non-developed land around the cities is explicitly mentioned in the Torah as being [a radius of] three thousand cubits in every direction from the wall of the city outward, for [Numbers 35:4-5] states: "From the wall of the city onward, 1000 cubits on all sides" and continues: "You shall measure from the outside of the city 2000 cubits on the eastern side." The first thousand are left as [additional] residential property and the 2000 that are measured outside this residential property are for fields and vineyards.
Every city is given a cemetery outside these boundaries, for they do not bury their dead within their cities, as [implied by ibid.:3]: "The residential area will be for their animals, their property, and all their vital needs." [This land] was given "for their vital needs" and not for burial.7And additional land must be given for that purpose. Nevertheless, a person who accidentally killed a colleague and who fled to one of these cities should be buried within these cities, as stated in Hilchot Rotzeach 7:3 (Radbaz).
In the cities of the Levites, the city itself should not be transformed into an outlying residential area and the outlying residential area should not made part of the city. This outlying residential area should not be converted to fields, nor should the fields be converted into such a residential area, as [Leviticus 25:34] states: "The fields of the residential area of their cities should not be sold."
According to the Oral Tradition,8See Arachin 33b. it was taught that the phrase "should not be sold" should be interpreted as "should not be changed."9Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 228) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 342) include this commandment with the above interpretation among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Instead, all of the three, field, a residential area, and a city should remain in its original circumstances forever.Similarly, in the other cities of [Eretz] Yisrael, the outlying residential area should not be converted to fields, nor should the fields be converted into such a residential area. The city itself should not be transformed into an outlying residential area and the outlying residential area should not be made part of the city.
A person should not destroy his home to make it into a garden, nor should he plant a garden in his ruin, lest one destroy Eretz Yisrael.10I.e., the intent should be to make the land a residential center.
The priests and the Levites who sold fields from the fields of their cities or homes from the homes in their walled cities do not redeem their property according to the procedures [explained above].11See Chapter 11 which describes the redemption of a field that is an ancestral heritage. See Chapter 12 which describes the redemption of a home in a walled city. Instead, they may sell their fields even directly before the Jubilee and redeem them immediately.12In contrast to the fields of an ancestral heritage that must be sold for at least two years, as stated in Chapter 11, Halachah 9.In the listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of these halachot, the Rambam mentions giving the Levites the potential to redeem the land as part of the prohibition against selling the lands of the Levite. This enables that mitzvah to be understood in two contexts:a) the halachic understanding expressed in halachot 4-5, that the status of the properties should not change,b) the simple understanding of the verse, that the Levites' property should never be permanently sold, but rather there should always be the opportunity to redeem it. If they consecrated a field, they may redeem it from the possession of the Temple treasury after the Jubilee.13When, by contrast, an ordinary person who does not redeem his field after consecrating it, it becomes the property of the Temple treasury in the Jubilee (Hilchot Arachin 4:20-21). They may redeem houses in a walled city whenever they desire, even after several years,14While an ordinary person can redeem such houses only during the first year (Chapter 12, Halachah 7). as [Leviticus 25:32] states: "The Levites will have eternal rights of redemption."
When an Israelite inherits property from his maternal grandfather who was a Levi,15I.e., his maternal grandfather had no sons and his property was therefore inherited by his daughter. The daughter was married to an Israelite and so her children are Israelites. Whether she dies in her father's lifetime or afterwards, his property is inherited by her son, an Israelite. although he is not a Levite, he may redeem [the property] as if he was a Levite. Since these cities or fields belong to the Levities, they may be redeemed forever. For this law is dependent on [the characteristics of] these places, not of the owners.16And when the Israelite inherited his grandfather's property, he inherited all the rights his grandfather possessed.
When a Levite inherits the property of his maternal grandfather who is an Israelite,17I.e., a Levite married an Israelite women who gave birth to a son. That son is a Levite. If his maternal grandfather (an Israelite) dies without sons, his mother inherits his property and when she dies, the son who is a Levite inherits it from her. he does not have the redemption rights of a Levite, only those of an Israelite, for the verse "The Levites will have eternal rights of redemption" applies only in the cities of the Levites.
The entire tribe of Levi are commanded against receiving an inheritance in the land of Canaan,18Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 169) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 504) include this commandment with the above interpretation among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. and they were commanded against receiving a share in the spoil when the cities are conquered,19Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 170) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 505) include this commandment with the above interpretation among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., elaborates in explanation why the two charges are counted as separate commandments. as [Deuteronomy 10:9] states: "The priest and the Levites - the entire tribe of Levi - should not have a portion and an inheritance among Israel." "A portion" [refers to a portion] of the spoil; "an inheritance" refers to [a portion of] the land. And [Numbers 18:20]: "You20The verse is addressed to Aaron as the leader of the entire tribe of Levi. shall not receive a heritage in their land, nor will you have a portion among them," i.e., in the spoil. If a Levite or a priest takes a portion of the spoil, he is punished by lashes.21The Radbaz states that it would appear that this applies only when one has destroyed the portion that he took. If, however, it can be returned, it should be returned and he is not subjected to lashes. (This is also the view of Sefer HaChinuch, loc. cit.) Nevertheless, the Radbaz concludes that it is possible to say that one may not compensate for this prohibition by making financial restitution and hence, lashes are required in all circumstances. If he takes an inheritance in Eretz [Yisrael], it should be taken from his possession.22For land can never be misappropriated from its rightful owners. Hence, his taking it is of no consequence and therefore, he is not punished (Radbaz).
It appears to me23This phrase introduces a ruling that the Rambam arrived at through deduction, without any explicit, prior Rabbinic source. that the above applies only with regard to the land for which a covenant was established with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, their descendants inherited it and it was divided among them. If, however, other lands will be conquered by a king of Israel, the priests and the Levites have the same rights as the entire Jewish people.24The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statement, stating that if so, the priests and the Levites would not have the rights to terumah and the tithes in these lands, for (see the following halachah and Hilchot Bikkurim 105), these presents were given to the priests instead of an ancestral portion. The Kessef Mishneh strengthens the Ra'avad's argument, noting that were it not for a special Divine commandment, the priests and the Levites would not have been given a portion of the spoil gained in the war against Midian. Nevertheless, the Kessef Mishneh as well as the Radbaz explain that the spoils from the war against Midian can be used as a source to teach that similar concepts apply with regard to other wars.
Why did the Levites not receive a portion in the inheritance of Eretz Yisrael and in the spoils of war like their brethren? Because they were set aside to serve God and minister unto Him and to instruct people at large in His just paths and righteous judgments, as [Deuteronomy 33:10] states:25In Moses' blessing to the tribe of Levi. "They will teach Your judgments to Jacob and Your Torah to Israel." Therefore they were set apart from the ways of the world. They do not wage war like the remainder of the Jewish people, nor do they receive an inheritance, nor do they acquire for themselves through their physical power. Instead, they are God's legion, as [ibid.:11]: states: "God has blessed His legion" and He provides for them, as [Numbers 18:20] states: "I am your portion and your inheritance."26The Rambam cites the first portion of this verse in Halachah 10 as proof that the Levites are not entitled to a portion of the spoil nor an ancestral heritage in Eretz Yisrael. In this halachah, he explains the rationale for that exclusion. The Levites are set aside from material involvement so that they can devote themselves to the spiritual. God, however, promises that this exchange will not cause them any loss, for He will provide for their material needs.
Not only the tribe of Levi, but any one of the inhabitants of the world27This wording could also imply gentiles. whose spirit generously motivates him and he understands with his wisdom to set himself aside and stand before God to serve Him and minister to Him and to know God, proceeding justly as God made him, removing from his neck the yoke of the many reckonings which people seek, he is sanctified as holy of holies.28This expression is used by I Chronicles 23:12 to refer to the holiness of Aaron, the High Priest. The Rambam is implying that every individual can reach a similar level of holiness. God will be His portion and heritage forever and will provide what is sufficient for him in this world like He provides for the priests and the Levites.29I.e., the Rambam is explaining that the motif that applies with regard to the priests and the Levites can be extended and in truth applies with regard to any person who is willing to devote his life to God's service. And thus David declared [Psalms 16:5]: "God is the lot of my portion; You are my cup, You support my lot."Blessed be the Merciful One who provides assistance.
