=== 1 | 1 ===
YAH, ADONAI of Hosts, God of Israel, Living God and King of the World, EL SHADDAI, Merciful and Gracious, High and Exalted, Dwelling Ever Above, Holy Is His Name1[Isaiah 57:15]—He carved2Throughout the SY, the most common way of describing the מַעֲשֵׂה בְּרֵאשִׁית Maʽaseh Bereshit 'Work of Creation' is not the abstract verb בָּרָא bara 'to create' used in [Genesis 1:1]. Instead, the SY prefers verbs relating to the processes of craftsman and artisans, in particular stonemasons: חָקַק chaqaq 'to carve, chisel', חָצַב chatzav 'to hew', שקל shaqal 'to weigh', יָסַד yasad 'to found',יָצַר yatzar 'to form, shape, fashion'—the latter providing the name of the book, סֵפֶר יְצִירָה Sefer Yetzirah, literally the 'Book of Forming' but conventionally rendered the 'Book of Creation'. and created His World3Most manuscripts do not include the expression וּבָרָא אֶת עוֹלָמוֹ uvara et ʽolamo 'and created His World' in this verse. In these versions, God simply חָקַק chaqaq 'carved', with no object expressed overtly. See also SY 5:4, where God simply יָסַד yasad 'founded', with no overt object. in Thirty-Two4The number 32 represents the sum of the 10 Sefirot Belimah and 22 Letters of Foundation. Together these represent the mathematical-linguistic foundations of Creation; see notes on 1:2 below. Although the number 32 is not ruminated upon any further after SY 1:1, subsequent commentaries have associated it with the 32 occurrences of the name אֱלֹהִים Elohim in [Genesis 1]. In the Bahir, the Thirty-Two Ways are associated with the gematria value of לֵב lev ‘heart’ ([Bahir 63], [Bahir 95] inter alia cf. SY 6:1-3) and with the 32 tzitzit (fringes) of the tallit (prayer shawl) [Bahir 92]. Wondrous5In the Tanakh, the root פל״א PLʼ generally implies that which approaches or exceeds the limits of one's abilities, comprehension, or willingness, e.g. [II Samuel 13:2], [Deuteronomy 17:8], [Leviticus 27:2]. It tends to be used of things that are marvelous, miraculous, or otherwise supernatural and extraordinary, i.e. that which defies the human ability to do or understand and must therefore be divine, e.g. [Deuteronomy 28:59], [Psalm 118:23], [Psalm 139:6]. The appearance of this root in the SY’s introductory paragraph serves as a reminder that although we embark upon a text rich in vivid, grounded symbolism—even anthropomorphism—we should not hasten to take such symbolic language overly literally. See also SY 1:8 on the limits of knowledge. Ways6The term נְתִיבָה netivah 'path, way, pathway, (raised) road' appears mostly in the poetic sections of the Tanakh, very often as a synonym or parallelism of דֶּרֶךְ derekh 'road, way'. This particular phraseology is one of several hints that the SY may share a particular literary affiliation with the Sifre Emet, the poems of Psalms, Proverbs, and Job. For details see Ronit Meroz (2007), "Between Sefer Yezirah and Wisdom Literature: Three Binitarian Approaches in Sefer Yezirah", in the Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies 6(18), pp. 101-142. of Wisdom7‘Wisdom’ here is likely a reference to the poetically personified חָכְמָה Chochmah of Proverbs 1, 8, and 9, especially [Proverbs 8:22], a favorite verse of Jewish mystics. Meroz has argued that the SY envisions Wisdom [חָכְמָה Chochmah] as a co-participant with God in the Work of Creation. A similar view is reflected in the midrashicic and Kabbalistic literature, where Torah or Wisdom acts as a participant or instrument in the Work of Creation; see e.g. Midrash Tanchuma 1:5 on [Genesis 1:1], Zohar 1:3a inter alia. 8Though the phrase is usually translated the ‘Thirty-Two Paths’, I find that the alliteration of ‘Wondrous Ways of Wisdom’ neatly approximates the SY’s choice of poetic vocabulary. Throughout, I have made an effort to select alliterative or parallelistic translations wherever the happy coincidences of Hebrew and English reasonably permit, so as to replicate the SY’s seamless transitions between prose and poetry, an effect all too easily lost in translation., with three linguistic tools: with Counting, with Writing, and with Speech.9The expression בשלשה ספרים בספר וספר וספור is perhaps the most difficult and obscure line in the entire SY. Some manuscripts have a different reading, בשלשה ספרים בספר וספר וספר ‘with three books: a book, and a book, and a book’—certainly easier linguistically but no more clear in its meaning. Meroz has associated these ‘three books’ with what she regards to be the three original textual layers of the SY, woven together after their composition into a single work by an editor. However, the manuscript variant found in the present edition is certainly old, appearing already in the oldest extant versions of the SY in the commentary of Saadia Gaon. The translation adopted here follows a popular logic. I base it off an interpretation of the SY’s internal structure, the semantic properties of the root ספ״ר SPR, and the SY’s general grammatical inventiveness. The text is intimately concerned with the role of language in the Work of Creation. It appears to conceive of language in three parts: counting or mathematics, i.e. the 10 Sefirot Belimah of SY 1 and the formulaic counting of the letters and the elements of creation throughout the text); writing, i.e. the 22 Letters of Foundation discussed in SY 2-5; and speech or pronunciation, i.e. SY 1:9, 2:3, 4:1. Hebrew has of course several verb roots relating to one or more of each of these three facets of language. However, only one, ספ״ר SPR, is capable of describing all three: counting (סָפַר safar 'he counted', מִסְפָּר mispar 'number, count'), writing (סֵפֶר sefer 'book, scroll'), and speaking (סִפֵּר sipper 'he told, accounted', סִפּוּר sippur 'telling, account'). The root ספ״ר is also utilized to coin the novel metaphysical term סְפִירוֹת Sefirot, on which see SY 1:2 below. For these reasons, I believe the first use of the root ספר SPR in SY 1:1, the plural ספרים SPR-im, does not refer to any specific noun at all, but rather the set of words derived from the abstract, idealized root ספ״ר SPR. This way of thinking about language imbues the Hebrew root itself with a certain metaphysical reality, an entity from which more concrete instantions of individual words may ontologically descend and ultimately crystallize into concrete speech or material reality. The root SPR thus holds unique metaphysical significance for the SY, alone representing the totality of language by which the world was created and is sustained. As each of the following three words derived from the root SPR are invoked as implements in the Work of Creation, I have translated the SPR-im as “linguistic tools”—an inelegant approximation of an elegant metalinguistic idea whose meaning is trapped within the particulars of Hebrew grammar. The three occurrences of the root SPR that follow, “with  ספר SPR and ספר SPR and ספור SPWR”, are here interpreted respectively as סָפַר safar ‘to count’, representing counting/mahetmatics; סֵפר sefer ‘scroll, book’, representing writing; and סִפּוּר sippur, representing speech. The word סָפַר safar is technically a finite verb, and not a noun as the syntax requires. It may be vocalized also as the inifitive construct סְפֹר sefor, but given the grammatical playfulness of the SY in general, I see no reason why the text should not have delighted in the oblique transformation of a verb like safar into an abstract noun.
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH10 The meaning of סְפִירוֹת בְּלִי[]מָה Sefirot Beli(-)mah is very difficult. The SY is the first place in all of Jewish literature where to word sefirot appears, and though this term is now familiar to readers through the works of the medieval Kabbalists and later, the use of the term in the SY differs significantly from later texts̄. It never appears on its own in the SY, being found only in the fixed expression Sefirot Belimah. The word sefirot by itself is the plural action noun of סָפַר safar 'to count', thus meaning literally 'countings'. It should probably be understood on one level as a reference to the ten digits of the decimal numeral system, though as we shall see, these Sefirot Belimah are imbued with metaphysical significance beyond mere numerals. The expression בְּלִי[]מָה beli[-]mah can be understood as either one word or two, with both readings being plausible and perhaps intended, and manuscripts commonly varying between the one- and two-word renditions. If it is read as one word, it must be the action noun of בָּלַם balam 'to restrain, withhold, keep (from)'; see SY 1:8. The ‘Ten Sefirot Belimah’ would then be the ‘Ten Numbers of Restraint’. In this interpretation, they are ten elemental entities or properties which bind or restrain primordial תֹּהוּ tohu, 'chaos, void, waste(land)' [Genesis 1:2], allowing structure and order to exist in creation. On the other hand, if בְּלִי מָה is to be read as two words, it represents the expression beli mah, literally 'without what'. This enigmatic expression appears only once in the Tanakh, in [Job 26:7], where in a harkening back to [Genesis 1:2] it serves as a parallelism of primarial tohu. It might best be calqued as 'whatlessness', meaning 'having no essence', and thus the ‘Ten Sefirot Belimah’ would be the ‘Ten Essenceless/Whatless Numbers'. The SY is fond of this sort of grammatical playfulness, as already seen above in the peculiar use of the three roots of spr in SY 1:1 and as will be seen later in playful expressions like וְעָשָׂה אֵינוֹ יֶשְׁנוֹ ve'asa eino yeshno 'and He made isn't-ness into is-ness' (SY 2:6). Later interpretors have, of course, explicitly linked the Ten Sefirot Belimah with the now-familiar Ten Sefirot found in later texts like the Bahir and Zohar, but I have generally refrained from alluding to them, as it is not at all clear that the SY ascribes the same symbolic significance to the Ten Sefirot Belimah as latter Kabbalistic texts do. and Twenty-Two Letters of Foundation11Gershom Scholem noted the similarity of the expression אוֹתְיוֹת יְסוֹד otyot yesod 'letters of foundation' to the Greek term στοιχεῖα stoikheîa 'elemental letters' found in Plato's Timaeus (Scholem 1995, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism, trans. Robert Alter, p. 77 n. 129). Certain translators have preferred to render otyot yesod as 'elemental letters' by analogy with the Greek term. Still, I much prefer 'Letters of Foundation', because the term יְסוֹד yesod can imply both 'foundation' in the sense of an origin site and 'foundation' in the sense of an ongoing support or sustainer, which harmonizes well with the SY's description of the letters as involved in both the creation and sustaining of the world.: Three Mothers, Seven Pairs, and Twelve Simple Letters.12This phrase refers to the subdivision of the 22-letter Hebrew alphabet into three units, consisting of groups of 3, 7, and 12 letters respectively. The precise meanings of these subdivisions will be subsequently explored in chapters 3, 4, and 5. It must be noted that the term אמות is vocalized and translated here as אִמּוֹת immot 'Mothers', based on the parallel אָבוֹת avot 'fathers' of SY 3:2 and 6:1. However, this is grammatically peculiar, as immot is usually only the construct plural of אֵם em 'mother', whose absolute plural is rather אִמָּהוֹת immahot. There are other problems with the interpretation ‘mothers’. In usual Hebrew grammatical terminology, the term ‘mothers’ is reserved for the אִמּוֹת קְרִיאָה immot qeriʼah, ‘mothers of reading’ (whence Latin matres lectionis), the letters אהו״י Alef-Heh-Waw-Yod which can serve to represent either consonants or vowels. Additionally, in SY 5:3 we appear to have a case where immot acts as antecedent to the pronoun הֵם hem, which is specifically used for masculine plurals, although the form of the numeral shalosh 'three' in shalosh immot is specific to feminine nouns. There exist alternative traditions where this term in the SY is vocalized instead as אַמּוֹת ammot 'cubits' or אֻמּוֹת ummot 'nations'. What the word actually means is thus far from clear, and Peter Hayman has avoided these ambiguities entirely by translating immot as “primary letters.” (See Peter Hayman (2004), Sefer Yeṣira.)
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—The count of ten fingers, five against five, with the Covenant of the Unique One established in the center,13On the image of the Covenant in the empty space between 'hands' or 'wings', cf. perhaps [Exodus 25:22] describing communion with God emanating out of the space between the winged cherubs of the Ark in the Tabernacle. like a word of the tongue and circumcision of the genitals.14This is a pun in Hebrew, drawing upon the similarity (in many dialects homophony) of מִלַּת millat ‘word’ and מִילַת milat ‘circumcision’. Both items refer to anatomical hiddenness: the word emerging from the tongue, hidden in the mouth, and circumcision of the genitals, the concealed lower organs revealed during circumcision. A connection is thus made between the act of speech and the act of circumcision, being two forms of creation and transformation according to the SY’s thought. Another association between language, mouth, and genitals, though the connection (if any) with the SY is unclear, is found in the idiom עָרְלַת שְׂפָתַיִם ʽorlat sefatayim ‘uncircumcised of lips’, probably meaning one who is unskilled in speech, e.g. [Exodus 6:12]. There is also a spatial-anatomical parallelism between the terms employed by the SY: the tongue concealed above, the genitals concealed below. Elsewhere in the SY, the ‘tongue’ (or ‘wedge’) appears as the symbol of a central balance between two extremities, e.g. SY 2:1, 3:1, so it is interesting that in this verse the tongue is rather portrayed as one of two binary poles. See also SY 6:3 where the tongue is one of the שְׁלֹשָׁה שׂוֹנְאִים Sheloshah Sonʼim ‘Three Foes’, probably a reference to לָשׁוֹן הָרָע Lashon Haraʽ ‘the Evil Tongue’, the vice of gossip or slander.
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—Ten and not nine, ten and not eleven. Understand with Wisdom and become wise with Understanding; test with them and probe of them. Make a thing stand in assembly before its Creators; return the Maker to His Site.
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—Their measure is ten; they have no edge. Depth15עוֹמֶק ʽomeq ‘depth’ here is based on the metaphor of עֲמֻקָּה ʽamuqqah ‘deepness’ as a symbol of divine mystery, as found in Biblical poetry, ex. [Job 11:8], [Psalms 64:7], [Ecclesiastes 7:24]. It could perhaps be understood in the SY as meaning 'dimension', 'mystery', or 'mystical dimension'. of Beginning, Depth of End; Depth of Good, Depth of Evil; Depth of Above, Depth of Below; Depth of East, Depth of West; Depth of North, Depth of South. The Unique Lord EL, the faithful king, governs them all from His Holy Abode,16Probably being the Holy of Holies of the Temple; see also SY 4:3. forever and ever and ever.
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—Their visage is as the look of lightning, and their limit has no edge. His Word is in them, running and returning.17[Ezekiel 1:14] By His word they pursue like a whirlwind; before His throne they bow.
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—Their end is attached to their start, like the flame-tongue is bound to the coal. For the Lord is unique, He has no second—before one, what can you count?
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—Keep your mouth from speaking and your heart from conceiving. If your heart should run, return to the place of which is said, “running and returning”.18[Ezekiel 1:14] Upon this matter the covenant was cut.
Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH—One—The Wind of the Living GOD, Blessed and Happy is His Name, He Who Lives Forever.19The expression חַי הָעוֹלָמִים Chai HaʽOlamim ‘He Who Lives Forever’ or ‘The One Living Forever’ is a signature phrase of the mystical and midrashic literature, e.g. [Hechalot Rabbati 28:1] (part of the Yom Kippur liturgy), [Zohar, Bereshit 10:116], [Bereshit Rabbah 1:5]. Voice and Wind and Speech—this is the Holy Wind.20The term רוּחַ ruach is usually translated ‘spirit’, especially in the phrase רוּחַ הַקֹּדֶשׁ ruach haqqodesh ‘Holy Spirit’. But on the most literal level, it means ‘wind’, as in the אַרְבָּע רוּחוֹת arbaʽ ruchot ‘four winds’ corresponding to the four cardinal directions, and is also conjured in the verb הֵרִיחַ heriach ‘to smell, breathe in (with the nostrils)’. Wind is of course the herald of the storm, the Biblical symbol par excellence of the divine theophany, making wind a potent symbol of divine imminence. Nonetheless, English translators have usually shied away from the this-worldly symbolism of the ‘Holy Wind’, much preferring immaterial ‘Spirit’ either out of theological embarrassment or deference to tradition. Perhaps capturing an intermediary concept between the immaterial divine imminence and the material wind is ‘wisp’, meaning both a small breeze and a phantom presence, but ‘Holy Wisp’ is a rather underwhelming expression. But beyond linguistic fidelity, there is a more interesting reason to render רוּחַ ruach as ‘Wind’ in the SY; see SY 1:10 below. 
Two—He carved Wind from Wind, and with it He hewed Twenty-Two Letters of Foundation: Three Mothers, Seven Pairs, and Twelve Simple Letters. And Wind is the first of them.
Three—He carved Water from Wind and with them He hewed tohu and bohu,21[Genesis 1:2] mud and clay. He carved them like a garden bed, erected them like a wall, screened them like ceiling plaster.
Four—He carved Fire from Water, and with it He hewed the Throne of the Glory, and the Wheels, and the Fiery Serpents, and the Holy Creatures, and the Ministering Angels. And from the three of them He founded His Abode, as is said, “He makes the winds His angels and burning fire His ministers”.22[Psalms 104:4]
([According to the 1562 Mantua print, the edition as written in the Otzer Hashem and in Rambam:] Five—Three of the Simple Letters—He sealed Wind by means of three and fixed them within His Great Name, Yod-Heh-Waw.) [The correct version:] He chose 3 of the simple letters with the secret of the 3 Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin, and He fixed them within His Great Name. With them He sealed 6 Edges. Five—He sealed Above and faced upwards and sealed it with Yod-Heh-Waw. Six—He sealed Below and faced downwards and sealed it with Yod-Waw-Heh. Seven—He sealed East and faced forwards and sealed it with Heh-Yod-Waw. Eight—He sealed West and faced backwards and sealed it with Heh-Waw-Yod. Nine—He sealed South and faced to His right and sealed it with Waw-Yod-Heh. Ten—He sealed North and faced to His left and sealed it with Waw-Heh-Yod.]
These are the Ten SEFIROT BELIMAH: One, the Wind of the Living God; and Wind from Wind, and Water from Air, and Fire from Water; and Up Above and Below, and East and West, and North and South.  

=== 2 | 2 ===
Twenty-Two Letters of Foundation—Three Mothers, Seven Pairs, and Twelve Simple Letters. Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin: Their foundation is the palm of innocence and the palm of guilt, and the tongue of edict decides between them.
Twenty-Two Letters—He carved them, and hewed them, and weighed them, and exchanged them, and combined them, and formed with them the soul of every formed being and the soul of every being He has yet to form.
Twenty-Two Letters of Foundation—Carved with voice, hewn with spirit, fixed in the mouth in five places: Alef-Heh-Chet-ʽAyin, Bet-Waw-Mem-Peh, Gimel-Yod-Kaf-Qof, Dalet-Tet-Lamed-Nun-Taw, Zayin-Samekh-Shin-Resh-Tzadi. ([In the Mantua printing, the following is added to the paragraph1I do not know why the editor of the 1884 Warsaw edition believes these additions to be present in the 1562 Mantua edition, but they are not. Interested readers can check the 1562 Mantua edition for themselves through the digital archives of the National Library of Israel: nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH990012793690205171/NLI. The relevant passage is on slide 128.:] Bound to the tongue like a flame to coal—Alef-Chet-Heh-ʽAyin, serving behind the tongue in the house of swallowing. Bet-Waw-Mem-Peh, between the lips and in front of the tongue. Gimel-Yod-Kaf-Qof, being cut upon the third portion of the tongue. Dalet-Tet-Lamed-Nun-Taw, with the tip of the tongue, serving with voice. And Samekh-Tzadi-Resh-Shin, between the teeth and tongue, lain down and flattened. 1These last two words, שכובה ושטותה, are difficult to identify. The first is clearly the root שָׁכַב shakhav ‘to lie, lie down’, but שכובה looks like a passive participle, shekhuvah, while shakhav is normally an intransitive verb not amenable to being made passive. Nonetheless I have rendered it ‘lain down’. The second word, שטותה, cannot be made sense of without emendation. שְׁטוּתָה shetutah would appear to be passed on a root שָׁטָה shatah which means ‘to mock, ridicule’, found in words like שְׁטוּת shetut ‘stupidity’. This is certainly an editorial error, confusing a Chet for a Taw. What was intended was שְׁטוּחָה shetuchah, meaning ‘flat’. Thus the letters Samekh-Tzadi-Resh-Shin are pronounced thus with the tongue ‘lying down’ and ‘flat’. [On this stand the remarks of the Ramav.])
Twenty-Two Letters of Foundation—Fixed in a wheel with 231 gates.2This refers to a kind of letter diagram. Drawing the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet around the edge of a circle, it takes 231 lines, here called שְׁעָרִים sheʽarim ‘gates’, to connect every possible combination of 2 letters. In this way every word of the Hebrew language traces a path through the ‘gates’ from one letter to the next. Such diagrams are often arranged so that the letter א Alef is across from ל Lamed, spelling the name אֵל El, God. For an example of such a diagram, see: https://www.researchgate.net/figure/points-231-lines-The-231-lines-connecting-the-22-letters-are-the-231-Gates-from-Kaplan_fig2_236826988 (From Jerome Levi (2009), Structuralism and Kabbalah: Sciences of Mysticism or Mystifications of Science?, in Anthropological Quartlery 82(4), pp. 929-984), citing Aryeh Kaplan (1997), Sefer Yetzirah, p. 111). The wheel turns back and forth. This is a cypher for the matter: There is nothing in goodness higher than Delight, and nothing in evil lower than Affliction.3The words עֹנֶג ʽoneg ‘delight, pleasure’ and נֶגַע negaʽ ‘affliction, plague, strike’ are anagrams and antonyms.
How did He weigh and transform them? Alef with them all and all of them with Alef; Bet with them all and all of them with Bet. And so it turns, such that all matter is found and all speech emerges into one name.
He formed matter from chaos4Though the term ‘chaos’ in modern English implies a state of great energy, fullness, and disorderly restlessness, the English term originates from Greek χάος kháos, meaning a ‘void’, ‘chasm’, or state of emptiness and inactivity. The Hebrew term תֹּהוּ tohu is much more similar in sense to the Greek kháos than it is to English chaos. Most literally, it means ‘waste(land)’, the lifeless open desert, a translation of [Genesis 1:2] so far captured in English only by Robert Alter’s The Hebrew Bible (2019), who poetically renders תֹהוּ וָבֹהוּ tohu vavohu as “waste and welter”; cf. Onqelos, who renders it into Aramaic as צָדְיָא וְרוֹקָנְיָא tzadya weroqanya ‘(and the earth was) barren and desolate’ (https://cal.huc.edu/comment.php?coord=5100101021). The SY seems to employ tohu here a similar sense of profound primordial emptiness and inactivity, paralleled by אֵינוֹ eno, ‘nothingness’, literally ‘it is not’ or ‘there is no one/none/nothing’. and made nothingness somethingness; He hewed great columns out of imperceptible Air. This is a cipher: observing, transforming, making all matter and all words one name. A cipher for the matter: twenty-two (numbers) [objects] in one body.


=== 3 | 3 ===
Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin—Their foundation is the palm of guilt and the palm of innocence, and the tongue of edict decides between them. 
Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin—A great secret, concealed and covered and sealed in Six Rings. From them emerge Fire and Water, being divided male and female. Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin is their foundation—from them are born Fathers from which all is created.
Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin—In the World are Air, Water, Fire. The heavens were created first from Fire, and the earth is created from Water, and the Air decides between the fire and the water.
Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin—In the Year are Fire, Water, and Wind. Heat was created from Fire, and cold from Water, and satiation from Wind deciding between them. Three mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin—In the Person1There is no satisfactory English equivalent of Hebrew נֶפֶשׁ nefesh, translated reluctantly as ‘person’. It derives from the root נפ״שׁ NPSh, having to do with breathing, refreshing, and resting; its etymological relationships with curiously similar roots like נשׁ״ם NShM ‘to breathe, pant’, נשׁ״ף NShP ‘to blow’, and נשׁ״ב NShB ‘to blow’ are unclear. On one level, it refers to the individual person or creature, i.e., ‘that which has breath’, similar to the term נְשָׁמָה neshamah (cf. [Psalm 150:6]), and might be translated ‘person, individual, being’. On another, it refers to something less tangible, approaching the kind of phantom essence implied by the English term ‘soul’. And on yet another level, it refers to the physical body, the primary metaphorical sense in which the term is encountered in the SY. Nefesh thus refers all at once to the material and immaterial essences of individual personhood, uniting ‘body’ and ‘soul’ in a single term for which English, inheritor of the philosophical duality between mind and body, lacks any true counterpart. are Fire, Water, and Wind; the head was created from Fire, the belly was created from Water, and the chest from Wind decides between them.
Three Mothers, Alef-Mem-Shin—He carved them, hewed them, combined them, and with them He sealed Three Mothers in the World, and Three Mothers in the Year, and Three Mothers in the Person, male and female.
He made the letter Alef reign over Wind, and He bound to it a crown. He combined them, this one with that one. With them He sealed the Wind in the world, and satiation in the Year, and the chest in the Person—male with Alef-Mem-Shin and female with Alef-Shin-Mem.
He made the letter Mem reign over Water, and He bound to it a crown. He combined them, this one with that one; He sealed with them the earth in the World, and cold in the Year, and the belly in the Person, male and female—male with Mem-Alef-Shin and female with Mem-Shin-Alef.
He made the letter Shin reign over Fire, and He bound to it a crown. He combined them, this one with that one; He sealed with them the heavens in the World, and heat in the Year, and the head in the Person, male and female [male with Shin-Alef-Mem and female with Shin-Mem-Alef, written thus in the N.Y.].


=== 4 | 4 ===
Seven Pairs, Begad-Kafrat (pronounced with two tongues)—their foundation is Life, Peace, Wisdom, Wealth, Beauty, Fertility, and Dominion, pronounced with two tongues: Vet-Bet, Ghimel-Gimel, Dhalet-Dalet, Khaf-Kaf, Feh-Peh, Resh-Rresh,1In the grammatical tradition of the Tiberian Masoretes, which all modern Hebrew traditions have inherited save for the Samaritans, the letters Beit-Gimel-Dalet-Kaf-Peh-Taw are pronounced in two ways, as plosives with the dagesh mark (בּ גּ דּ כּ פּ תּ) and as fricatives without (ב ג ד כ פ ת). The letter Resh is not among them, even though it appears in the SY with the letters known commonly today by the acronym Begad-Kefat. The Tiberians do describe a twofold pronunciation of Resh, the usual pronunciation being what linguists would describe as a ‘uvular trill’ and the rarer being a ‘pharyngealized alveolar trill’ (see Geoffrey Khan (2020), The Tiberian Pronunciation Tradition of Biblical Hebrew, 2 vols.); however, the distribution of these two allophones is not in parallel with the Begad-Kefat letters. Instead, the SY may be intimating a twofold pronunciation of Resh known among certain mediveal Jewish communities in Babylonia and elsewhere, which does indeed preserve a distinguish between ‘single’ Resh and ‘double’ Resh. Although Resh is usually thought to belong to the letters which cannot normally receive a dagesh, this was apparently not the case for these traditions. The Samaritans still to this day preserve a tradition allowing Resh to occur in both single and double forms, bearing a distinction comparable to the difference between the Spanish single r of pero and double rr of perro. Taw-Thaw. A soft and hard structure, a strong and weak structure. Pairs, for they are opposites—The opposite of Life is Death; the opposite of Peace is Evil; the opposite of Wisdom is Folly; the opposite of Wealth is Poverty; the opposite of Beauty is Ugliness; the opposite of Fertility is Barrenness; the opposite of Dominion is Servitude.
Seven Pairs, Begad-Kafrat—Seven and not six, seven and not eight. Test with them and probe of them (and form and think). Make a thing stand in assembly before its Creators; return the Maker to His Site.
Seven Pairs, Begad-Kafrat, against 7 Edges. 6 of the Edges are Above and Below, East and West, North and South, with the Holy Palace established in the center, bearing them all.
Seven Pairs, Begad-Kafrat. He carved them, hewed them, exchanged them, and formed with them the stars in the World and days in the Year and gates in the Person. He carved out of them the Seven Firmaments, and Seven Earths, and Seven Sabbaths; for this reason, He loved the Seventh Day more than anything under all the heavens.
How? He made the letter Bet reign over Life, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it Saturn in the World, and Sunday in the Year, and the right eye in the Person.
He made the letter Gimel reign, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it Jupiter in the World, and Monday in the Year, and the left eye in the Person.
He made the letter Dalet reign, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it Mars in the World, and Tuesday in the Year, and the right ear in the Person.
He made the letter Kaf reign, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it the Sun in the World, and Wednesday in the Year, and the left ear in the Person.
He made the letter Peh reign, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it Venus in the World, and Thursday in the Year, and the right nostril in the Person.
He made the letter Resh reign, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it Mercury in the World, and Friday in the Year, and the left nostril in the Person.
He made the letter Taw reign, and He bound to it a crown, and formed with it the Moon in the World, and Saturday in the Year, and the mouth in the Person.
Seven Pairs, Begad-Kafrat—How did He exchange them? Two stones build two houses; three build six houses; four build twenty-four houses; five build one hundred and twenty houses; six build seven hundred and twenty houses; seven build five thousand and forty houses. From here on out, go and contemplate what the mouth cannot speak and the ear cannot hear. These are the Seven Stars in the world: the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars. These are the 7 Days in the Year: the Days of Creation. And the Seven Gates in the person: two eyes, two ears, two punctures of the nose, and the mouth. With them He carved the Seven Firmaments and the Seven Earths and the Seven Hours; for this reason, He loved the Seventh Day more than any object under the heavens. 

=== 5 | 5 ===
Twelve Simple Letters, Heh-Waw Zayin-Chet Tet-Yod Lamed-Nun ʽAyin-Samekh Tzadi-Qof—Their foundation is Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Talking, Eating, Sex, Work, Movement, Excitement, Play, Contemplation, Sleep. Their measure is the Twelve Diagonal Borders: Northeastern border, Southeastern border, Upper-Eastern border, Lower-Western border, Upper-Northern border, Lower-Northern border, Southwestern border, Northwestern border, Upper-Western border, Lower-Western border, Upper-Southern border, Lower-Southern border. They extend outwards and go on forever and ever and ever—They are the Arms of the World.
Twelve Simple Letters, Heh-Waw Zayin-Chet Tet-Yod Lamed-Nun ʽAyin-Samekh Tzadi-Qof—He carved them, hewed them, weighed them, exchanged them, transformed them, and formed with them the Twelve Constellations in the World. A cipher: Teshat Seʼav Meʽaq Gedad.1An acronym for the twelve names of the Hebrew Zodiac: טָלֶה Taleh ‘Lamb (Aries)’, שׁוֹר Shor ‘Ox (Taurus)’, תְּאוֹמִים Teʼomim ‘Twins (Gemini)’, סַרְטָן Sartan ‘Crab (Cancer)’, אַרְיֵה Aryeh ‘Lion (Leo)’, בְּתוּלָה Betulah ‘Virgin (Virgo)’, מֹאזְנַיִם Moznayim ‘Scales (Libra)’, עַקְרָב ʽAqrav ‘Scorpion (Scorpio)’, קֶשֶׁת Qeshet ‘Bow (Sagittarius)’, גְּדִי Gedi ‘Goat Kid (Capricorn)’, דְּלִי Deli ‘Bucket (Aquarius)’, דָּגִים Dagim ‘Fishes (Pisces).’ And these are the Twelve Months in the Year: Nisan, Iyyar, Siwan, Tammuz, Av, Elul, Tishri, Marcheshwan, Kislew, Tevet, Shevat, Adar. And these are the Twelve Leaders in the Person: two hands, two legs, two kidneys, spleen, liver, gall, rumen, abomasum, craw.2Identification of the latter four terms is very strange. It is unclear if the author or editor of this section is employing Hebrew terms in a novel way, is unfamiliar with human physiology, or is using animal organs to some symbolic effect, or some combination thereof. The הֶמְסֵס hemses ‘rumen’ and קֵיבָה qeivah ‘abomasum’ are two of the four stomachs of a cud-chewing ruminant such as sheep, goats, and cattle, while the last, קֻרְקְבָן qurqevan, is the ‘crop’ or ‘craw’, the organ in birds where swallowed stones are stored to aid digestion. The only of the latter four terms found in humans is מָרָה marah ‘gall(bladder), bile’. It’s possible that these four are meant to signify the four stomachs of ruminants, the functions of which were not wholly understood in the past and may have been believed to be present in humans. Presumably, the anatomy of slaughtered livestock would have been fairly familiar to many writers and readers of the time, while blessedly few indeed would have had first-hand knowledge of human innards. Like what did He make them? (A city) [strife]. And like what did He arrange them? War. God made them as this one compared with that one.3[Ecclesiastes 7:14]. The meaning for the SY is: God did not make things by themselves, individually, but rather, He made all things in relationship to all other things. The conception of Creation as a network of ontological interdependencies is perhaps apparent in the ‘231 gates’ referred to above in SY 2:4; see also SY 6:2. How did He combine them? He made the letter Heh reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Aries in the World, and Nisan in the year, and the right hand in the Person, male and female. He made the letter Waw reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Taurus in the World,  and Iyyar in the Year, and the left hand in the Person. He made the letter Zayin reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Gemini in the World, and Siwan in the year, and the right leg in the Person. He made the letter Chet reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Cancer in the World, and Tammuz in the year, and the left leg in the Person. He made the letter Tet reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Leo in the World, and Av in the Year, and the the right kidney in the Person. He made the letter Yod reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Virgo in the World, and Elul in the Year, and the left kidney in the Person. He made the letter Lamed reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Libra in the World, and Tishri in the Year, and the liver in the Person. He made the letter Nun reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Scorpio in the World, and Marcheshwan in the Year, and the spleen in the Person. He made the Samekh reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Sagittarius in the World, and Kislew in the year, and the gall in the Person. He made the letter ʽAyin reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Capricorn in the World, and Tevet in the Year, and the rumen in the Person. He made the letter Tzadi reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Aquarius in the World, and Shevat in the Year, and the abomasum in the Person. He made the letter Qof reign, and bound to it a crown, and formed with it Pisces in the World, and Adar in the Year, and the craw in the Person.
Three Mothers, which are the Three Fathers from whom come Fire and Wind and Water; Three Mothers, and Seven Pairs, and Twelve Simple Letters.
The Holy One, Blessed Is He, YAH, ADONAI of Hosts, Living God, God of Israel, High and Exalted, Dwelling Ever Above, Holy Is His Name, Lofty and Holy Is He4[Isaiah 57:15]—These are the Twenty-Two Letters with which He founded. 

=== 6 | 6 ===
Three Fathers and their descendants, and Seven Stars [another version: Conquerors] and their hosts, and Twelve Diagonal Borders. A sight for faithful witnesses to speak—World, Year, Person. An edict—Twelve [another version: Ten] and Seven and Three He appointed them: the Dragon Teli, and the Wheel, and the Heart. Three—Fire, Water, and Wind; Fire above and Water below, with Wind the edict deciding between them. A cipher to speak: The Fire carries the Water; Mem being quiet and Shin whistling, with Alef the edict deciding between them.
Teli is in the World like a king on his throne; the Wheel is in the Year like a king in the city; the Heart is in the Person like a king in war. God made all things as this one compared to that one: 1[Ecclesiastes 7:14] good compared to evil, better and best and a worse and worst. Goodness distinguishes evil and evil distinguishes goodness; goodness is kept for the good and evil is kept for the evil.
Three, but each one stands alone. 7 divided: Three opposite Three, with an edict deciding between them. Twelve stand in war: Three Friends, Three Foes, Three Lifegivers, and Three Executioners. Three Friends: the heart and the ears and the mouth. Three foes: the liver and the gall and the tongue. And EL, the faithful king, rules over them all: One over Three, Three over Seven, Seven over Twelve, and all of them fastened this one to that one.
And as soon as our father Abraham, peace be upon him, had viewed and witnessed and seen and searched and understood and carved and hewn and exchanged and formed, he raised up his hand. The Lord of All, Blessed Is He, revealed Himself to him. He returned him to his bosom and kissed him upon the head, and called him, “My beloved,” and cut a covenant for him and his seed. And they believed in Hashem, and He reckoned righteousness to him. He cut for him a covenant between his ten toes, and this is the covenant of circumcision; and his ten fingers, [the covenant of] the tongue. He bound to him the Twenty-Two Letters with His tongue and revealed to him their foundation. He dragged them in Water and lit them in Fire and shook them in Wind, and burned them in the Seven [Stars] and drove them in the Twelve Constellations.2Herein lies perhaps one of the most important and scandalous mysteries in the Sefer Yetzirah: It is as unclear in the Hebrew as it is in the English whether it is God or Abraham performing these deeds. The SY ends on a note of profound and shocking reversal; in all the rest of the Sefer Yetzirah, it is the letters which have been the agents of cosmic affectation and creation in the universe; only here, at the end, are they themselves now affected. Who is the one dragging the Twenty-Two Letters through the water and driving them through the cosmos—God, or man?
