=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Four passages [of the Torah]:1contain references to the mitzvah of tefillin. Kadesh Li and V'hayah ki y'viacha Ado-nai in the book of Exodus  13:1-10 and2The commentaries suggest that, in this instance, the Rambam cited the source for these passages because there is also a passage in the book of Deuteronomy that begins V'hayah Ki Y'viacha. 13:11-16) and Shema and V'hayah im shamo'a (Deuteronomy 6:4-9) and3Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 422) explains that these four passages were chosen because they include the concepts of the oneness of God, the acceptance of His yoke and the yoke of His commandments, and the description of the exodus from Egypt. These are fundamental principles of the Jewish faith. 11:13-21) should be written separately4on parchment and covered with leather.5as described in Chapter 3. They are called tefillin.6Tosafot, Menachot 34b states the word is related to the root ללפ, which means "dispute." The Tur (Orach Chayim 25) inteprets the word as meaning "sign." Tefillot Yisrael associates the term with the power of thought, citing Genesis 48:11. The Pri Megadim (Orach Chayim 25:20) understands the term as meaning, "mark of distinction."They are placed on the head and tied7The commentaries note the difference between the two verbs, "placed" and "tied." See also our commentary on Chapter 4, Halachah 4. It is, nevertheless, worth noting that in the listing of the mitzvot in the introduction to the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam mentions "tying the tefillin on the head." on the arm.8Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandments 12 and 13) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvot 421 and 422) consider these obligations to be two of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. (See Menachot 44a.) Since they are two separate mitzvot, the performance of one is not dependent on the performance of the other, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 4. According to Torah law, even a mere point of one of the letters9for example, the yud has a short foot in its lower right-hand corner. If that foot is missing, it is considered to have been improperly formed. Therefore, not only it, but the entire passage is not acceptable. from these four passages prevents all of them from being acceptable. All four must be written in the proper manner.10If even one of the passages is not written in the proper manner, the person is not considered to have fulfilled the mitzvah at all. (See also the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Menachot 3:7.)Accordingly, it is proper to have one's tefillin checked from time to time to make sure that none of the letters have faded. (See the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 11.)
Similarly, if even one letter of the two passages1which mention the mitzvah and, hence, are contained in the mezuzah, Shema and V'hayah im shamo'a (Deuteronomy 6:4-9 and 11:13-21), is lacking a point,2from its proper shape, it is not acceptable according to Torah law, which requires that they [each] be written in a perfect manner.3In this instance, as well, a disqualifying factor in a single point of a single letter prevents the entire mitzvah from being fulfilled. Similarly, a Torah scroll which is lacking even one letter4The Ben Yedid explains that the difference in the phraseology used by the Rambam with regard to tefillin and mezuzot ("lacking a point") and a Torah scroll ("lacking even one letter") alludes to the difference in the phraseology used by the sources for these laws (Menachot 34a and Bava Batra 15a). is unacceptable.5Though Rabbenu Nissim (Megillah, Chapter 2) appears to contest the Rambam's statements on this issue, the Rambam's view is accepted by most authorities. (See also Chapter 7, Halachah 9.)
There are ten requirements for tefillin.1Though all of the ten principles mentioned by the Rambam have their source in the Talmud, their organization into a list of ten is original. All of them are halachot transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai.2Yad Malachi interprets the latter expression as a law which has all the authority of a Torah commandment, even though there is no allusion to it in the Written Law. (See also the Rambam's Introduction to his Commentary on the Mishnah, Chapter 4.) It is necessary to fulfill them all. Therefore, if one made any changes with regard to them, the tefillin are not fit for use:3A person who wears tefillin which do not fulfill these requirements is not considered to have fulfilled the mitzvah at all. Two of them involve their composition,4These are listed below and discussed in the following halachot. and eight involve the coverings [placed around the passages] and the tying of their straps.5These eight conditions are mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachah 1, and discussed in the subsequent halachot of that chapter.These are the two that involve their composition:a) They must be written in ink;b)6as opposed to other tints7This translation is not precise. Note Halachah 7 for a more specific definition of the term קלף. They must be written on parchment.
How is ink prepared? One collects the vapor of oils,1Shabbat 23a states that it is preferable to use olive oil. of tar, of wax, or the like, [causes it to condense,]2See Shabbat, ibid., and commentaries, where it is explained that they would heat the above substances and hold a glass above, upon which the vapors would condense. Afterwards, the soot would be collected. and kneads it together with sap from a tree3Shabbat, ibid., states that it is preferable to use balsam sap. and a drop of honey. It is moistened extensively,4In one of his responsa, the Rambam writes that it is customarily moistened with oil. crushed until it is formed into flat cakes, dried, and then stored.5Niddah 20a teaches us that their ink was stored while dry.When one desires to write with it, one soaks [the cakes of ink]6From the statement in Shabbat forbidding ink to be soaked on the Sabbath, we can assume that the normal process is to soak it before using it. in gallnut juice7which endows the ink with a lasting quality. In contrast, the Rambam writes in one of his responsa that if one were to soak the ink in water, it would fade rapidly.In the same responsum, he states that a liquid possessing qualities similar to gallnut juice can be obtained from pomegranate shells or the outer shells of other nuts. or the like and writes with it. Thus, if one attempts to rub it out, he would be able to.8Sotah 20a derives this concept from Numbers 5:23, which states, "He shall write and he shall blot out." Proper ink should be able to be blotted out after writing.This is the ink with which it is most preferable to write scrolls, tefillin, and mezuzot.9Note the Zohar (Vol. II, p. 159a), which requires that ink be made from substances that are derived from the plant kingdom. If, however, one wrote any of the three10Torah scrolls, tefillin, and mezuzot. with gallnut juice11itself, and not in a mixture with other substances or vitriol,12a substance produced by the rusting of metal. Our translation is based on Rav Kapach's commentary which has its source in the Rambam's responsa. Others render this phrase "with gallnut juice and vitriol," implying that the two substances should be combined. which remains without being rubbed out, it is acceptable.13after the fact (בדיעבד).
If so,1i.e., if there are no specific substances which are excluded, as stated above what was excluded by the halachah conveyed to Moses on Mount Sinai, which stated that it be written in ink?It excludes tints of other colors, such as red, green,2Megillah 17a explicitly disqualifies a megillah written in red ink. From that and other sources, it appears that such ink was frequently used at that time, but was deemed unacceptable for use for a Torah scroll. and the like.3Note the Bi'ur Halachah (32), which states that even blue ink is unacceptable. If even one letter of a Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzot is in another tint or in gold,4Soferim 1:9 relates that a Torah scroll was written for Alexander with every one of the names of God written in gold. When the Sages heard about this, they said that the scroll should be entombed.Besides excluding the use of gold-colored ink, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:3) explains that covering the ink with gold dust is not acceptable. they are invalid.5From this, we learn that all black inks are acceptable, regardless of their makeup. Though scribes continue to make ink in the traditional fashion, there is no prohibition against using commercially produced black ink.
There are three types of parchment: g'vil,1whose preparation is described in this halachah. k'laf, and duchsustos.2whose preparation is described in the following halachah.What is implied? The hide of a domesticated or wild animal is taken.3As mentioned in Halachah 10, the animal must be kosher. First, the hair is removed from it.4Shulchan Aruch HaRav (32:10) states that if the hair is not entirely removed, the parchment is not fit to be used. Even after the fact, it is unacceptable. The Mishnah Berurah quotes this opinion as well, but also mentions other opinions, which do not invalidate the parchment if some hair remains, as long as it had been placed in lime for a long enough time for thehair to fall off. Afterwards, it is salted and then prepared with flour. Then resin and other substances which cause the skin to contract and become harder5The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:8) mentions that lime is customarily used for this purpose. are applied to it. In this state, it is called g'vil.6In one of his responsa, the Rambam explains that the term g'vil is used to describe any coarse, uneven surface. Note a parallel usage in Bava Batra 3a.If the hide is not prepared in this fashion, it is referred to as diftera, and a Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzah, written upon it is invalid. Even בדיעבד (after the fact), such parchment is not acceptable, as stated in Halachah 14.
After the hair is removed, the hide may be taken and divided in half in the manner known to the parchment processors.1There is, however, no obligation to divide the parchment. If it has been processed correctly, it may be used for a Torah scroll without being separated, as stated in the following halachah. Thus, there are two pieces of parchment: a thin one, which is on the side where the hair2or wool of the animal grew, and a thicker one, on the side of the flesh.After it has been processed using salt, then flour, and then resin and the like,3Several of the Rambam's responsa were addressed to communities where it was not customary to prepare hides in this manner. In these letters, the Rambam stresses that even after the hair is removed from the hide, it must be processed in this manner. Otherwise, it may not be used for either a Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzah. the portion on the side where the hair grew is called k'laf4which means "peel." It is given this name because it is a thin layer of flesh which is peeled easily. and the portion on the side of the flesh is called duchsustos.5Duch is Aramaic for "place," and sustos is Greek (Median in other texts) for "meat." Thus, the word means "the place of the meat" (Aruch).Our translation and commentary follows the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah, which is quoted in the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:7. It must, nevertheless, be emphasized that the authoritative Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah reverse the interpretations of k'laf and duchsustos. The latter interpretation is reinforced by several responsa of the Rambam on the subject. It also is supported by Hilchot Shabbat 11:6. The Rashba's text of the Mishneh Torah also contained this version, as is obvious from his responsa (Vol. 1, Responsum 579).
It is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai that a Torah scroll should be written on g'vil1From Bava Batra 14b, it appears that Moses wrote the Torah scroll which he placed in the holy ark on g'vil. Similarly, Gittin 54b mentions that Torah scrolls would be written on g'vil. on the side on which the hair had grown.2This side is smoother and better to write on. When tefillin are written on k'laf,3The Rambam's expression is somewhat inexact, because it is permissible to write tefillin only on k'laf. If they are written on g'vil or duchsustos, they are unacceptable (Shabbat 79b). they should be written on the side of the flesh.4i.e., on the portion of the k'laf where it is separated from the duchsustos. When a mezuzah is written onduchsustos,5As stated in the following halachah, it is preferable - but not obligatory - to write a mezuzah on this type of parchment. it should be written on the side of the hair.6i.e., on the portion of the duchsustos where it is separated from the k'laf.Whenever one writes on k'laf on the side of the hair7the epidermis or on g'vil or duchsustos on the side of the flesh,8the side facing the inside of the body it is unacceptable.9The Aruch states that this practice is alluded to by Proverbs 25:2: "The glory of God is in the concealment of a matter." Only "the concealment of a matter," the sides of the parchment which are naturally concealed, are fit to be used for "the glory of God," the fulfillment of mitzvot.It must be emphasized that the Yemenite manuscripts mentioned in the previous halachah, which reverse the definitions of k'laf and duchsustos, do not change the text of this halachah. Thus, according to these texts, when writing on the thin upper parchment, one should write on the epidermis, and when writing on the thick lower parchment, one should write on the part facing the inside of the body.There is an advantage to this version. According to the standard texts, there is an apparent contradiction. Although one should write on the epidermis when writing on g'vil, it is improper to do so when writing on k'laf.
Although it is a halachah which was transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai, that if one wrote a Torah scroll on k'laf, it is acceptable.1The entire scroll, however, must be written on one or the other of these types of parchment. If half was written on k'laf and half on g'vil, it is unacceptable (Chapter 7, Halachah 4; Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 271:4). G'vil was mentioned only to exclude duchsustos. If a Torah scroll was written on the latter, it is not acceptable.2Though this concept is not mentioned explicitly in the Talmud, the rabbis derive it from their understanding of Bava Batra 14b.Similarly, if a mezuzah was written on k'laf or on g'vil, it is acceptable.3Even in Talmudic times, Shabbat 79b mentions that on occasion it was preferable to write a mezuzah on k'laf, because the mezuzah would be preserved better than if it were written on duchsustos. Duchsustos was mentioned only as a mitzvah.4i.e., it is preferable to do it in this manner.It must be noted that at present, a single type of parchment is used for all three sacred objects. The parchment is not separated in two. A thin portion is removed from the upper layer, and the majority of the - if not the entire - lower layer is rubbed off. The parchment produced in this manner is more attractive and also lighter (a factor significant with regard to a Torah scroll. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:7; Ramah, Yoreh De'ah 271:3, 288:6; Siftei Cohen, Yoreh De'ah 271:9.)
[Torah] scrolls, tefillin, and mezuzot1Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:14 expands the scope of this law, stating that it is not befitting to write the name of God on parchment from a non-kosher animal. This applies even when the intent is not to use the parchment for a sacred purpose. may not be written on hide from a non-kosher animal, fowl, or wild animal.2Shabbat 108a derives this concept from the exegesis of Exodus 13:9, "So that the Torah of God will be in your mouths." They conclude: Only what is permitted to be "in your mouths" - i.e., species which are kosher - is acceptable for a Torah scroll. Even בדיעבד (after the fact), such parchment is not acceptable, as stated in Halachah 14.As explained in Chapter 3, this requirement applies not only to the parchment, but also to all the other elements involved in making these sacred articles. One may write on the hides of [all] kosher animals, wild beasts, and fowl.3See Halachah 20 in regard to writing on parchment made from the skin of birds. This applies even when these animals died without being ritually slaughtered or when they were killed by wild beasts.4Shabbat (ibid.) offers the following parable to explain why even though such animals may not be eaten, it is permitted to use their hides. There were two people who were sentenced to death. One was executed by the king himself and the other by the executioner. Which is more noteworthy? Obviously, the one whom the king executed himself.Similarly, in the present instance, the fact that these kosher animals were "executed by the king" - i.e., their death came about at God's decree - distinguishes them from other animals which are never fit to be eaten.We may not write on the skin of a kosher fish because of the foul secretions, since the processing of the skin will not cause the foul secretions to cease.5Hilchot Keilim 1:4 states: "The skin of a fish is not susceptible to contracting ritual impurity and would be fit for tefillin to be written upon, were it not for its foul secretions." This implies that the only problem is the secretions of the fish skin.
The g'vil for a Torah scroll and the k'laf for tefillin and for a Torah scroll must be processed with this purpose in mind.1The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:8; Yoreh De'ah 271:1) states that when placing the skin in lime at the beginning of the process of making it into parchment, one should explicitly say that one is processing it for these purposes.Shulchan Aruch HaRav (32:11) and the Mishnah Berurah (32:26-27) explain that parchment processed to be used as a Torah scroll may be used for tefillin (or for a mezuzah). Parchment processed for the sake of tefillin, however, may not be used for a Torah scroll, because a Torah scroll is on a higher level of holiness. If they were not processed with this intent, they are not acceptable.2Even if no parchment that was processed with the proper intent is available, this parchment should not be used, as stated in Halachah 14.Accordingly, if they were processed by a gentile, they are not acceptable. Even when [a Jew] instructed a gentile to process the parchment with the intent that it be used for a Torah scroll or for tefillin, it is not acceptable.3Even if the gentile states that he is processing the parchment with the intent that it be used for these purposes, we do not rely on his word, because we suspect that The gentile follows his own intentions and not those of the person who hires him.4Note the comments of Rav Chayim Soloveitchik, who approaches the concept differently, and explains that the above phrase, "the gentile follows his own intentions...," is a description of the gentile's fundamental nature. It is not that we suspect that the gentile will not listen to the person who hires him, and his act is therefore not acceptable. Rather, because his nature is to "follow his own intentions," he is disqualified from performing any act that requires a sacred intention.According to this interpretation, the question of whether a gentile's actions are accepted if he is supervised by a Jew must be understood as follows: The act of preparing the parchment for a Torah scroll is not, in and of itself, a sacred act, but merely a preparation for performing such an act. Accordingly, one might assume that it is sufficient for a Jew to command the gentile to process the scroll for the proper intent. The gentile would be considered like a machine which performs activities with no will of its own, and it would be as if the Jew performed the act himself. In conclusion, however, it is accepted that because the gentile acts independently, the intention of the Jew who hires him cannot be associated with his acts. Therefore,5the scope of this ruling can be expanded: whenever an article must be made with a specific intent in mind,6e.g., the strands of tzitzit (Hilchot Tzitzit 1:11) or a bill of divorce (Hilchot Gerushin 3:16) it is unacceptable if made by a gentile.7Rabbenu Asher does not accept the Rambam's ruling with regard to these parchments. Though he accepts the general principle, he explains that this particular instance is an exception.In other instances, the gentile must act according to the Jew's intent for a prolonged period of time. Here, it is absolutely necessary to have the intent to use the parchment for tefillin or a Torah scroll only at the moment it is placed in the lime. We can assume that if a gentile is given instructions to place it in the lime with that intent, he will do so with that intent.The Shulchan Aruch quotes both opinions in Orach Chayim 32:9. Yoreh De'ah 271:1, however, mentions only the Rambam's opinion. In both places, the Ramah states that it is customary to follow Rabbenu Asher's opinion.Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:12 and the Mishnah Berurah 32:28-29 quote Rabbenu Asher's statements that a Jew should be present at the time the parchment is placed in the lime and that he should explicitly tell the gentile to put it in the lime to be used for a Torah scroll. Afterwards, he should assist the gentile somewhat in the process of preparing the parchment.[The parchment used for] a mezuzah need not be processed with this purpose in mind.8The Jerusalem Talmud (Yoma 3:6) states, "Parchment which was processed for use as a talisman is acceptable for a mezuzah."In one of his responsa, the Rambam explains that the reason for the difference in law between a mezuzah, on the one hand, and a Torah scroll and tefillin, on the other, stems from the fact that a Torah scroll and tefillin are mitzvot which each person is obligated to fulfill. In contrast, the mitzvah of mezuzah is an obligation that is not incumbent on a person unless he dwells in a house that requires one. (It must be noted, however, that there are opinions which maintain that this responsum was not written by the Rambam.)This ruling is not accepted by the other authorities. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 288:5) states that לכתחילה (at the outset), one must seek a mezuzah that was written on parchment processed with this intention in mind. Only if it is impossible to find such a mezuzah, may one use a mezuzah which was not processed with this intent. (Note also our commentary on Chapter 3, Halachah 15.)
It is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai that a Torah scroll or mezuzah should be written only [on parchment] which has been ruled.1The parchment should be ruled with a stylus or a reed. It is improper to use a substance that leaves a mark. Each line of the parchment should be ruled and a border made on both sides. If unruled parchment is used for a Torah scroll or for a mezuzah, it is unacceptable (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 271:5, 288:8). [The parchment used for] tefillin, however, need not be ruled,2The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:6) states the top line of tefillin must be ruled because the Sages forbade writing more than three words from a verse from the Bible without ruling the line above them. See Chapter 7, Halachah 16, and also see the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 284:2).In Orach Chayim, the Shulchan Aruch continues, explaining that a person who cannot write on a straight line without ruling the parchment should rule the parchment before writing tefillin. The Ramah states that it is customary for even the most competent scribes to write tefillin on ruled parchment. If, however, one wrote tefillin without ruling the parchment, the tefillin are acceptable even if the lines are crooked (Mishneh Berurah 32:21). because they are covered.3This explains why although a verse from the Torah must always be written on ruled parchment, we are not required to do so for tefillin.Even though a mezuzah is also covered, ruling the parchment is required because it can be removed from its covering easily and must be checked twice in seven years. In contrast, there is no obligation to check tefillin and the parchments are almost never removed from their compartments (Kessef Mishneh, Rabbenu Nissim).It is permissible to write tefillin and mezuzot without [looking at] an existent text, because everyone is familiar with these passages.4The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:20, 29), however, emphasizes that one should carefully check the passages of the tefillin to make sure that they were written correctly. One who does not know the passages by heart should write from an existent text. It is, however, forbidden to write even one letter of a Torah scroll without [looking at] an existent text.5Even a person who knows the passages by heart may err, because sometimes the spellings of words are different from their pronunciations (Megillah 18b).The Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 274:3) quotes a difference of opinion among the Rabbis if, after the fact, it is permitted to use a Torah scroll that was not written from an existent text.
A Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzah written by an apikoros1The phraseology used in this halachah is a matter of question. Though our texts follow the standard published texts of the Mishneh Torah, the authoritative manuscripts substitute the word min for apikoros.The difference between the two versions is significant. In Hilchot Teshuvah 3:8, the Rambam defines an apikoros as a person who denies the Torah and/or the prophetic tradition, while in Hilchot Teshuvah 3:7, he describes a min as a person who does not believe in God. When a min writes a Torah scroll, the names of God it contains do not possess any holiness, because he does not believe in God at all. In contrast, since an apikoros does believe in God, were he to write a Torah scroll the names he writes would possess a certain dimension of holiness. should be burned.2In Hilchot Yesodei Torah 6:8, the Rambam explains why burning such a scroll does not violate the prohibition against destroying God's name:He does not believe in the sanctity of [God's] name and did not compose it for a sacred purpose. Rather, he considers this to be similar to any other text. Since this is his intent, the names [of God he writes] do not become holy.Significantly, the Rambam does not state that we presume that the scribe had the intention that the name of God refer to a false deity. Note, however, the Rambam's statements in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 2:5: "[It can be assumed that] a min's thoughts are concerned with false gods." Shulchan Aruch HaRav 39:4 and the Mishnah Berurah 39:13 refer to the latter statement and explain that the passages should be burned, because the names of God refer to a false deity.Shabbat 116a draws a parallel between the burning of such a Torah scroll and the scroll of a sotah (a woman accused of adultery). In the process of a sotah's trial, a scroll on which is written a passage containing God's name is blotted out. Our Sages conclude that just as God is willing to allow His name to be wiped out to establish peace between a man and his wife, so, too, He allows His name to be destroyed because of these individuals who disturb the peace that exists between Him and His people. If they were written by a gentile, an apostate Jew, a person who betrays [the Jews]3or Jewish property to a powerful person,4It was quite common in the Second Temple period for Jews to betray their countrymen or their property to the Roman authorities. The severity of this transgression is emphasized by the Rambam, who includes a moseir in the 24 categories of individuals who do not have a portion in the world to come. (See Hilchot Teshuvah 3:6,12.)Similarly, in Hilchot Chovel UMazik 8:10, the Rambam states that a moseir may be killed to prevent him from betraying a Jew's life or property to gentiles. Because of the severity of this transgression, the Rambam considers such an individual equivalent to an outright nonbeliever. a slave, a woman, or a minor,5This includes even a minor who has reached the age when he is trained to wear tefillin (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 39:1). they are not acceptable6for use and must be entombed,7lest they be used. (See Turei Zahav, Yoreh De'ah 281:1.) Since there is a possibility that the names of God they contain were written with the proper intent (and hence, they would possess a dimension of holiness), they are not burned. as [implied by Deuteronomy 6:8-9]: "And you shall tie...8tefillin and you shall write."9a mezuzah. [Our Sages10Gittin 45b explain that this includes only] those who are commanded to tie [tefillin on their arms]11Thus excluding slaves, women and minors, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 13. and those who believe in what they write.12Thus excluding Jews who do not believe in their heritage, gentiles, and mosrim.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 39:2) states that anyone who is disqualified from writing tefillin is also disqualified from performing any other activity necessary to prepare them.[Sacred articles]13Torah scrolls, tefillin, or mezuzot which are found in the possession of an apikoros, and it is not known who wrote them,14Since it is possible that the apikoros did not write them himself, they may not be burned. They, however, should be entombed.15and may not be used for sacred purposes, because it is possible that the apikoros (or one of his colleagues) wrote them. Those which are found in the possession of a gentile16more precisely, the term kuti used by the Rambam means "Samaritan." At one point, the Samaritans converted and were considered to be Jews by the Sages. Towards the latter portion of the Second Temple period, it was discovered that they had remained idolaters. From that time onward, they were regarded as gentiles by the Sages, and the term kuti was used to refer to gentiles. (It must be noted that the authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah use the term goy, "gentile," rather than kuti.)are kosher. - We presume that the gentile is offering sacred articles which he obtained from a Jew, and he did not make them himself.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 39:6, Yoreh De'ah 281:1) quotes this opinion. Yoreh De'ah (loc. cit.), however, also mentions a conflicting opinion, which forbids scrolls possessed by gentiles to be used. The Mishnah Berurah 39:16 explains that, at present, we can assume that the sacred articles are acceptable, because today a gentile would not know how to make them himself. Accordingly, we can assume that they were taken from a Jew.Even the opinions which do not allow the sacred articles purchased from the gentiles to be used require that they be redeemed and entombed, because of our regard for the sacred articles and our fear that the gentiles would treat them sacrilegiously.We should not, however, purchase Torah scrolls, tefillin, or mezuzot from gentiles for more than they are worth - The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 39:7; Yoreh De'ah 281:1) suggests paying slightly more than their worth.so that they do not become accustomed to stealing them. - The Sages feared that if the Jews redeemed these sacred articles from the gentiles at more than their market value, the gentiles would make special efforts to steal them in order to receive these higher prices.Gittin 45a establishes a similar principle with regard to human captives, stating, "Captives should not be redeemed for more than their worth." are kosher. We should not, however, purchase Torah scrolls, tefillin, or mezuzot from gentiles for more than they are worth, so that they do not become accustomed to stealing them.
A Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzah that was written on parchment from a non-kosher animal, beast, or fowl,1See Halachah 10. or on parchment that was not processed [properly, is not acceptable].2See Halachot 6-7. [Similarly,] a Torah scroll or tefillin that was written on parchment that was not processed with the intent to use it for these sacred purposes is not acceptable.3See Halachah 11.
When a person writes a Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzah without having [the proper] intention,1The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 274:1) states that before a scribe writes a Torah scroll, he should state that he is writing it for the sake of the holiness of a Torah scroll. Making that statement at the outset is sufficient for the entire Torah scroll. If he fails to make this statement, the scroll is not acceptable. Similar rules apply to tefillin (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:19) and mezuzot.Rav Chayim Soloveitchik notes that this is not the Rambam's view. The phrasing of this halachah clearly implies that the Rambam does not consider the lack of proper intention when writing a Torah scroll sufficient to render it unacceptable. Thus, with regard to preparing the parchment, one is required to have the intent that it be used for the mitzvah, while that intent is not necessary when one is actually writing the scroll.Rav Chayim differentiates between the two deeds as follows: Preparing the parchment is, in essence, a mundane act. Accordingly, the dimension of holiness that makes the parchment fit for use as a Torah scroll must be added by our intentions. In contrast, writing the scroll is, in essence, a holy act. Accordingly, there is no need for anything to be added by our intention. should he write one of God's names without the desired intent,2i.e., when writing God's name, one must be aware of its holiness and write it with that intent in mind. Note the passage from Hilchot Yesodei Torah 6:8 quoted in the commentary on Halachah 13.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:19; Yoreh De'ah 276:2) states that one must write God's name with the intent of expressing its holiness. they are not acceptable.3The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah, loc. cit.) states that one must make a verbal statement of this intention. If not, the Torah scroll is unacceptable. The Siftei Cohen (276:1) differs and states that while making a verbal statement is preferable, as long as one intended to write the name with the desired intent, the Torah scroll may be used. The Ramah (Orach Chayim 32:19) also states with regard to writing God's name in tefillin, that, if the scribe made a verbal statement that he is writing the Torah scroll for the desired pupose, after the fact, it is sufficient merely to have had the desired intent in mind when writing God's name without expressing it verbally.Therefore, when a person is writing God's name, he should not reply even if the king of Israel4The Kessef Mishneh notes that the words "of Israel" are significant. A Jewish king is expected to comprehend the sanctity of a Torah scroll and, hence, will understand if he is not answered. Should a gentile king greet a scribe and his failure to answer create a threat to his life, he is allowed to reply. greets him.5The Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 276:4) rules that if the scribe does reply, the Torah scroll is not disqualified. If he is writing two or three names,6in succession - e.g., "God is our Lord. God is one," in the Shema, where three names of God are written in succession. he may interrupt between them and reply.7When he begins to write again, the scribe should state that he is writing the name to express God's holiness (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 276:3).
[When a scribe] dips his pen [in ink] to write God's name, he should not begin [writing] one of the letters of God's name.1lest too much ink collect on the pen and create an ink blot that must be rubbed out. In doing so, one might also rub out God's name. This is prohibited, as stated in Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 6:1-2. Rather, he should begin with the letter preceding [God's name].2Thus, if an error occurs, God's name will not be effected.If [a scribe] forgot to write God's name in its entirety, he may insert it in between the lines.3Pit'chei Teshuvah 273:6 suggests writing another word above the line together with God's name. It is, however, unacceptable to have a portion of God's name on the line and a portion inserted [between the lines].4From the Rambam's phraseology, it appears that even after the fact, the Torah scroll is not acceptable. Although this decision is accepted by the Turei Zahav (Yoreh De'ah 276:4), the Bayit Chadash mentions a more lenient view. With regard to other words, if one forgets, one may write half the word on the line and half above the line.5One should not, however, write the extra word in the margin between the columns of a Torah scroll (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 276:1).When does the above apply? With regard to a Torah scroll.6Because there is no obligation that a Torah scroll be written in order. Indeed, one may intentionally write certain words or passages not in order. In contrast, with regard to tefillin and mezuzot, one should not insert even one letter7of God's name or of any other word [between the lines].8The Jerusalem Talmud, Megillah 1:9, explains that a word cannot be inserted in the passages of tefillin and mezuzot. The commentaries explain that this is because these passages must be written כסדרן, "in order." If not, they are invalid. In this instance, the word which is inserted will not have been written in order. Rather, if one forgets even one letter, one should entomb what one has written and write another one.9There is another alternative. One may rub out the words written after the omitted word (needless to say, provided that they do not include God's name), and then rewrite the words that were rubbed out.It is permitted to write10any portion of a Torah scroll, even God's name on [parchment where letters] have been scraped off11when the ink has dried or rubbed out12while still moist. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:24) states that it is preferable to wait until the ink dries and then scrape the letters off, rather than rub them out while the ink is still moist. In the latter instance, a mark of the ink is still left. Though it does not disqualify the religious article, it is not attractive. on all [of these sacred articles].13See also Chapter 7, Halachah 13.
Scribes who write Torah scrolls, tefillin, and mezuzot1and desire to protect their work from being exposed to dust or other factors may not turn the parchment face down.2This does not show proper respect for the sacred articles (Eruvin 98a). Rather, they should spread a cloth over them or fold them.3By no means, however, should they leave them open and uncovered, for this is also a sign of disrespect. The Bayit Chadash and the Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 277:1) extend this principle to all sacred texts, explaining that they should never be left open.
[The following rule applies when] a scribe who wrote a Torah scroll, tefillin, or mezuzah states: "I did not write the names of God with the proper intent."1As mentioned in Halachah 15, if a scribe did not have the proper intent when writing one of God's names, the scroll is not acceptable. Once they have left his hand,2becoming the property of another individual his statements are not believed with regard to the disqualification of the scroll.3The Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 281:9) states that this law applies only when the scribe was paid for his services. If he wrote the scroll as a favor, his word is not accepted and the scroll is not disqualified. They are, however, accepted to the extent that he must forfeit his entire wage.4Gittin 54b states that he may not collect his entire wage minus the payment due him for the names of God, because a Torah scroll is worthless unless God's names were written with the proper intent.The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 281:4) states that the scribe does not forfeit his entire wage. Although he is not paid the fee due him for a Torah scroll, he still should be paid for producing a text of theChumash.At that time, printing presses were uncommon and books were written as scrolls. Though such a scroll could not be used for a communal Torah reading, it would be useful for individual study. [Note the objections of the Turei Zahav (Yoreh De'ah 281:4) to this ruling.]Why isn't he believed with regard to the disqualification of the scroll? Because it is possible that he wanted to cause a loss to the purchaser or to the person who hired him, thinking that5he would not suffer a major loss with this statement all that he would be required to forfeit would be the payment for the names of God.6Hence, he was willing to suffer a loss of this nature in order to irritate the purchaser.Accordingly, were he to say that the parchment of this Torah scroll or tefillin7The Rambam omits a mezuzah, since, as he states in Halachah 11, a mezuzah need not be processed with a sacred intent in mind. was not processed with the proper intent in mind,8as required by Halachah 11 his statements are accepted with regard to the disqualification of the sacred articles because, [by virtue of these statements,] he forfeits his entire wage.9We assume that he would not be willing to suffer such a major loss only to cause difficulty to a colleague. Everyone knows that if the parchments were not processed with the proper intent, he does not deserve any payment.10In this instance, as well, he deserves the remuneration appropriate for writing a scroll useful for individual study.
Tefillin and mezuzot may be written only in Assyrian script.1This refers to the calligraphy used for the Hebrew alphabet that closely resembles the printed Hebrew we use today. One of the opinions mentioned in Sanhedrin 22a explains that this calligraphy was indigenous to the Jews, and the Torah itself was originally written in it. It was, nevertheless, not used by the Jews for an extended period until after the Babylonian exile, when it became the standard calligraphy for sacred writings.In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Yadayim 4:5), the Rambam explains the latter opinion, stating that Ashurit means "the finest and most choice." This name was given to this calligraphy because:It is the most choice calligraphy. Its characters are not interchangeable... nor do they resemble each other to the extent that doubt might arise.... This does not apply with regard to other scripts.It was adopted by the Jewish people in the Babylonian exile after the destruction of the First Temple. In previous (and subsequent) generations, Hebrew was generally written with other characters. Permission was granted to write Torah scrolls2This leniency was not extended with regard to tefillin and mezuzot. Megillah 9a derives this concept from the exegesis of Deuteronomy 6:6: "And these words shall be totafot...." Our Sages explain that the expression "shall be" implies that they shall remain unchanged from their Hebrew original. in Greek as well.3From the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Megillah 1:8, 2:1, it appears that the intent is not to write a Greek transliteration of the Hebrew, but rather a translation. The Rambam explains that the Septuagint - the translation of the Torah into Greek at the order of King Ptolemy (Megillah 9a;Soferim 1:7) - had become popular. Hence, it was permitted to be used for a Torah scroll. That Greek language has, however, been forgotten from the world. It has been confused and has sunk into oblivion.4I.e., contemporary Greek is very different from the classical tongue, to the extent that they can be considered to be two separate languages. Therefore, at present, all three sacred articles may be written using Assyrian script alone.5Significantly, however, in Hilchot Megillah 2:3, the Rambam does not state that Greek is unacceptable at present. Note also Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 690).One must be precise while writing them, making sure that one letter does not become attached to another one, because any letter which is not surrounded by parchment6In our commentary on the following halachah, we discuss the laws governing a letter which is not surrounded by parchment because of a hole that is located on its border. on all four sides7There is no minimum amount of space required to be left between letters. Furthermore, one must be careful not to leave too much space, to the extent that it appears that the word is divided in two (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 274:4). is unacceptable.8If the letters are attached, however, the difficulty may be corrected and, afterwards, the sacred article may be used (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:18).Any letter that cannot be read by a child who is neither wise nor foolish9This refers to a child who is able to recognize letters, but not words. Were he able to recognize words, one could assume that he might identify a letter, not by its shape, but because of the meaning of the word in which it is located (Rashi, Menachot 29b). is not acceptable.10Tefillin and mezuzot must be written in order (Chapter 3, Halachah 5; Chapter 5, Halachah 1). Therefore, if a letter which cannot be recognized by a child is written in tefillin or mezuzot, the parchment may never be corrected. Changing the form of the letter is tantamount to rewriting it in its entirety (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:25). Therefore, one must be careful with regard to the form of the letters,11This applies not only when the sacred article was originally written, but throughout the time it is being used. If a portion of a letter cracks, fades, is rubbed out, or is torn, in a manner which alters its form, the sacred article is unacceptable.See also the Tur, Shulchan Aruch, and commentaries (Orach Chayim 36) for a detailed description of the proper form for each letter. so that a yud will not resemble a vav, nor a vav a yud;12These two letters are very similar, the difference between them being that the leg of the vav is extended and that of the yud is not. Therefore, if a scribe would write a yud with a long leg or a vav with a short leg, difficulties may arise. a kaf should not resemble a beit, nor a beit a kaf;13The difference between these two letters is primarily in the lower right-hand corner. In a kaf this corner is rounded, while in a beit it is square. Hence, a scribe's imprecision could cause a difficulty. a dalet should not resemble a resh, nor a resh a dalet.14The difference between these two letters is primarily in the upper right-hand corner. In a resh this corner is rounded, while in a dalet it is square. Hence, in this instance as well, a scribe's imprecision could cause a difficulty.[The same applies in] other similar instances.15Shabbat 103b mentions other pairs of letters which resemble each other, among them: a samech and a final mem, a zayin and a final nun, and a heh and a chet. [The text must be written in a manner] that a reader will be able to read without difficulty.16Shabbat, loc. cit., breaks the word וכתבתם (Deuteronomy 6:9 , which refers to the command to write a mezuzah, into two words, וכתב תם which mean, "And you shall write perfectly." Thus, the command to write a mezuzah - and, by association, tefillin - also serves as an imperative requiring that the writing be precise.
[The following rules apply to] parchment which has holes: One should not write over a hole.1Rashi, Shabbat 108a, associates this ruling with the interpretation, וכתב תם, quoted from Shabbat 103b above. Writing which is "perfect" should not be broken by holes in the parchment. If, however, ink passes over the hole [without seeping through],2As long as no ink seeps through the parchment, the writing can be considered as "perfect." the presence of the hole is of no consequence, and one may write upon it.3This applies even if there is a slight hole in the parchment which can be seen when the parchment is held up to light (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:17; Mishnah Berurah 32:32).[The latter principle has ramifications in contemporary society. Today, many scribes check mezuzot and tefillin using light tables and/or magnifying glasses. The cracks or perforations they find in this manner are not significant and cannot disqualify a parchment.] Accordingly, if the skin of a fowl4which has many small holes where its feathers were has been processed, it is permissible to write upon it.5Nevertheless, it is not common for scribes to use parchment of this origin.[The following rules apply] when a parchment becomes perforated after6Halachah 19 deals with the requirement that the letters be surrounded by parchment while they are being written. This halachah mentions the ruling when the perforation is made afterwards. it has been written on:7Since, at the outset, the writing was "perfect," the parchment is not disqualified because of a hole of later origin. Nevertheless, as will be explained, there are other halachic difficulties involved. If the perforation is within the inside of a letter8e.g., in the space inside a heh, inside a mem, or inside any of the other letters - it is acceptable. - According to the Rambam, the letter is acceptable even though the hole touches the letter itself. Although the previous halachah states that a letter must be surrounded by parchment on all sides, that statement refers only to the external perimeter of the letter. There is no obligation that the letter be surrounded by parchment on the inside.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:15, quotes the Rambam's opinion, but also mentions a passage from the Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 1:9), which requires that the letter be surrounded by parchment on the inside as well. Most Ashkenazic halachic authorities suggest accepting the stringency of the Jerusalem Talmud's ruling. - e.g., in the space inside a heh, inside amem, or inside any of the other letters - it is acceptable.Despite the fact that a leg of a letter becomes perforated to the extent that it becomes separated [into two portions], it is acceptable if:a) [the length of9the portion of the leg]10which remains connected to the body of the letter is equivalent to that of a small letter;11i.e., a yud.In this context, Rabbenu Asher differentiates between the right and left legs of the heh. This distinction, however, is not accepted by the later authorities [Shulchan Aruch, Ramah, (Orach Chayim 32:15)]. and12ifb) the letter's [present form]13i.e., its upper portion does not resemble another letter.14For example, when a perforation causes a vav to be separated into two portions, if its upper portion resembles a yud, it is unacceptable. If the length of the upper portion would prevent a child (see the previous halachah) from confusing it with a yud, it is acceptable.If [the length of15the portion of the leg]16which remainsis not equivalent to that of a small letter, it is - not large enough to be of consequence, and the letter isnot acceptable. - See also Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 32). is not equivalent to that of a small letter, it is not acceptable.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
In what manner are the tefillin [placed on] the head written? [The] four passages1mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 1: Kadesh Li (Exodus 13:1-10), V'hayah ki y'viacha (Exodus 13:11-16), Shema (Deuteronomy 6:4-8), and V'hayah im shamo'a (Deuteronomy 11:13-21). are written on four parchments2Menachot 34b explains that the word totafot, with which the Torah refers to the head tefillin, is a combination of the Carthaginian and African terms for two. Since two and two equals four, the word thus means "a four-sectioned ornament." and rolled closed,3more precisely, folded closed. Though in this halachah, the Rambam mentions only the tefillin of the arm, the parchments in the tefillin of the head are also folded from the end to the beginning, so that when they are opened, one begins reading at the beginning (Chapter 3, Halachah 7). each as a separate entity. They are placed in four compartments, which are covered by a single piece of leather.4See Chapter 3, Halachah 2, for a description of how these tefillin are made.Menachot, loc. cit., derives this concept from the fact that Exodus 13:9 refers to the head tefillin as "a remembrance," using a singular form of the word. This teaches that all four passages must appear as a single entity, "one remembrance."In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Keilim 18:8), the Rambam also mentions tefillin of the head in which four separate compartments are sewn together. Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:58 and the Mishnah Berurah 32:172 write that tefillin made in this manner or by gluing the four compartments together are acceptable. They nevertheless suggest that it is preferable to purchase tefillin that are made from a single piece of leather.[At present, frequently, tefillin which are made from four compartments that are either sewn or glued together are referred to as peshutot and sold for a substantially lower price than tefillin made from a single piece of leather. The difficulty in purchasing them extends beyond one's willingness to opt for the more lenient opinion mentioned in the above sources. Since most halachic authorities advise accepting the more stringent view, most careful scribes do not use these peshutot. Thus, it is likely that they will have other problems as well.]The four passages of [the tefillin placed on] the arm are written on four columns on a single parchment.5They may, however, be written on four separate parchments, which are later glued together (Menachot, loc. cit.). They should be rolled closed like a Torah scroll from the end to the beginning and placed in a single compartment.6Menachot, loc. cit., derives this concept from the exegesis of Exodus, loc. cit.: "And they shall be a sign for you on your hand." The verse implies that just as the tefillin's external appearance is as a single sign, so too, internally, they should be a single entity.
Care must be taken in writing these passages. If one wrote a passage which should be s'tumah1As the Rambam explains at length in Chapter 8, there are two general categories for the passages of the Torah, s'tumah and p'tuchah.S'tumah means "closed." It refers to a passage whose first word is always written in the middle of a line in the Torah. (See Chapter 8, Halachah 2.) as p'tuchah2P'tuchah means "open." It refers to a passage whose first word is always written at the beginning of a line in the Torah. See Chapter 8, Halachah 1. or a passage which should be p'tuchah as s'tumah, it is invalid.3The Ramah (Orach Chayim 32:36) quotes an opinion which explains that the tefillin are not disqualified for such an error. Since there is a difference between tefillin and a Torah scroll - in a Torah scroll, there are many other passages between Shema and V'hayah im shamo'a - the tefillin are not disqualified if V'hayah im shamo'a is written as p'tuchah. Contemporary Ashkenazic practice is based on this opinion. [Note our commentary on Chapter 5, Halachah 2.]The first three passages are all p'tuchot,4For this reason, the first two passages should be written in a manner in which they end at least nine letters before the end of the column (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:36). while the final passage, V'hayah im shamo'a, is s'tumah.5As is explained in the commentary on Chapter 8, Rabbenu Asher differs with the Rambam and offers a different interpretation of the terms s'tumah and p'tuchah. Their difference of opinion does not create a difficulty with regard to the first three passages. A problem, however, does arise with regard to the passage, V'hayah im shamo'a. The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.) states that the Rambam's opinion should be followed. The Turei Zahav (Orach Chayim 32:26) offers a compromise, which satisfies, according to his interpretation, both the Rambam's and Rabbenu Asher's views. His interpretation, however, is not accepted by all authorities.
One must be careful regarding [the spelling of the words in these passages] with regard to the short or full form.1There are times when the Hebrew vowels cholam and shuruk are written with a letter vav, and times when that letter is omitted. Similarly, there are times when the vowel chirik is written with a yud, and times when that letter is omitted.The expression, malei, rendered as "full form," refers to the form which includes the extra letter. Chaseir, rendered as "short form," refers to the form which lacks the extra letter. [The manner in which] these four passages are written [in tefillin] should resemble the manner they are written in a Torah scroll that has been checked [for accuracy in this regard].2In this context, note the comments of the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:20) and Shulchan Aruch HaRav (32:33), which elaborate on the responsibility of a scribe.When one writes a word which requires a short form using a full form, it is invalid until one erases the extra letter.3As mentioned above, every letter of the four passages in the tefillin must be written in order. Nevertheless, although an entire passage was written, correcting a word by erasing an extra letter is not a contradiction to this principle.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:23) mentions that a problem may arise if the letter to be erased is in the middle of a word, since, when it is erased, the space left will cause the word to appear divided. The commentaries explain that the difficulty can sometimes be corrected by extending a letter, for example, writing a resh with an extended upper line. If one writes a word which requires a full form using a short form, it is invalid and may not be corrected.4Because the additional letter will not have been written in the proper order.These are [the correct spellings of the words that could present difficulties] with regard to the short and full forms in these four passages.5The Rambam's inclusion of these particulars in the next four halachot is a clear expression of the desire he expressed in his introduction to the Mishneh Torah, to compose a text that will serve as "a compilation of the entire Oral Law," that would allow a person to "comprehend the entire Oral Law from it without having to study any other text." He saw the Mishneh Torah as a guide to the performance of the mitzvot, and therefore included in it details that would allow every individual to understand - and thus carry out - the minute particulars involved in the fulfillment of each mitzvah.1. The Rambam does not use the expression, "short form," because the chirik of the alef possesses a yud. Similarly, the Rambam states "without a vav" or "without a yud" in several other instances in these halachot, because the form of the word is neither short or full in its entirety. 2. Generally, the word is written ידך. Menachot 37a explains that this departure from the norm was intended to teach us that tefillin are worn on the left hand, as explained in the commentary on Chapter 4, Halachah 2. 3. There are three sizes of letters in the Torah - the normal size, an enlarged size, and a reduced size - as mentioned in Chapter 7, Halachah 8. The Baal HaTurim notes that ayin and dalet spell the word eid, which means "witness." The Shema describes God's oneness. By reciting this verse and placing it in their tefillin and mezuzot, the Jews serve as witnesses, testifying to that oneness. 4. The Rambam also discusses the subject of crowns in Chapter 7, Halachot 8-9. When discussing this matter, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 36:3) mentions the obligation to place crowns on the letters, שעטנ"ז ג"ץ. The obligation of placing crowns on these letters is explicitly mentioned in the Talmud, Menachot 29b. Hence, they are regarded with greater stringency.Afterwards, the Shulchan Aruch also states that there are scribes who customarily place crowns on other letters. Significantly, even in Yemen, where the Rambam's directives are usually adhered to precisely, an exception is made in this instance, and there are different customs with regard to the crowns placed upon letters.5. Shulchan Aruch HaRav (36:5) and the Mishnah Berurah (36:15) require that one add any crowns that are lacking in the passages. This refers, however, to the crowns on the letters, שעטנ"ז ג"ץ, and not to the crowns required by the Rambam.
[In] the first passage, Kadesh li kol b'chor, [the word] b'chor [is written using] the full form; the word zachor [using] the full form; the word b'chozek [using] the short form; the word hotzi [using] the full form; the word yotzi'em without a vav; the word y'viacha [using] the full form; the word v'ha'emori [using] the short form; the word v'hay'vusi [using] the full form; the word la'avotecha without a vav; the word ha'avodah [using] the short form; the word matzot [using] the short form; the word hash'vi'i [using] the full form; the word matzot [using] the full form; the word s'or [using] the short form; the word g'vulecha [using] the short form; the word ba'avur [using] the full form; the word l'ot [using] the full form; the word ul'zikaron [using] the full form; the word einecha [using] the full form; the word torat [using] the full form; the word hotziacha without a yud; the word hachukkah [using] the short form; and the word l'moadah [using] the full form.
[In] the second passage, V'hayah ki y'viacha, [the word] y'viacha [is written] without a yud; the word chamor [using] the short form; the word b'chor [using] the full form; the word b'chozek [using] the short form; the word hotzianu [using] the full form; the word vayaharog [using] the short form; the word b'chor [using] the full form; the word mib'chor [using] the short form; the words v'ad b'chor [using] the full form; the word zove'ach without a vav; the word b'chor in v'chol b'chor [using] the full form; the word l'ot [using] the full form; the word yadecha is written with a hey; the word ul'totafot without the final vav; the word einecha [using] the full form; the word b'chozek [using] the short form; and the word hotzianu [using] the full form.
[In] the third passage, Shema, the ayin of [the word] Shema and the dalet of [the word] echad are enlarged.The word m'odecha [is written using] the short form; the word l'vanecha [using] the full form; the wordb'vetecha without a second yud; the word uv'kumecha [using] the full form; the word l'ot [using] the full form; the word yadecha [using] the short form; the word l'totafot without both vavim; the word einecha [using] the full form; the word mezuzot without the first vav; the word beitecha without a second yud; the word uvish'arecha [using] the full form.
[In] the fourth passage, V'hayah im shamo'a, [the word] shamo'a [is written using] the short form; the word mitzvotai with only one vav; the word yoreh [using] the full form; the word umalkosh [using] the full form; the word v'tiroshcha without a vav; the word v'hishtachavitem [using] the full form; the word y'vulah [using] the full form; the word hatovah [using] the short form; the word notein [using] the short form; the word otam [using] the short form; the word l'ot [using] the full form; the word l'totafot lacking the second vav; the word einechem [using] the full form; the word otam [using] the short form; the wordb'vetecha without a second yud; the word uv'kumecha [using] the full form; the word mezuzot [using] the full form; the word beitecha without a second yud; the word uvish'arecha [using] the full form; the word la'avoteichem without a vav.
Care must be taken regarding the placement of crowns on the letters. They are formed like [small] zeiynin on the [tops of the] letters which possess crowns as in a Torah scroll. These are the letters which possess crowns in these four passages.
There is only one letter [with a crown] in the first passage: the final mem of miyamim. There are three zeiynin upon it. In the second passage, there are five letters [with crowns]. Each of these is a heh, and four zeiynin are placed on each of them. They are: the heh of un'tanah, the first and final heh in the word hikshah, the heh of vayaharog, and the heh of yadecha.In the third passage, there are five letters [with crowns.] They are: the kof of uv'kumecha; it has three zeiynin; the kof of uk'shartam; it has three zeiynin; the two tetim and the pei of l'totafot; each of these letters has four zeiynin.In the fourth passage, there are five letters [with crowns.] They are: the peh of v'asafta; it has three zeiynin; the tov of v'asafta has one zayin; the two tetim and the peh of l'totafot; each of these letters has four zeiynin.There are a total of sixteen letters which require crowns. If one did not place crowns above them, added other crowns, or reduced the number of zeiynin, the passages are not invalid.
A person who purchases tefillin from a person who is not an expert1Note the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 39:8), which states: "One should not purchase [tefillin] from a person who is not an expert." is required to inspect them.2checking to see that no extra letters were added, no letters were omitted, and that each letter is formed correctly.[The Shulchan Aruch's directive and the importance of checking tefillin today must be emphasized, because many scribes, particularly those who write inexpensive tefillin, are not experts. Very frequently, people have purchased tefillin only to find that the passages are not acceptable. For this reason, the Rabbis have suggested buying only tefillin that have been written and inspected by an expert.] If he purchased 100 tefillin, he should inspect three, either two head tefillin and one arm tefillin, or two arm tefillin and one head tefillin.3Eruvin 97a states that one must check at least one arm tefillin and one head tefillin to see that the scribe is proficient in writing both. If he finds them acceptable, [from this time onward,] he can assume the scribe [to be proficient].4One of the fundamental principles of Torah law is that a chazakah ("assumption upon which one can rely") about a matter can be established when the matter is repeated on three consecutive occasions. Thus, they are all considered to be acceptable and need not be checked.5provided the person who sells them states that they were all written by the same individual (Mishnah Berurah 39:22).If, however, one purchases them in different packages, they must all be checked, because it can be presumed that each package was purchased from a different scribe.6It is, however, sufficient to check three tefillin from each package.
After a person writes tefillin himself,1and inspects them purchases them from an expert,2whose work need not be inspected or purchases them from another person and has them inspected, and places them in their leather [compartments], they need not ever be checked again.3The commentaries explain that since they are enclosed in compartments that are not exposed to air, we can presume that the letters are intact.Though this decision is quoted in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 39:10), a qualification is already made. A pair of tefillin which is not worn on a regular basis should be checked twice in seven years. The later authorities (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 39:11 and the Mishnah Berurah 32:26) suggest checking even tefillin that are worn regularly. At present, perhaps because of the differences in the way the compartments are made or in the parchment or ink that is used, it is very common for letters in tefillin to smudge, fade, and crack. The Mateh Efrayim suggests that each person have his tefillin inspected every year. Even authorities who are not that stringent recommend periodic checks.As long as their compartments are intact, they are assumed to be acceptable even though several years have passed.4If, however, the compartments are opened or they are exposed to water, we are obligated to check them (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, loc. cit., Mishnah Berurah, loc. cit.). We do not suspect that a letter has faded out or been perforated. Hillel the elder stated: "These [tefillin]5the tefillin he himself wore are from my maternal grandfather."6”and they have not been checked since.”

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
There are eight requirements in the making of tefillin. All of them are halachot transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai1In Chapter 1, Halachah 3, the Rambam mentioned that there were ten requirements for tefillin that were communicated as "halachot transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai." The first two involve the actual composition of the tefillin. They, and the other laws involving that subject, were discussed in the first two chapters. Now the Rambam discusses the requirements involved in making the tefillin's compartments and straps. and, therefore, it is necessary to fulfill them all. If one deviates with regard to any of them, the [tefillin] are unacceptable.2Though a "halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai" is not written in the Torah itself, it is as binding upon us as those laws which are stated explicitly. They are:a) The tefillin must be square3There is a homiletic dimension to this requirement. Nothing is naturally square. Thus, this shape alludes to man's power of achievement. Wearing tefillin on our heads and opposite our hearts implies that we should exercise our powers of achievement when our minds and hearts are tied to God's mitzvot.The base of the tefillin must also be square. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:39) states that this is also a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai.Note Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:59 and the Mishnah Berurah 32:181, which state that since the squareness of tefillin is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai, the tefillin must remain square at all times. If over the course of time, their shape changes, they may no longer be used. and must be sewn closed in a square.4See Halachah 10. [Both] diagonals5of the square on the top and the base of the tefillin must be equal,6The commentaries cite Sukkah 8a, which states that the diagonal of a square is approximately 1.4 times the length of one of its sides. and thus all four angles will be equal.7Each one being 90 degrees. See Halachot 2 and 4.b) The leather of the head [tefillin] should have a shin embossed on both its right and left sides.8See Halachah 2.c) The passages should be wrapped in fabric.9See Halachah 8.d) A hair should be wound around that fabric. Afterwards, they should be placed in their compartment.10See Halachah 8.e) They should be sewn [closed] with the sinews [of an animal].11See Halachot 9-10.f) The leather compartment in which they are placed should have a place for the straps to pass through so that they can be moved through the [tefillin's] handle.12See Halachot 3-4.g) The straps should be black.13See Halachot 14.h) The knot with which they are tied should be the renowned knot that is formed like a dalet.14See Halachah 13. Note Shabbat 62a, which states that the knot of the arm tefillin, which is shaped like a yud, is also a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai.
How are the head tefillin made? We take a cubic wooden block.1This appears to be the Rambam's preference. It is not, however, an absolute requirement. [It need not, however, be a perfect cube]. If its height is [slightly] more or less than its width, it is of no consequence. We are required to take care only that its width and length are alike.2Thus, the top of the tefillin must be a perfect square, but its side surfaces need not be square. This ruling is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah (Orach Chayim 32:39).The Bi'ur Halachah emphasizes that it is not the top surface of the tefillin alone which must be square. At every point along its height, its circumference must be a perfect square. Thus, even if the top surface itself remains square, should the tefillin be crooked or noticeably indented at the sides, they are unacceptable.Three grooves are carved into it so that four projections will be made as depicted.3The accompanying diagram is based on a drawing by the Rambam himself, which has been copied in all printings of the Mishneh Torah. Leather is taken4Note our commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 1, regarding making tefillin by sewing or gluing together separate compartments. This halachah indicates the Rambam's preference for tefillin to be made from a single piece of leather. and soaked in water, and then, the mold is placed within it.5The authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah read, "The leather is placed around the mold." This version more accurately describes the process with which tefillin are actually made. The leather is inserted in between the grooves.6and around theFJ 46sides, so that when it dries four compartments will be created.While [the leather] is still wet, it is plucked and squeezed7with tweezers. The Orchot Chayim states that one must make the shin in this manner, and it is unacceptable to use a mold. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 32), Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:65, and the Mishnah Berurah 32:193 all mention that though it is theoretically preferable to follow the Orchot Chayim's ruling, nevertheless, until recently, most shinim were made using a mold. At present, however, there are some manufacturers of tefillin who have reverted to the practice of making the shin with tweezers. until the shape of a shin8The Orchot Chayim mentions that the letter shin is numerically equivalent to 300. In the diaspora, tefillin are worn 300 days during a solar year (according to the opinion which requires that they be worn on chol hamo'ed).4 with three heads9This is the usual form of the shin. is formed on the right side of the tefillin as they will be worn, and the shape of a shin with four heads10The Beit Yosef (loc. cit.) explains that the letters on the tablets of the Ten Commandments were hewn into the stone. When a three-headed shin is hewn into stone, the protruding stone appears as a four-headedshin. is formed on the left side of the tefillin as they will be worn.11The Ramah (Orach Chayim 32:42) rules that tefillin are not disqualified if the sides on which the two shinim are placed are reversed, so long as they possess both forms of the shin.
The leather is then left on the mold until it dries, and then it is removed. Thus, the leather will be [formed into a block] with four empty compartments.1The leather is then left on the mold until it dries, and then it is removed. Thus, the leather will be [formed into a block] with four empty compartments. One of the passages from the Torah is placed2upright, as a Torah scroll stands in the ark (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:45), with the right side of the passage on the left side of the tefillin (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:70). in each compartment,3In Halachah 5, the Rambam describes the order in which the passages are placed into the compartments. and then a portion of the leather is folded over beneath them,4Thus, forming the bottom of the tefillin's base. This is referred to as the titorah, which means "bridge" (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:44). It is given this name because it extends like a bridge below the tefillin (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:66). and then they are sewn closed on all four corners.5The precise manner in which the tefillin are sewn closed is described in Halachah 10.Within this lower piece of leather, a place should be left for the straps to be inserted,6and pass through. This portion should extend outward like a handle.7Alternatively, "loop" (Aruch).The width of this "handle" should be less than the width of the base of the tefillin, to distinguish it from the base and thus accentuate the base's squareness (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, loc. cit., Mishnah Berurah 32:177). It is called a ma'aboret.8which literally means "passageway."
How are the tefillin of the arm made? We take a wooden block whose length is equal to its width1Here, also, a square shape is required at the top of the tefillin, along its entire height, and at its base. and is a fingerbreadth2According to the Shiurei Torah, a fingerbreadth is 2 centimeters in modern measure. The Chazon Ish differs, and considers it 2.4 centimeters. - or slightly more or slightly less3high - Curiously, though the Rambam mentions the preferred size for the arm tefillin in this halachah, he did not suggest a size for the head tefillin in the previous two halachot. Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:62 relates that people of stature should wear head tefillin that are at least three fingerbreadths high.Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:63 and the Mishnah Berurah 32:189 mention that the width and length of the base of the tefillin should be more than one fingerbreadth. Preferably, the width and length of the head tefillin should be two fingerbreadths. - high, and place wet leather around it.4Thus, forming a single compartment.The leather is left on this mold until it has dried, and then it is removed. The four passages5which are written on a single piece of parchment are deposited in the place left by the mold.6As mentioned in the previous halachah, the parchment should be placed upright in the compartment. A portion of the leather is folded over beneath them, and then they are sewn closed on all four corners.7See Halachah 10. A piece of leather, like a handle, should be left for the straps [to be inserted].8The ma'aboret of the arm tefillin is governed by the same principles as explained above with regard to the head tefillin.
What is the order of the passages? For the head tefillah, the final passage, V'hayah im shamo'a,1The order of the passages chosen by the Rambam - when read by a person facing the person wearing the tefillin - reflects their order in the Torah (Menachot 34b). Hence, V'hayah im shamo'a is referred to as the final passage. is placed in the first compartment on the right side of the person putting on the tefillin. Shema is placed next to it. V'hayah ki y'viacha is placed in the third compartment next to Shema, and Kadesh Li is placed in the fourth compartment, on the left side of the person putting on the tefillin.2Rashi also prescribes this order for the passages of the tefillin, and this is the order that is accepted as halachah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 34:1). Many other Torah authorities (among them Rav Hai Gaon and Rabbenu Tam) suggest a different order, placing the two passages that begin V'hayah, V'hayah ki y'viacha and V'hayah im shamo'a in the center, Shema on the right side of the person wearing the tefillin, and Kadesh Li on his left side.Thus, a person who is facing the person wearing the tefillin will read them in the following order.3The diagram accompanying this halachah is based on a diagram drawn by the Rambam himself and included in all texts of the Mishneh Torah.Thus, the Rambam (and similarly, Rabbenu Tam and those who follow his opinion) considered that the order of the passages be calculated from the perspective of a person standing opposite the person wearing the tefillin. In contrast, there are other opinions (Shimusha Rabbah and the Ra'avad) who maintain that the order of the passages should be calculated from the perspective of the person wearing the tefillin. (This produces two further perspectives regarding the order of the tefillin. The Shimusha Rabbah follows the same order as the Rambam except that V'hoyoh im Shamoa, is placed in the first compartment on the left side of the person putting on the tefillin, not on the right side. Similarly, the Ra'avad shares Rabbenu Tam's view, but reverses the sides.) If their order is altered, they are not acceptable.4For this reason, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 34:2) suggest that a God-fearing person put on both a pair of tefillin that follow the opinion of the Rambam and Rashi, and a second pair, that follow the opinion of Rabbenu Tam. Though the Shulchan Aruch mentions certain reservations in this regard, in many communities it has become widespread practice to wear both pairs of tefillin.Significantly, the She'elot UTeshuvot Min HaShamayim writes that with regard to this dispute an answer was received from heaven, "Just as there is a dispute in the earthly realm, there is a dispute in the spiritual realms."
[The passages for] the arm tefillin are written on four columns1each passage being written on a separate column on a single piece of parchment2Though this is not an absolute requirement, it is preferable (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:72; Mishnah Berurah 32:219). like a Torah scroll,3i.e., the parchment is rolled closed. according to the order in which these passages are found in the Torah,4If the passages, in part or in totality, are not written in order, they are unacceptable and may not be corrected. in the following manner:If5The diagram accompanying this halachah is based on a diagram drawn by the Rambam himself and included in all texts of the Mishneh Torah. they were written on four separate pieces of parchment and placed in the same compartment, one fulfills one's obligation. There is no need to glue them together.6Although the Ramah (Orach Chayim 32:47) accepts the Rambam's decision, he states that it is customary to glue the parchments together. He emphasizes that it is desirable to use glue that does not contain any non-kosher ingredients.
When the passages1both of the head and the arm tefillin - are rolled closed - to be inserted into their compartments. - both of the head and the arm tefillin - are rolled closed, they should be rolled from the end to the beginning,2as a mezuzah must be rolled from אחדtowards שמע(Menachot 31b). so that were the passage to be rolled open, it would be possible to read each portion from the beginning to the end.3The Bi'ur Halachah (32) states that although rolling the passages is preferable, if the parchments were placed in the tefillin without being rolled closed they are acceptable.
Before the passages are placed in their compartments, they should be wrapped in a fabric,1The present custom is to use a piece of parchment (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 32:44). Although the Rambam considers this requirement to be a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai, the Ashkenazic authorities do not agree. Accordingly, they maintain that, after the fact, if the passages are not wrapped in this parchment, the tefillin may still be used (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:68; Mishnah Berurah 32:205).The difference between the Rambam and the Ashkenazic authorities depends on their interpretation of a passage from the Jerusalem Talmud (Megilah, Chapter 1). This difference in interpretation is also reflected in the laws regarding correcting a torn Torah scroll. See Chapter 9, Halachah 15. and hair should be wound around them. Afterwards, they may be placed in their compartments.2All authorities agree that this is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai.The difference of opinion of whether it is necessary to wrap the tefillin in parchment has created a difficulty with regard to this obligation. The opinions which do not require that the tefillin be wrapped in parchment require that this hair be wrapped around the passages themselves. In contrast, the Rambam, who maintains that it is necessary to wrap them, obligates the hair to be placed around that wrapping.In practice, it is customary to satisfy both opinions and wrap the hair around the passages, cover them with a parchment, and then wrap the same hair around the parchment as well (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:69, Mishnah Berurah 32:209).This hair should be from a kosher species of animal or beast.3As explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 10, all the elements required for tefillin must be made from species which may be eaten. Even when these animals died without being ritually slaughtered or were treifah,4wounded or possessing an illness that will cause them to die within a year. The meat of such an animal may not be eaten. [their hair is nevertheless acceptable].5As explained in the commentary on the above-mentioned halachah, although these animals themselves may not be eaten, since they come from a kosher species, they are not disqualified. It has already become a universally accepted custom to wind hair from the tail6The hair from the tail is longer and easier to tie than the hair from the other portions of the body. of a calf7To recall the sin of the Golden Calf (Shimusha Rabbah). [around these parchments].8Based on the Zohar (Parashat Bo), it is customary that the hair which is wound around the passage, V'hayah im shamo'a, be extended and protrude from the compartments slightly (Ramah, Orach Chayim 32:44).
When the tefillin are sewn closed, they may be sewn only with sinews1The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:50) states that if sinews are not available, one may sew the tefillin closed with thread made from parchment, until sinews are available. Although there are opinions which object to this ruling, it should be followed if there is no other alternative (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:76; Mishnah Berurah 32:227). from a kosher species of animal or beast.2The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:49) states that it is preferable to use the sinews of an ox.Significantly, the Rambam does not mention sinews from kosher fowl. The Rabbis have not defined which of a fowl's sinews are classified as גידים and which are not. Therefore, it is desirable to use the sinews from beasts or animals, and thus avoid this difficulty (Mishnah Berurah, loc. cit.). [Sinews taken from] animals which died without being ritually slaughtered or which were treifah [are nevertheless acceptable].3See the previous halachah.It is customary to take sinews from the heels of kosher animals and beasts. They are white in color. If they are too firm, they are softened by [pounding them with] stones and the like until they become like flax.4This halachah serves as another example of the Rambam's desire for the Mishneh Torah to serve as a complete guide for the fulfillment of the mitzvot. Afterwards, they are spun and twisted into threads5Note Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:75, which states that the process of spinning the sinews into thread must be carried out with the intent that they be used for this sacred purpose. Accordingly, this process may not be carried out by gentiles. and used to sew together tefillin and the sheets of Torah scrolls.6A Torah scroll contains many sheets of parchment. It is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai to join these sheets by sewing them with sinews, as explained in Chapter 9, Halachah 13.
When the tefillin are sewn closed,1If the base of the tefillin is made from a separate piece of leather from the compartments, the stitches must also be connected to the edges of the skin covering the compartments (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:77; Mishnah Berurah 32:228). they should be sewn as a square.2If the stitches are sewn in any other shape, the tefillin are unacceptable. It is a widely accepted practice for there to be three stitches on each side, so that there will be twelve stitches in all.3The Shimusha Rabbah interprets this to be an allusion to the twelve tribes of Israel. This applies for both the arm tefillin and the head tefillin. If, however, one made ten or fourteen stitches, there is no difficulty.4Although the simple meaning of the Rambam's statements is that any number of stitches is acceptable, the commentaries have noted that the Shimusha Rabbah also attaches significance to the numbers ten and fourteen. Ten represents the twelve tribes minus Levi (the priestly tribe) and Judah (the tribe of royalty). Fourteen includes also the tribes of Menasheh and Ephraim.For each of the stitches, the thread5or threads must pass through from both sides.6The tefillin should be sewn closed with two needles: one which is initially passed through facing the upper side of the tefillin, and one which is initially facing their lower side (Mishnah Berurah 32:230).
The groove between [each of the compartments] of the head tefillin should reach the stitches [which sew the tefillin closed].1Thus, the separation between the compartments will be both external and internal. [Nevertheless,] if the groove is discernible, so that the [division into] four compartments is openly visible, [the tefillin] are acceptable even if the groove does not extend until the stitches.2i.e., the separation between the compartments does not extend through the total height of the tefillin. If, however, the groove is not discernible, [the tefillin] are not acceptable.3Note the Mishnah Berurah 32:187, which states that if the groove between the tefillin is not discernible, the tefillin are not acceptable even if they are divided into four separate compartments. Needless to say, however, if only an external distinction is made, but inside, there is no separation between the compartments, the tefillin are not acceptable (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:61).It is necessary to pass a thread or cord through each of the grooves on [the outer side of] the leather [compartments] to separate between the compartments.4This decision is not accepted by all the authorities. Tosafot, Menachot 32b, states that it is necessary to pass a cord between the compartments only when all four passages are written on a single piece of parchment. See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:71, Mishnah Berurah 32:217. It is common custom to pass one of the sinews used to sew [the tefillin closed] between each of these three grooves.5This halachah raises questions with regard to the process in which tefillin are customarily made today. At present, after the compartments of the tefillin are fashioned into a single block, a sinew is passed between the compartments. Afterwards, they are glued together, and then the entire block is shaped into a square. The grooves we see do not represent the real divisions between the blocks, but are merely external impressions.This process is employed, because were the compartments not to be glued together, it would be difficult to form the tefillin into a square. Even if that were possible at the outset, problems might arise over the course of time, because the compartments might spread further apart, and thus prevent the square shape from being maintained. Though it is acceptable to use tefillin made in the present manner, the Rabbis suggest using those in which the separation between the compartments remains openly visible afterwards. (See the Responsa of the Chatam Sofer, Orach Chayim 5; and the Bi'ur Halachah 32.)
How are the straps made? We take leather straps1See Halachah 15. [at least] the length of a barley-corn in width.2The Mishnah Berurah 27:42 emphasizes that when the tefillin are being tied around the arm, care must be taken that the straps do not wrinkle - particularly around the knot, where it is natural that they do - so that this minimum width is maintained.Based on Chapter 9, Halachah 9, we can conclude that this measure is approximately 1 centimeter according to Shiurei Torah and 1.2 centimeters according to Chazon Ish. If they are wider than that, they are acceptable. The length of the straps of the head tefillin should be sufficient to surround the head, tie the knot,3See the following halachah. and extend on either side of the head until they reach the navel or slightly above it.4The Tur (Orach Chayim 27) writes that, according to one opinion, the strap on the right side should reach the navel and the strap on the left should reach the chest. Another opinion states that the right strap should reach the genitalia, and the left, the navel.The length of the strap of the arm should be sufficient to surround the forearm,5at the muscle (Chapter 4, Halachah 2) tie its knot,6See the following halachah. and extend7Significantly, neither in this halachah nor in the following chapter, where the Rambam describes the manner in which tefillin are worn, does he mention the custom of winding the tefillin strap seven times around the arm. until it can be wound three times around the middle finger and tied.8In one of his responsa, the Rambam explains that although the verse, "And you shall tie them for a sign on your hand," refers to the knot tied on the forearm, our Sages divided the word וקשרתם in half, תם וקשר, meaning "And you shall tie a perfect knot." For the knot of the tefillin to be "perfect," the straps should be tied on the hand as well. If the straps are longer than this, they are acceptable.9From the Rambam's statements in Halachah 19, it would appear that he maintains that the minimum standards mentioned in this halachah are absolute requirements.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 27:11) states that since the minimum measure mentioned in this halachah for the head tefillin is not found in the Talmud, if the only tefillin available do not have straps that conform to these measures, these tefillin should be worn. The straps of the head tefillin, however, must be long enough so that they can be draped in front of the person at least slightly (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 27:22; Mishnah Berurah 27:44).
One places the straps through their handle,1The extension of the tefillin's base described in Halachah 4. leaving space for the [circumference of] one's head, and ties2The Pri Megadim writes that this knot must be tied with the specific intent that it be used for the mitzvah. a square knot, which resembles a dalet.3The Rambam's intent is that though the knot is square, the straps extending from either side each appearFJ 46as the legs of a dalet. Note the Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 32), which states that it is preferable to tie a knot which is shaped like a dalet itself. (Unlike the Rambam's knot, which is square, this knot is a right angle.) Sephardic and Chassidic custom is to follow the Beit Yosef. Ashkenazim and Yemenites follow the Rambam's view. Every Torah scholar should learn how to tie this knot.4Chulin 9a mentions this as one of the basic points of knowledge which every Torah scholar should possess. It is impossible to describe this knot in writing. Rather, it must be seen.5The Eshkol associates this statement with the interpretation (Menachot 35b) of Exodus 33:23: "And you shall see My rear," that God showed Moses the knot of His head tefillin. Since it is impossible to describe that knot, God actually showed it to Moses.The straps of the hand tefillin should be tied with a knot that resembles a yud.6The Tur (Orach Chayim 32) writes that - together with the shin embossed on the head tefillin and the dalet mentioned above - this yud completes God's name ידש.Significantly, in Halachah 1, the Rambam does not mention the yud as a "halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai." Our text of Shabbat 62a confers that status on all three of these letters. Tosafot (Shabbat, loc. cit.) suggests emending the text of that passage and conferring that status on the shin alone.The Rambam appears to take an intermediate position. This knot should7have a loop to allow the strap to pass through it so that it can be widened or narrowed while one is tying the tefillin on one's arm.
The outer surface of the straps of both the head and the arm tefillin must be black.1The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 33:4) states that it is preferable that the straps be dyed black by a Jew with the intent that they be used for the mitzvah of tefillin. According to the Ramah, this is an absolute requirement. This is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai.2The straps must remain black at all times. Frequently, after the tefillin have been worn for an extended period, the dye on the straps begins to fade (in particular, near the knots). Since the color of the straps is "a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai," the tefillin are unacceptable if that color has faded. Accordingly, from time to time, it is desirable to check the straps and, if necessary, dye them again (Mishnah Berurah 33:19).In contrast, with regard to the inner surface, since it faces the inside, it is acceptable if it is green or white.3or any other color (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 33:3). One should not make this [side of the straps] red, since it will be embarrassing for him if they become overturned.4People might think that he is infested with skin ulcers and it is the blood oozing from them which makes the straps red (Rashi, Menachot 35a).The back of the straps should be the same color as the compartment;5before it is dyed; alternatively, the color of the underside of the compartment (Kin'at Eliyahu). if it is green, they should be green; if it is white, they should be white.6i.e., it should be the natural color of the leather. It is attractive for tefillin to be entirely black, the compartments7The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:40) uses the expression, "It is a mitzvah that they be black." The Nodah B'Yehudah (Orach Chayim 1) cites the Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 1:9), which states that it is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai that the compartments be black. The Rambam, however, does not consider dyeing the compartments an obligation of this nature. and the entire strap.8i.e., both sides. This practice was never widely accepted (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 33).
The leather used to cover the tefillin1i.e., the compartments and from which the straps are made should come from a kosher species of animal, beast, or fowl. Even when these animals died without being ritually slaughtered or were treifah, [their hides are nevertheless acceptable].2Shabbat 108a derives this concept through the exegesis of Exodus 13:9, "So that the Torah of God will be in your mouths." If, however, leather from a non-kosher species3since it is not permitted to be eaten, it may not be used for tefillin was used or if they were covered with gold, they are not acceptable.4The Rambam appears to be stating that the compartments themselves may not be made from leather from a non-kosher species or from gold. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:48), adds that this prohibition forbids attaching these substances to kosher tefillin.The leather used for the straps must be processed with the intent that it be used for the mitzvah.5If it was not processed with this intent, it is unacceptable (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 33:3; Mishnah Berurah 33:17). In contrast, the leather used to cover the tefillin6i.e., the compartments need not be processed at all.7Accordingly, if processed, it is not necessary that it be processed with the intent that it be used for a mitzvah.The Rambam's view is not accepted by most authorities. Rabbenu Asher states that the leather must be processed and that the processing must be carried out with the intent that the leather be used for the mitzvah. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 32:37) accepts Rabbenu Asher's view, but writes that if no other tefillin are available, it is possible to rely on the Rambam's opinion. It is even acceptable if it is made from matzah.8Shabbat 79a describes this as leather which was not processed with flour and salt and, therefore, likened to matzah, which is simple, without any flavoring. [Indeed,] this is the practice in many communities.9In one of his responsa, the Rambam writes that such leather is used because it is easier to shape. Others state that such leather becomes firmer.
tefillin may be made only by a Jew, since making them is equivalent to writing [the passages],1for which a gentile is disqualified, as explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 13. because of the shin [embossed] in the leather [compartment] mentioned above.2Halachah 2. Since embossing that shin is equivalent to writing, it must be done by a Jew with the proper intent. Therefore, if they were made by a gentile or sewn closed by him, they are unacceptable.3The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 39) explains that since making tefillin has one element which is equivalent to writing the passages, every deed connected with making them may be performed only by those permitted to write them.Similarly, they may not be made by any others whose writing [of the passages] is not acceptable.4for example, an apostate, a woman, a minor, or a Canaanite slave (Chapter 1, Halachah 13).
A head tefillah may not be made into an arm tefillah,1for the reason to be explained immediately but an arm tefillah may be made into a head tefillah,2by making four compartments, separating the passages, and placing each one in its respective compartment. Similarly, a shin must be embossed on either side of the tefillin. because an article should not be lowered from a higher level of holiness3Rashi (Menachot 34b) explains that the head tefillin are considered to be on a higher level because they have the first two letters of the name שדי (the embossed shin and the dalet of the knot). In contrast, the arm tefillah has only one letter, the yud of the knot. to a lesser one.4This principle is applied in many other contexts in Torah law. For example, Hilchot tefillah 11:14 states that a house of study may not be transformed into a synagogue, because a house of study is on a higher level of holiness. Similarly, the strap of a head tefillah should not be used for an arm tefillah.5Within its discussion of these laws, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 42:3) also mentions the prohibition against using articles associated with tefillin - e.g., a carrying bag - for mundane purposes.When does the above apply? After one has worn them. However, if head tefillin have never been worn, one may make them into arm tefillin.6The commentaries explain that this halachah communicates a fundamental principle of Torah law, הזמנה, designating an article to be used for a sacred purpose, alone is not sufficient for this holiness to be imparted to them. They must first be used for the purpose for which they were intended.[Homiletically, this teaches us how important it is to express in deed all the resolves which we have made.] How is this done? One drapes leather around them until they become a single [compartment] and [then, one can] tie them on his hand.7The fact that inside, they are still divided into four compartments is not significant.
[The following laws apply when] the stitches of the tefillin1which sew the upper portion of the tefillin's base to the lower portion, as described in Halachot 9 and 10 become torn: If two stitches which are located next to each other become torn, or three stitches become torn even though they are not located next to each other, [the tefillin] are unacceptable.2Menachot 35a mentions these laws with regard to "tefillin being torn." The Rambam explains that this refers to the stitches, as stated in this halachah. Rabbenu Asher, however, interprets this passage as referring to the leather separating one of the compartments of the head tefillin from the other. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 33:1-2) quotes both opinions as halachah.When does the above apply? With regard to old [tefillin]. With regard to new [tefillin], however, if their base remains intact, they are acceptable.3Our translation of טבלה as "base" follows the interpretation of most authorities. Note, however, the Bi'ur Halachah (33), which stresses the emphasis the Rambam placed on the stitches being sewn in a square shape. (See Halachot 1 and 10.) If some of the stitches are torn, he explains, then the shape of these stitches may no longer be square, and that is the difficulty to which the Rambam is referring. Thus, he interprets טבלה is referring to "the square shape of the stitches." [tefillin are considered] to be "new" as long as the leather remains strong and does not tear when one takes hold of a portion of the leather where the stitch was torn and hangs the tefillin. If the leather is not fit to hang the tefillin because it will tear, the [tefillin are considered] "old."4Note that Rashi (Menachot, loc. cit.) and others interpret the passage as ruling more leniently with regard to "old" tefillin than "new" tefillin. Accordingly, Shulchan Aruch HaRav 33:2 and the Mishnah Berurah 33:15 state that, at the outset, one should follow the stringencies implied by both opinions, and replace the stitches whether the tefillin are new or old. If that is impossible and it is impossible for the person to obtain other tefillin, he may wear those with torn stitches whether they are new or old.
Should a strap be torn, [the pieces] should not be tied or sewn together.1Menachot 35b derives this concept from the word וקשרתם, “And you shall tie them." As mentioned, this word can be divided in half – תם וקשר - which means "and you shall tie perfectly." Rather, it should be removed and entombed,2Since it was used for a mitzvah, it may not be discarded casually (Megillah 26b). and another one [substituted for it].3The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 33:5) mentions an opinion which allows one to sew (but not tie) the two portions of the torn strap together. It concludes that it is preferable to follow the Rambam's view, but if there is no alternative, the more lenient opinion may be followed.The remnants of [torn] straps are not acceptable4i.e., if a strap tears, one may not continue using one of the pieces unless their length and width meets5or exceeds - the minimum requirements - mentioned in Halachah 12. - or exceeds - the minimum requirements.At all times, a person should be careful that the external surface of the straps faces upward6Menachot 35b states, "Their attractive side should face outward." Mo'ed Katan 25a relates that Rav Huna fasted for forty days to atone for the fact that his tefillin strap once became overturned. when he ties them on his arm and head.7Shulchan Aruch HaRav 27:19 and the Mishnah Berurah 27:38 place greater emphasis on the portion of the strap which is tied around one's head and arm. If these portions of the strap become overturned, one should seek atonement by fasting or by donating to charity. Nevertheless, care should also be taken that the remainder of the straps do not turn over.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
Where are the head tefillin placed?1Though all four Biblical passages state that the tefillin should be worn "between your eyes," Menachot 37b establishes a correlation between these verses and Deuteronomy 14:1, "Do not place a bald spot between your eyes," and explains that, just as in the latter verse, "between your eyes" refers to the skull, so, too, the verses which concern tefillin imply a place on the skull. They should be placed at the point of the skull, the end of the hairline towards the face,2The Tur (Orach Chayim 27) states that the place for the head tefillin is the point of the skull, "the end of the hairline towards the face until the place where a child's brain [can be felt] to pulsate." In his commentary on the Tur, Rav Yosef Karo notes the difference in phraseology between the Tur and the Rambam, and in his Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 27:9), he quotes the Tur's text. the place where a child's brain [can be felt] to pulsate.3Our translation is based on the Kessef Mishneh. Instead of "pulsate," Rashi (Menachot 37a) interprets רופס as "is soft."Care must be taken to position them in the center,4of the head, so that they will be5parallel to the place "between the eyes."6However, to place the tefillin actually between one's eyes is forbidden and is considered as heresy (Halachah 3; Megillah 4:7). The knot7mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachah 13 should be at the top portion of the neck,8Menachot 35b states that lifting the knot to the top portion of the neck will cause "Israel to be above and not below." the bottom of the skull.9the portion opposite the face. Care should be taken that the knot be positioned in the center of the neck and not move from side to side (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 27:10). This point is directly opposite the space between the eyes.
The arm [tefillin] should be tied to one's left arm1Menachot 37a brings a number of exegetical references which indicate that tefillin should be placed on the left arm. Among them, "It is written, 'And you shall tie' and 'And you should write.' Just as writing is done with the right hand, so, too, tying should be done with the right hand." Tying tefillin with one's right hand implies that they are placed on the left. at the muscle2but not above the muscle (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 27:2; Mishnah Berurah 27:4) - i.e., the bulging flesh of the arm between the shoulder and the elbow.3Menachot 37b explains that though the verse literally states that tefillin should be placed on the hand, the exegesis of several verses indicates that they are placed on the muscle. The interpretation of the verse, "And these words..." quoted by the Rambam is one of the proofs cited there. Thus, if one presses his arm to his ribs, the tefillah will be opposite his heart,4The tefillin, and, in particular, the yud of the knot, should be tilted to face the heart (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 27:1,2). thus fulfilling the directive [Deuteronomy 6:6], "And these words... shall be upon your heart."5This position implies that one should subjugate the desires and feelings of his heart to God (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 25:5).
A person who places the arm tefillah on his palm,1in contrast to our Sages' definition of the phrase, "on your hand" or the head tefillah on his forehead,2in contrast to our Sages' definition of the phrase, "between your eyes" follows the way of the Sadducees.3In his commentary on Avot 1:3, the Rambam writes that Tzadok and Baithos were students of Antigonus of Socho. When they heard their teacher declare, "Do not serve the master for the sake of receiving a reward," they were upset, since they thought that he was implying that no reward would be given for the performance of mitzvot. They spoke about the matter between themselves and decided to reject the Torah.They began splinter groups which rejected the core of Jewish practice, and coveted material wealth. They found that they could not convince the majority of the people to reject the Torah entirely, so they adopted a different tactic. They claimed that they were true to Torah, but the only Torah that was Divine was the Written Law. The Oral Law was merely a human invention.This thesis was only a ruse to sway the people from the performance of the mitzvot. Accordingly, the Sages would frequently refer to all those who deny the Torah and its tradition to be Sadducees ("followers of Tzadok") or Baithosees ("followers of Baithos"). A person who makes his tefillin rounded like a nut4Megillah 24b, the source for this law, adds, "they are dangerous," for they can fracture the person's skull. Though absent in the standard published edition, this line is included in many texts of the Mishneh Torah. The Kessef Mishneh, however, explains the line's omission since it does not teach us any halachic concepts. does not fulfill the mitzvah at all.5because, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 1, tefillin must be square.A left-handed person puts tefillin on his right hand, since [figuratively,] it is his left hand.6Menachot 37a states that tefillin must be placed on the weaker hand. For a left-handed person, this is the right hand. If he is ambidextrous, he should place them on his left hand7i.e., his left hand in a literal sense. - Note the Ramah (Orach Chayim 27:6), who explains that everything depends on the hand with which the person writes. If he writes with his left hand, the tefillin should be placed on the right.Rav Shlomo Kluger, the Tzemach Tzedek, and other later authorities have dealt with questions concerning people who are ambidextrous to varying degrees. Frequently, they have advised that such a person wear tefillin on one of his arms during the prayer service, and afterwards place them on the other arm, to make sure that he fulfills the mitzvah. - i.e., his left hand in a literal sense.The places where to tie and place8The arm tefillah is "tied," while the head tefillah is "placed." This reflects the commandment in Deuteronomy 6:8, "And you shall tie them... on your hand and they shall be... between your eyes." We must actually tie the arm tefillin upon our bodies. In contrast, the mitzvah of the head tefillin is that "it be" - i.e., be positioned in its appropriate place. the tefillin were received as part of the oral tradition.9In his Introduction to the Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that, on Mount Sinai, Moses was given instructions how to observe all the mitzvot. This constituted the "oral tradition." Though the Sages of the Talmud may have used certain verses from the Torah as allusions to these instructions, the fulfillment of the mitzvot began at Sinai (or shortly afterwards, depending on the mitzvah). The people did not need the allusions from the Torah to tell them how to fulfill the mitzvot, since they had already received this information orally from Moses.To relate these concepts to the present context: Although the Sages mentioned several exegetical references to the places where tefillin are worn, it is not that the Sages discovered the proper position for tefillin. Rather, directly after they were given the commandment to put on tefillin, the Jews placed them on their arms and heads. Years later, the Sages sought allusions for these practices in the Written Law.
The [absence of the] head tefillah does not preclude [wearing tefillin] on the arm,1i.e., if a person does not have a head tefillah or is in a situation where it is inappropriate to wear the head tefillah (see Halachah 23), he should still wear the arm tefillah and similarly, the [absence of the] arm tefillah2or if a person lost the arm on which he should place tefillin does not preclude [wearing tefillin] on the head.3The Kessef Mishneh mentions a version of the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Menachot 4:1) which differs with this ruling. Rav Kapach explains that he is referring to the initial version of the Commentary on the Mishnah, which the Rambam later revised.In that initial version, the Rambam explains (based on Menachot 44a) that the Sages feared that if a person were given license to wear only one tefillah, he might hesitate from purchasing the other one. Therefore, they allowed one to wear a single tefillah only when he already possessed the second one. When the Rambam reviewed that commentary, he emended the text to concur with the decision here. They are two mitzvot, each one to be considered independently.4Since there are two different commandments in the Torah, "And you shall tie... and they shall be...," they are regarded to be two separate mitzvot.What blessings are recited? On the head tefillin, one recites:5See the following halachah, where the Rambam explains that, generally, it is proper to recite only a single blessing. "[Blessed are You...] who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the mitzvah of tefillin." On the arm tefillin, one recites: "[Blessed are You...] who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to put on tefillin."6It is possible to explain the difference in the two blessings as follows: With regard to the arm tefillin, the Torah states, "And you shall tie them," requiring a deed, and hence the expression "put on." In contrast, the head tefillin are required "to be... between your eyes." Since less emphasis is placed on our actions, it is appropriate to praise God "concerning the mitzvah of..." (Rav Yehudah ben Yakar).
When does the above apply? When one puts on only one of them.1As mentioned in the previous halachah, at times one can put one on without the other. On such occasions, the appropriate blessing should be recited for each tefillah. If, however, one puts them both on,2one after the other without interruption. (The rulings governing an interruption are discussed in the following halachah.) one recites only a single blessing, "...to put on tefillin."One3This phrase can also refer to putting on the head tefillin, since both mitzvot share the same intent. Hence, if no interruption is made between the two, it is unnecessary - and therefore, we are forbidden - to recite a second blessing.This ruling is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 25:5) and is followed by all Sephardic authorities and some Ashkenazic authorities. The majority of the Ashkenazic community follows the opinion of Rabbenu Asher (quoted by the Ramah, Orach Chayim, loc. cit.) which maintains that the two blessings should be recited even when no interruption is made between putting on the two tefillin.This opinion agrees that the blessing "...to put on tefillin" also applies to the head tefillin. Therefore, even according to this opinion, it is forbidden to make an interruption between putting on the two tefillin; nevertheless, the Sages instituted a second blessing in recognition of the unique importance and holiness of the head tefillin.The later authorities have added that because of the possibility that the second blessing is being recited in vain, one should recite the phrase Baruch shem kavod malchuto le'olam va'ed. should tie the tefillin on one's arm,4Rabbenu Asher and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 25:11) write that one should put on the head tefillin directly after tying the tefillin to the arm, before continuing to wind the straps around the hand. Thus, no interruption at all will be made between the fulfillment of the two mitzvot.There are, however, certain opinions (see the commentary of Rav David Arameah) that maintain that since tying the arm tefillin around the middle finger is an essential element of the mitzvah, this should be done before putting on the head tefillin.Our present practice follows the Ari zal who would wind the tefillin straps around his forearm, put on the head tefillin, and then, tie the straps around his hand (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 25:24, Mishnah Berurah 25:38). and afterwards put on the head tefillin.5following the order stated in the Biblical commandment (Menachot 36a). When one removes them, the head tefillin should be removed, and then the arm tefillin.6Menachot (loc. cit.) continues, explaining that the phrase, "they shall be totafot (plural) between your eyes," teaches us that "as long as the tefillin are 'between your eyes,' 'they should be' - i.e., one should wear both tefillin. Thus, the head tefillah should be removed before the arm tefillah.
[After] reciting the blessing, "...to put on tefillin," and tying the tefillin on one's arm, one is forbidden to talk1for doing so would constitute an interruption between putting on the two tefillin. Other interruptions - e.g., to signal to a colleague or to wink at him - are also forbidden. They do not, however, require a second blessing. - even to respond to a greeting from one's teacher2The Rambam chooses this example because a person is required to show deference to his teacher. Accordingly, although normally one is forbidden to interrupt the recitation of the Shema, one may do so to greet his teacher or return his greetings, according to the rules outlined in Hilchot Kri'at Shema 2:15-16.The comparison to a teacher is also significant from a different perspective. Hilchot Kri'at Shema (loc. cit.) discusses when one may interrupt one's prayers "because of fear" - e.g., when one encounters a gentile king. Whenever an interruption is allowed in deference to such a king, one may also respond to Barchu, Kedushah, or Kaddish, for they are expressions of deference to the King of kings (Tur, Orach Chayim 66).From the fact that the Rambam mentions the prohibition against talking between putting on the two tefillin in the context of deference to one's teacher, one might assume that he would allow an interruption in the above situations when deference to God is involved. Though this opinion is accepted by many early and later authorities (Rabbenu Tam, Rav Shneur Zalman of Liadi), the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 25:10) forbids making such an interruption. - until he puts on the head tefillin. If he talks, it is considered to be a transgression.3since, by doing so, he obligates himself to recite a second blessing that would otherwise not be required. Reciting an unnecessary blessing violates the prohibition, "Do not take the name of God, your Lord, in vain" (Exodus 20:7 .Based on Deuteronomy 20:8, the Sages explained that the Jewish army should be composed only of righteous men. Any sinners were excused from military service. Significantly, there are opinions which consider this transgression significant enough for a person to be included in this category (Sotah 44b). [In such an instance,] one is required to recite the second blessing, "...concerning the mitzvah of tefillin," and then put on the head tefillin.4The Ramah (Orach Chayim 25:9) requires that the person also repeat the blessing "...to put on tefillin" in this instance. According to his opinion, the blessing "...concerning the mitzvah of tefillin" was instituted as praise for the special holiness of the head tefillin, and is not recited for the performance of the mitzvah itself.
Whenever a person puts on tefillin1This halachah may be difficult for many people to comprehend, because they associate wearing tefillin with the prayer service alone. In truth, as explained in Halachot 10, 25, and 26, the mitzvah of tefillin applies throughout the entire day, and the restriction of wearing them only during the prayer service is a relatively recent development. - even if he removes them and puts them on several times throughout the day2Every moment one wears tefillin, one fulfills a mitzvah. Therefore, it is proper to recite a blessing each time one puts them on. - he should recite a blessing for them.3The Ramah (Orach Chayim 25:12) states that if a person removes his tefillin with the intent of putting them on again in the near future, it is not necessary for him to recite a blessing.With regard to all mitzvot: one recites a blessing for them before performing them.4See Hilchot Berachot 11:2-8 for a discussion of this principle. Therefore, one should recite the blessing for the arm tefillah after placing it on one's muscle,5and not beforehand, so that the blessing is recited directly before the mitzvah is fulfilled (Kessef Mishneh). before tying it,6i.e., tightening the knot around the muscle since tying it comprises the fulfillment of the mitzvah.7See the commentary on Halachah 3.One should recite the blessing for the head tefillah after placing it on one's head, before adjusting the straps around the head (Ramah, Orach Chayim 25:8).
When a person removes his tefillin to place them in a container,1This refers to the bag in which the tefillin are held, and not the cases in which they are usually placed. Based on Shulchan Aruch HaRav 25:3, it appears that as long as the tefillin are enclosed in these cases, the laws mentioned below would be modified slightly. he should not place the arm tefillah below and the head tefillah above, because when he wants to put them on, he will encounter the head tefillah first.2From Shulchan Aruch HaRav 25:3 and the Mishnah Berurah 25:3, it appears that "encounter" must be taken literally. One need not actually hold the tefillin for these laws to apply. Thus, he will [be forced to] ignore it and take out the arm tefillah, since one should not put on the head tefillah before the arm tefillah.3as explained in Halachah 5.[This is undesirable because] it is forbidden for a person to ignore one mitzvah and proceed to the fulfillment of another mitzvah.4From the Rambam's statements, it appears that even when one encounters the head tefillin first, it is proper to put on the arm tefillin first. Although there are authorities (e.g., Rabbenu Yerucham) who do not accept this decision, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 25:6) rules in this manner.This decision can be explained as follows: The concept not to bypass the performance of a mitzvah is a Rabbinic law. (Although below, a verse from the Torah is cited as the source for this concept, that verse is merely an allusion.) In contrast, the obligation to put the arm tefillin on first is derived from the Torah itself. Hence, it is given priority (Mishneh Berurah 25:23). Rather, as soon as a mitzvah comes to a person's hand, he should occupy himself with it.5On Exodus 12:17, "And you shall watch the matzot," the Mechilta comments, "Do not read 'matzot'; read 'mitzvot,' and explains that just as matzot must be baked hurriedly so they do not leaven, mitzvot should be performed with eagerness, without delay. Therefore, a person should place the arm tefillin above, so that he will encounter it first, and thus put on the tefillin in the proper sequence.6The Rambam's statements are quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 28:2). Shulchan Aruch HaRav 28:8 and the Mishnah Berurah 28:7, however, suggest that it is preferable not to place the arm tefillin directly above the head tefillin, because the head tefillin possess a higher level of holiness (Chapter 3, Halachah 17). Rather, a wide bag should be made, where they can be placed side by side, with the arm tefillin slightly above.
A container that was made for tefillin to be placed in and which was used1even once (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 42:3) for that purpose2As will be explained, both these particulars are necessary. becomes holy. It is forbidden to use it for mundane purposes.3e.g., to serve as a container for ordinary articles. If, however, when the container was made, the person had the intent to use it for tefillin only temporarily, and then to use it for another purpose, the Ramah (Orach Chayim, loc. cit.) allows it to be used for mundane purposes.If a container was prepared for that purpose, but never used for it,4This ruling depends on the principle mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 3, Halachah 17, that הזמנה, designating an article to be used for a sacred purpose, is not sufficient for holiness to be imparted to the article. It must first be used for the purpose for which it was intended. or if a container was temporarily5Shulchan Aruch HaRav 42:4 and the Mishnah Berurah 42:24 explain that even if a person used a container for tefillin many times, as long as he never intended the container to be used for this purpose continually, it is not considered as holy. Should, however, a person even once consider the container as intended for tefillin, it may never be used for another purpose. used for tefillin, but was not prepared for that purpose, it does not become holy. Rather, it is considered an ordinary article as before.6Shulchan Aruch HaRav, loc. cit., allows one to use the container for mundane purposes at the same time it is used for tefillin. The Mishnah Berurah 42:26, however, suggests that this does not show respect for the tefillin.It is forbidden to suspend tefillin.7from a hook. Doing so is considered as disgracing the mitzvah. Berachot 24a states, "The life of a person who hangs tefillin will also hang [by a thread]." [This applies regardless of whether one suspends them] by their straps or from the tefillah itself.8Holding the head tefillin by the straps and letting the tefillah hang while putting it on is not included in this prohibition (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 40:1; Mishnah Berurah 40:1). It is, nevertheless, proper to put them on without letting the tefillah hang. One may, however, suspend the bag in which they are placed.
The time for wearing tefillin is the day and not the night, as [Exodus 13:10] states: "And you shall observe this statute in its appointed time, from day to day." "This statute" refers to the mitzvah of tefillin.1Most commentaries on the Torah interpret "this statute" as referring to the Paschal sacrifice, and render the Hebrew מימים ימימה as "from year to year." Though this is the accepted meaning with regard to the Torah's simple interpretation, from a Halachic perspective the matter is the subject of a debate between the Sages (Menachot 36b), and the interpretation quoted by the Rambam is advanced by Rabbi Yosse HaG'lili.Similarly, Sabbaths and holidays2The expression יום טוב generally refers to the days of the festival on which it is forbidden to do work - and not chol hamo'ed, the intermediate days. Thus, it would appear that the Rambam requires wearing tefillin on chol hamo'ed. Similarly, the Kessef Mishneh citesHilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 7:13 which also appears to indicate that one should put on tefillin on chol hamo'ed.The Kessef Mishneh concludes by stating that, originally, it was customary to wear tefillin on chol hamo'ed. Afterwards, the later Rabbis discovered a statement of the Zohar Chadash (Shir HaShirim 1:3), which severely criticizes those who wear tefillin on these days, and the custom of not wearing tefillin spread.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 31:1) forbids wearing tefillin on chol hamo'ed. The Ramah (loc. cit.) maintains that they should be worn and a blessing recited. At present, even those who wear tefillin on chol hamo'ed generally do not recite a blessing (Mishnah Berurah 31:8). In the Sephardic and Chassidic communities and, similarly, in all communities in Eretz Yisrael, it is customary not to wear tefillin on these days. are not days on which tefillin [are worn],3Not only are we not obligated to wear tefillin on these days, doing so is considered to be a disgrace to the Sabbath and a transgression of the prohibition forbidding us to add to the Torah's commandments (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 31:1; Mishnah Berurah 31:5). (See also the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah: Eruvin 10:1; Beitzah 1:10.) as [Exodus 13:9] states: "And they shall be a sign for you."4The citation of this proof-text reflects a general pattern within the Mishneh Torah. As mentioned in Menachot (loc. cit.), there is a debate whether the verse, "And you shall observe this statute..." applies to tefillin or the Pesach.Rabbi Yosse HaG'lili interprets the verse as referring to tefillin, and explains that it teaches that tefillin should not be worn at night, nor on Sabbaths and holidays. Rabbi Akiva differs, and interprets the verse as referring to the Paschal sacrifice. Though he maintains that tefillin should be worn at night, he agrees that they should not be worn on Sabbaths and holidays, and derives that concept from the verse, "And they shall be a sign...."The Rambam quotes the proof-texts cited by both the differing opinions because each one clearly alludes to the halachic principles he seeks to express (Radbaz, Vol. V, Responsum 1693). For this same reason, he sees no difficulty in quoting the verse, "And you shall observe these statutes..." in Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 1:7 according to the interpretation of Rabbi Akiva. Since the Sabbaths and the holidays are themselves signs,5See Exodus 31:13: "It (the Sabbath) is a sign between Me and you." This sign refers to the mitzvot associated with the Sabbath and holidays (Tosafot) or to the prohibition against performing work on these days (Rabbenu Asher). [the sign of tefillin is unnecessary].6Two witnesses are required by Torah law. Thus, at all times we must have two signs of our commitment to Torah. One is circumcision; the other, either tefillin, or the Sabbath or the festivals.When does the time to put them on begin? When one can see713 Rabbenu Yonah explains that tefillin are associated with sight because the Torah also mentions them in connection with that sense.Menachot 35b interprets the verse, "And all the nations of the earth shall see that the name of God is called upon you" (Deuteronomy 28:10 , as a reference to tefillin. a colleague standing four cubits away8The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 1:2) explains that this refers to a colleague with whom one shares occasional contact. One would recognize a close friend easily, and a person with whom one is not acquainted would never be recognized. and recognize him.9This time is between עלות השחר, "dawn," the first shinings of the sun's rays, and הנץ החמה, "sunrise," the appearance of the sun on the horizon. [It continues] until sunset.10More particularly, most authorities interpret the Rambam to be referring to the appearance of the stars. The Ari zal, however, states that the tefillin should be removed at sunset (Mishnah Berurah 30:15).
It is permitted for a person who put on tefillin before sunset to continue wearing them after nightfall.1Menachot 36a relates that Rav Ashi wore his tefillin at night. They may even remain upon him the entire night.2One must, however, remove them before going to sleep. Sleeping in tefillin is forbidden, as stated in Halachah 15.This law, however, is not to be taught in public.3lest the common people fail to treat the matter with the proper concern. Instead, everyone should be taught not to wear tefillin at night and to remove them before sunset.4lest one fall asleep while wearing them.A person who puts on tefillin after sunset transgresses a Scriptural prohibition,5This prohibition is not, however, included as one of the 613 mitzvot, nor is it punished by lashes. The Radbaz (Vol. V, Responsum 1468) explains that since a person may continue wearing tefillin at night, we see that this prohibition does not have the same force as others. Therefore, its violation is not punished by lashes. as [implied by Exodus 13:10]: "And you shall observe6The word השמר and its derivitives connote a Torah prohibition (Menachot 36b). this statute... from day to day."7The Rambam's statements represent an intermediate position between the opinions of the Ashkenazic authorities, who maintain that the prohibition against wearing tefillin at night is merely a Rabbinic decree, and the practice of "the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael who would recite the blessing, 'who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to observe His statutes' before removing their tefillin at night.According to the Rambam, the prohibition against wearing tefillin at night stems from the Torah. A blessing, nevertheless, is not required when removing them.
When a person is wearing tefillin in the midst of a journey and the sun sets, marking the commencement of the Sabbath,1Our translation follows the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah, which reflects Rashi's commentary in Beitzah 15a.Other versions of the text divide the halachah in two: with the first clause speaking about nightfall during the week, and the second clause speaking about the commencement of the Sabbath. The manner in which these laws are stated in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 30:4) follows the latter version. he should cover them with his hand2so that others will not see him and think that it is proper to wear tefillin at this time until he reaches his home3Since one wears tefillin like a garment, taking them home in this manner does not constitute a violation of the prohibition against carrying on the Sabbath. and then, remove them.4According to the versions which state that this clause applies during the week, the person does not remove the tefillin and carry them during his journey, lest they fall from his hand.If he is sitting in the house of study5In Talmudic times, the houses of study were located in the fields, and it was not safe to leave articles there. and the sun sets, marking the commencement of the Sabbath,6The authorities agree that this refers to sunset and not the appearance of the stars, since it is forbidden to carry from sunset onwards. he should cover them with his hand until he reaches his home, and then remove them.7he should cover them with his hand until he reaches his home, and then remove them. If there is a house located near the wall [of a city] where they would be safe, he should place them there.8This applies both on the Sabbath and during the week. Since the person has a safe place where the tefillin could be kept, he is not allowed to continue wearing them. If, however, he did not remove his tefillin after sunset because he did not have a place where they would be safe, it is permissible for him to continue wearing them in order to protect them.9The Kessef Mishneh explains that, although in the previous halachah, the Rambam had also stated that it is permissible to continue wearing tefillin at night, people should not be informed about this leniency. In contrast, when one's intent is to protect the tefillin, one may wear them without compunction (Kessef Mishneh). One may not, however, put on tefillin at night even for the purpose of protecting them (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 30:4; Mishnah Berurah 30:9).
All those who are exempt from the obligation to recite the Shema1This includes:a) women and Canaanite slaves (Hilchot Kri'at Shema 4:1), who are not obligated by either of these mitzvot, since these mitzvot are associated with certain time limits (מצות עשה שהזמן גרמה).b) minors, who, according to Torah law, are not obligated to perform any mitzvot. (There is, however, a Rabbinic obligation to educate them in the performance of mitzvot.)c) individuals whose thoughts are unsettled or who are occupied with the performance of other mitzvot. (See the subsequent halachot of Hilchot Kri'at Shema, Chapter 4.) are exempt from the obligation to wear tefillin.2Significantly, in Hilchot Tzitzit 3:9, the Rambam mentions that women and slaves may wear tzitzit or perform any other mitzvah which they are not obligated to fulfill. Perhaps, he does not make that statement with regard to tefillin, because as the Ramah (Orach Chayim 38:3) states, the obligation to concentrate one's thoughts on the tefillin and to control one's body is the reason that women should not take on the practice of wearing tefillin. Our Sages, nevertheless, cite the example of Michal, King Saul's daughter, who would wear tefillin. If a minor knows [the importance of] guarding his tefillin,3who knows not to sleep, not to enter a lavatory, and not to release gas while wearing them (Shulchan Aruch, Ramah, Orach Chayim 37:3) his father should obtain tefillin for him,4In some Sephardic communities, it is customary for children to wear tefillin from the age of nine. In Ashkenazic communities, however, a minor begins putting on tefillin two to three months before becoming Bar-Mitzvah (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 37:3; Mishnah Berurah 37:12). to educate him regarding the performance of mitzvot.5Many times throughout the Mishneh Torah - e.g., Hilchot Tzitzit 3:9, Hilchot Berachot 5:1, Hilchot Sukkah 6:1 - the Rambam mentions a father's obligation to educate his children regarding the performance of mitzvot.A person with stomach problems and anyone who can contain his excretory functions only with difficulty6because he may release gas (see Halachah 15) and because he may not be able to concentrate on the tefillin are exempt from the obligation to wear tefillin.7If, however, one feels that he can control his body and thoughts for a limited time, he should wear them for that interval (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 38:2). [In contrast,] all those ritually impure are obligated to wear tefillin like one who is pure.8See Hilchot Sefer Torah 10:8.A person who suffers discomfort, or someone who is disturbed and cannot concentrate his thoughts, is exempt from the obligation to wear tefillin,9The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 2:3) cites the example of Rabbi Yannai, who would not put on tefillin until the third day after he recovered from illness. since a person who wears tefillin is forbidden to divert his attention from them.10as explained in the following halachah.Priests who are in the midst of [the Temple] service,11offering or partaking of the sacrifices Levites who chant12while the sacrifices are being offered on the platform,13the three steps which separated the courtyard of the Israelites from the Priestly Courtyard. (See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:2.) and Israelites while they are attending the Temple [ceremonies]14This refers to the Israelites who were part of the ma'amadot and would attend the Temple service as emissaries of the entire Jewish people. (See Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 6:5.) are exempt from the obligation to pray and to wear tefillin.15Since a person who is occupied with the performance of one mitzvah is exempt from the obligation of performing others (Rashi, Zevachim 19a).That passage continues to explain that these individuals were allowed to wear tefillin and would do so - with the exception of the priests, who would not wear the arm tefillin, for doing so would cause a separation between the priestly garments and their flesh. (See also Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 10:3,6.)
A person should touch his tefillin1touching the arm tefillin before the head tefillin (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 28:1) [from time to time] during the entire time he is wearing them,2The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim, loc. cit.) quotes this law and adds that, in particular, one should touch the tefillin when reciting the verse, "And you shall tie them... and they shall be..." in the Shema. so that he will not divert his attention3The Mishnah Berurah (28:1) also mentions that one should check that they have not moved from their proper place. from them even for a single moment,4As mentioned in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 25:5), when putting on tefillin, a person should intend "to subjugate his desires and thoughts to God." There is no need, however, for this intent to be in the forefront of one's thoughts throughout the entire time one is wearing tefillin. On the contrary, in Talmudic times (see Halachah 25), tefillin would be worn throughout the day, even during one's involvement in mundane affairs.Accordingly, the Rabbis (see Shulchan Aruch HaRav 28:1; Mishnah Berurah 44:3) explain that here, by "diversion of attention," the Rabbis meant that a person's mind should not become focused on frivolous matters or on his bodily needs to the extent that he forgets about the fear of God. Thus, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 38:4) states that a person who cannot control himself from thinking about lewd things should not put on tefillin, and Shulchan Aruch HaRav 38:8 and the Mishnah Berurah 38:30 free a person who is troubled by cold from the obligation of wearing tefillin.The Sha'agat Arieh (Responsum 39), however, interprets the Rambam's words very strictly and maintains that, according to the Rambam, even the slightest diversion of attention from tefillin is forbidden. for5The Rambam emphasizes that because tefillin possess such great holiness, diverting one's attention from them would be considered an act of disrespect, and is therefore forbidden (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 14). their holiness surpasses that of the tzitz.6The head-plate worn by the High Priest. (See Exodus 28:36-38; Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 9:1-2.) The tzitz has God's name [written] upon it only once,7The words קדש לי-ה-ו-ה (consecrated unto God) are embossed on it. while the head tefillin8and similarly, the arm tefillin - contain the name י-ה-ו-ה 21 times - in the passages from the Torah they contain. - and similarly, the arm tefillin - contain the name י-ה-ו-ה 21 times.
tefillin require a clean body;1In this context,Shabbat 130a cites the example of Elisha, ba'al hak'nafayim. i.e., that one should be careful not to release gas while wearing them.2As mentioned in Halachah 13, a person who cannot control himself and feels that he must release gas, is exempt from the obligation of wearing tefillin.Accordingly, it is forbidden to sleep while wearing them3Shabbat 130a explains that the Rabbis forbade sleeping in tefillin lest one accidentally release gas. Significantly, the Rabbis did not consider sleeping a diversion of one's attention from the tefillin (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 44:1; Mishnah Berurah 44:3). - neither a long sleep nor a nap. If, however, one places a cloth over them4The Kessef Mishneh interprets Sukkah 26a as indicating that this will keep the person's attention focused on the tefillin and prevent him from releasing gas. and a woman is not with him,5lest this lead to sexual relations, which are forbidden in the presence of tefillin, as stated in Halachah 24. one may nap while wearing them. What should he do? Place his head between his knees and sleep while sitting.6This will prevent him from falling into a deep slumber in which he might lose control of himself.
A person who has tefillin wound around his hand1If, however, he is merely holding them, it is forbidden, lest they drop from his hand (Kessef Mishneh). The Ramah (Orach Chayim 44:1) states that if the tefillin are placed in a container, there are no restrictions. is permitted to sleep with them. [This applies] even to a long sleep.2Since he is not wearing them, there is no difficulty even if he were to release gas (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 44:1; Mishnah Berurah 44:6).He may eat only a snack3a meal of less than ak'beitzah, approximately 2 ounces in modern measure. while wearing them. If, however, he enters to partake of a regular meal, he should remove them4lest he become drunk while eating and act in a manner unbecoming to the tefillin (Berachot 23b). and place them on the table until after he washes his hands [at the conclusion of the meal].5The Rambam discusses the obligation of washing after eating (mayim acharonim) in Hilchot Berachot 6:3. Afterwards, he should put them on and recite grace over his meal while wearing them.6Wearing tefillin while reciting grace will add to one's concentration on the blessing.
[The following rules apply with regard to a person] wearing tefillin who must use the lavatory:1In Talmudic times, the lavatories were outhouses in the fields. [He should remove his tefillin2Rashi (Berachot 23a) relates that this is a Rabbinic decree ordained lest one relieve himself while wearing them. There is no prohibition in the Torah itself against wearing tefillin in a place of filth.[Note the contrast between this position and the prohibition against reciting prayers and other holy matters in a lavatory (Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:2,4). The latter prohibition appears to have its source in the Torah itself.] but,] while he enters, he should not place them in the holes [of the outer wall of the lavatory] which are near the public domain, lest they be taken by passersby.3Berachot 23b relates that once, a student of Torah left his tefillin in a hole in the wall of a public lavatory. A woman took them, and afterwards came to the house of study. She told the student's colleagues, "See what so-and- so gave me as payment."When the student heard this, he climbed to the roof of the house of study to hide himself in shame. Shortly afterwards, he slipped and fell to his death. When the story became known, the Sages ordained that a person should bring his tefillin into a lavatory lest the story repeat itself.What should he do? Even if he [merely] has to urinate, he should remove his tefillin four cubits away [from the lavatory] and roll them in his clothes like a Torah scroll,4The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 43) points out that Rashi and other Ashkenazic authorities do not require that the tefillin be covered. holding them near his heart with his right hand.5since a person uses his left hand to wipe himself (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 43:3; Mishnah Berurah 43:20). He must take care that the strap does not protrude more than a handbreadth from his hand.6The straps also possess a dimension of holiness, and hence, care should be taken regarding them. Afterwards, he should enter and relieve himself. After leaving the lavatory and walking more than four cubits away,7When our Sages established the decree forbidding a person from wearing tefillin in a lavatory, they added this distance as a safeguard. he should put them on.8It must be emphasized that this and the following two halachot no longer apply, since, at present, homes are equipped with toilet facilities, and there is no longer a need to use public outhouses. At home, or in other places where one could keep the tefillin in a safe place, it is forbidden to wear tefillin in a lavatory (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 43:5).1. See Halachah 11, which prohibits putting on tefillin after sunset.2. As explained in Halachah 24, a container which is always used for tefillin or other sacred articles is considered as an accessory to the tefillin with no importance of its own. Thus, it is as if the tefillin are being held without any covering at all. Nevertheless, if it is a handbreadth in size, it is given halachic significance as an ohel. Hence, it is considered to be a separation between the tefillin and the lavatory.Needless to say, these laws apply only when the person does not have a safe place where he can deposit his tefillin. If such a place is available, he may not bring tefillin into a lavatory (Kessef Mishneh).3. See Halachah 24, which forbids engaging in intercourse in a room which contains tefillin that are open.4. Thus, it is feared that they may have touched the genitalia (Rashi, Sukkah 26b). Note the Ramah (Orach Chayim 40:7), who prohibits a person from wearing tefillin if he has any traces of semen on his body. 5. This halachah is dependent on the description of a bathhouse inShabbat 10a. There were three rooms: a waiting room, a dressing room, and the actual bathing room.6. Shulchan Aruch HaRav 45:3 and the Mishnah Berurah 45:5 explain that this applies even when no one there is actually naked. Those sources also state that these laws apply only in bathhouses which contain filth. In contrast, there are no restrictions against wearing tefillin in the bathing room of a mikveh if no people are standing there naked. Compare also to Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:3-4, 16.
When does the above apply? In a permanent lavatory where drops [of urine] will not sprinkle upon him. In contrast, in a place that is temporarily being used as a lavatory, one should not enter, [holding tefillin] wound up in one's hand. Instead, one should remove them [outside the lavatory] and give them to a colleague to guard.Urine cannot be expelled [without drops sprinkling] even in a permanent lavatory unless one squats. If [the floor is covered] with soft dust, [drops will not sprinkle] even when one stands. If the floor is hard, one should stand on an incline [and urinate], so that drops will not sprinkle on him.
When a person is wearing tefillin and must relieve himself in the evening, when there would be no time left in the day to put them on again after he finishes, he should not enter a lavatory, [holding them] rolled up in his clothes.What should he do [instead]? He should remove them and place them in their container if it is a handbreadth in size, or in another container which is not specific for them even though it is not a handbreadth in size. He should hold the container in his hand when he enters the lavatory. Similarly, if he needs to relieve himself at night, he should place them in a container and enter the lavatory, holding the tefillin in his hand.
If a person forgot and entered a lavatory while wearing tefillin, he should cover them with his hand until he completes expelling the first issue of feces or urine, and then leave the lavatory, remove the tefillin, return, and complete relieving himself. Were one to interrupt in the midst of expelling the first outburst of feces or urine, he might become very dangerously ill.
If a person forgot and had intercourse while wearing tefillin, he should not hold either the straps or the compartments themselves until he washes his hands. [Then, he should] remove them. [This restriction was instituted] because hands are active.
[The following rules apply to] a person who enters a bathhouse: In the rooms where people stand clothed, it is permitted to put on tefillin. In the rooms where some of the people stand naked and some clothed, one need not remove one's tefillin, nor, at the outset, should one put tefillin on there. In the rooms where [everyone] stands naked, one should remove one's tefillin and, needless to say, one should not put them on.
A person should not walk in a cemetery1even if he is not within four cubits of a grave (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 45:1; Mishnah Berurah 45:1) wearing his head tefillin.2Arm tefillin, however, need not be removed, for they can be worn under one's sleeve. As mentioned in Halachah 4, the two tefillin are two separate mitzvot, whose observance is not necessarily dependent on each other. One must be careful, however, to cover the straps of the arm tefillin, even those around one's hand and finger (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 45:2; Mishnah Berurah 45:3). Even [outside a cemetery], a person should remove his3head tefillin if he comes within four cubits of a corpse or a grave,4Proverbs 17:5 states: "One who mocks the poor (רש) reproaches his Creator." Berachot 18a explains that the word רש can also refer to the dead, and states that performing mitzvot in the presence of a corpse or by his graveside would be, in a certain sense, mocking him, since he is unable to perform mitzvot. Accordingly, the Sages forbade Torah study, the recitation of the Shema, and the performance of other mitzvot in these situations. until he distances himself four cubits from them.5Beyond this distance, one is not considered to be in the actual presence of the corpse. If a cemetery is surrounded by a wall, one may wear tefillin outside the wall even within four cubits of a grave, because the wall constitutes a separation (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 45:1; Mishnah Berurah 45:1).A person should not put on tefillin [when he is naked]. He must first cover his genitalia6From the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 2:3), it appears that, in addition to wearing a cloak over one's body, one must also cover one's genitalia before putting on tefillin. and put on his clothes.7Shulchan Aruch HaRav 45:3 and the Mishnah Berurah 45:5 associate this prohibition with the prohibition against standing naked in the presence of sacred texts.A person who is carrying a load on his head should remove his head tefillin [and not put it on again] until he puts down his load.8Bava Metzia 105b considers this a lack of respect for the tefillin. It is even forbidden to wear a handkerchief9or any other article which is not a garment and is not usually worn on one's head (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 41:1) around one's head when wearing tefillin. One may, however, wear a hat over the tefillin.10Preferably, the tefillin themselves should not be covered. Since the hat is being worn as a garment, it is not considered disrespectful to the tefillin. Our Sages relate that the High Priest would wear his turban over the tefillin (Zevachim 19b), and the king would wear his crown above the tefillin (Avodah Zarah 44a).
When tefillin or a Torah scroll are in a room, it is forbidden to engage in sexual relations, unless they are removed or placed into a container, and that container placed into a second container1These laws also apply with regard to sacred texts (Mishnah Berurah 40:4) and mezuzot (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 40:5). which is not specific to them.2Covering the tefillin's container with another garment is sufficient. There is no need for a second container. The bag in which the tefillin bag and the tallit are placed is also considered specific to the tefillin bag and another covering is necessary (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 40:3; Mishnah Berurah 40:7). If, however, the second container designated for them, even ten3or a hundred (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 40:2). containers are considered as a single container.4Note that in Chapter 10, Halachah 7, the Rambam offers a third alternative: setting up a partition ten handbreadths high between a Torah scroll and the bed. This is also acceptable for tefillin. See also the commentary on that halachah.Should a person place [the sacred articles] in two containers, he may place them at the head of his bed,5Placing them at the foot of the bed is considered to be disrespectful to the tefillin and is forbidden, even though one is not sleeping together with one's wife (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 40:3). between a cushion and a pillow,6Our translation of רכ and תסכ is based on Rav Kapach's text of the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Shabbat 4:2. The Aruch renders the phrase, "between the mattress and the pillow." as long as they are not under his head,7Placing them under one's head would be tantamount to using them as a pillow and would be considered disrespectful to the tefillin. Hence, it is forbidden at all times (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit.). so that he can protect them.8from thieves; alternatively, from mice (Rashi, Berachot 24a). [This applies] even if his wife is together with him in bed.9and they intend to be intimate (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit.).
The holiness associated with tefillin is very great.1See Halachah 14 above and also Hilchot Sh'vuot 11:11-12, where the Rambam equates the sanctity of tefillin with that of a Torah scroll. As long as a person is wearing tefillin on his head and arm, he will be humble and God-fearing and will not be drawn to frivolous behavior or empty speech.2Berachot 30b relates that when Rabbah reproached Abbaye for light-headedness, which he thought would lead to frivolous behavior, Abbaye answered him, "I am wearing tefillin," implying that the tefillin would prevent him from losing self-control. He will not turn his thoughts to evil matters, but rather will direct his heart to words of truth and justice.3Menachot 43b states that a person who wears tefillin on his head and arm will surely not sin.Accordingly, a person should try to wear [tefillin] throughout the entire day,4In Talmudic times, not only Torah scholars, but also common people would wear their tefillin throughout the entire day. In the later generations, this practice was generally followed only by Torah scholars, as the Hagahot Maimoniot relates in the name of Rav Amram Gaon:We saw the Geonim, the heads of the court, and the giants of the previous generations... who would not remove their tefillin until after... the Shema of the evening service.Nevertheless, at present, even Torah scholars have accepted the practice of wearing tefillin only during the morning prayers. This practice was instituted since tefillin require "a clean body" (Halachah 15) and one cannot divert his attention from them (Halachah 14), and most people cannot meet these requirements (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 37:2). for this is the mitzvah associated with them.5Note the questions in the Pri Megadim and the Bi'ur Halachah (Orach Chayim 37): Is the mitzvah of tefillin to wear them all day, or is the mitzvah to put tefillin on once each day, with the remaining time one wears them being merely the continuation of the mitzvah. Among the praises conveyed upon Rav, the student of Rabbenu Hakadosh,6Though we find Megillah 28a conveying such praise on Rav Zeira, there is no passage in the Talmud which describes Rav in these terms. Nevertheless, the responsa of the Geonim (Damasek Eliezer 178) include these among the ten acts of pious behavior for which Rav was noted. was that he was never seen walking four cubits without [reciting words of] Torah, without tzitzit, and without tefillin.7See Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 5:11, which describes such behavior as an example of Kiddush Hashem (the sanctification of God's name).
Although it is a mitzvah to wear [tefillin] throughout the entire day, it is most important during prayer. Our Sages declared: "Whoever recites the Shema without tefillin is considered as if he is giving false testimony."Whoever does not wear tefillin transgresses eight positive commandments, for in each of the four passages contained in the tefillin we are commanded to wear both head and arm tefillin. [The rewards for wearing tefillin are also great.] Whoever wears tefillin regularly will live long, as [implied by Isaiah 38:16]: "God is upon them, they shall live."

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
How is a mezuzah written?1Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 15) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 423) consider the mitzvah of mezuzah to be one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The two portions, Shema and V'hayah im shamo'a, are written on one piece of parchment in a single column.2The Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 1:9) states that unlike a Torah scroll or tefillin, a mezuzah should be written in a single column. Approximately half a fingernail of space3approximately one centimeter should be left above and below [the writing].4Also, a small amount of parchment should be left on the right side for the mezuzah to be rolled closed (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 288:1).Should one write [a mezuzah] in two or three columns, it is acceptable,5although this is not the desired form as long as it not written tail-shaped,6i.e., wider above than below, the top lines being longer than the bottom ones in a circle,7This word is not found in our text of Menachot 31b, the source for this halachah. or tent-shaped.8i.e., wider below than above, the bottom lines being longer than the top ones. If it was written using any of these forms, it is not acceptable.9Menachot 31b.If it was not written in order10e.g., one wrote the passage [V'hayah im shamo'a] before the passage [Shema] - it is not acceptable. - Furthermore, if even one letter from a mezuzah was not written in order, the mezuzah is unacceptable (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 288:3).The Ginat Veradim suggests that the Rambam requires only that the order of the two passages not be reversed, but is not concerned with the order of the letters within the passages themselves. This perspective, however, is not accepted by other authorities, who explain that surely, the Rambam requires order within the passages. He gave the above example only because he felt that it was more important to emphasize that even if the passages themselves were written in order, if their order was reversed, the mezuzah is not acceptable. - e.g., one wrote the passage [V'hayah im shamo'a] before the passage [Shema] - it is not acceptable. If one writes a mezuzah on two different parchments, it is not acceptable even if they were sewn together [later].11In his Responsa (213), Rabbi Akiva Eiger writes that if the parchments were sewn together before the passages were written upon them, the mezuzah is acceptable.A mezuzah should not be made from a Torah scroll12i.e., one may not cut the passage, Shema, from a worn Torah scroll and write the passage, V'hayah im shamo'a, on the empty space below it. One may not cut both passages from the Torah scroll since, as explained above, a mezuzah may not be written on two different parchments (Siftei Cohen, Yoreh De'ah 290:1). or tefillin that have become worn,13Though it is possible to cut the two passages from the arm tefillin, it is forbidden to do so. nor should a mezuzah be written on the empty parchment from a Torah scroll,14the empty parchment left as a border above and on the sides of the Torah scroll. The Or Sameach notes thatShabbat 116a questions whether or not these empty portions of parchment have become sanctified with the holiness of a Torah scroll, and does not resolve the issue. Because of the doubt involved, the Rambam rules that in situations where the question of their holiness is raised, one should always take the more stringent perspective. Therefore, in Hilchot Shabbat 23:27, the Rambam rules that they should not be saved from a fire on the Sabbath if the violation of even a Rabbinic transgression is involved (accepting the possibility that they have not become consecrated). In this halachah, this approach requires accepting the possibility that they have been consecrated. because one should not lower an article from a higher level of holiness15As explained in Chapter 10, Halachot 2-5 (see also Hilchot Tefillah 11:14), the holiness of a Torah scroll surpasses that of all other articles. to a lesser one.16Our Sages have established the principle, "One may ascend to a higher level of holiness, but may not descend to a lower one."
It is a mitzvah to leave a space between the passage Shema and the passage V'hayah im shamo'a, as if it were s'tumah.1S'tumah means "closed." According to the Rambam, it refers to a passage whose first word is always written in the middle of a line in the Torah. See Chapter 8, Halachah 2. In the Torah, V'hayah im shamo'a is s'tumah. If space were left as if it were p'tuchah,2P'tuchah means "open." According to the Rambam, it refers to a passage whose first word is always written at the beginning of a line in the Torah. See Chapter 8, Halachah 1. it is acceptable, since these passages do not follow each other in the Torah.3Note the contrast between this ruling and the Rambam's decision in Chapter 2, Halachah 2, regarding tefillin: "If one wrote a passage which should be s'tumah as p'tuchah or a passage which should be p'tuchah as s'tumah, it is unacceptable."The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 32) explains the difference as follows: In tefillin, there are passages which follow directly after each other in the Torah. Therefore, all the passages must be written as they appear in a Torah scroll. In contrast, the two passages contained in a mezuzah do not follow each other in the Torah. Therefore, there is no absolute requirement for the passages to be written as they appear in the Torah.One must take care regarding the crowns4See Chapter 2, Halachot 8-9 and Chapter 7, Halachot 8-9. [on the letters] in a mezuzah. The following letters should have crowns.5The Rambam lists the letters in the following halachah. Significantly, the letters he mentions here are not the same as he mentions in Chapter 2 with regard to tefillin. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 288:7) rules that, in a mezuzah, just as in a Torah, one should place crowns on the letters, שעטנ"ז ג"ץ.
In the first passage, there are seven letters which should each have three zeiynin upon it. They are: The shin and the ayin of [the word] Shema,1In Chapter 2, Halachah 6, the Rambam writes that, when writing tefillin, the ayin of the word Shema and the dalet of the word echad should be enlarged as in a Torah scroll. It is customary to write these letters in the same manner in mezuzot. the nun of [the word] nafsh'cha, the two zeiynin of [the word] mezuzot, and the two tettin of the word totafot.In the second passage, there are six letters each of which should have three zeiynin upon it. They are: The gimmel of [the word] d'ganecha, the two zeiynin of [the word] mezuzot, the two tettin of the word totafot, and the tzadi of [the word] ha'aretz.If no crowns were made, or one increased or decreased their number, [the mezuzah] is not invalidated.2As mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 9, based on Rabbenu Asher's opinion, it is proper to add crowns if they have been omitted from the appropriate letters in a mezuzah. If the mezuzah was not written on ruled [parchment],3See Chapter 1, Halachah 12, where this subject is discussed. if [the scribe] was not exact with regard to the use of the full or short form [of the words,4See Chapter 2, Halachot 6-7. or if [the scribe] added even a single letter inside5Making additions on the outside of the mezuzah is discussed in the following halachah. [the mezuzah], it is invalidated.6Similarly, if a single letter is forgotten, the mezuzah is invalid (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 288:3).
It is a common custom to write [God's name,] Shaddai,1This name serves as an acronym for the Hebrew words, שומר דלתות ישראל, "Guardian of the gates of Israel" (Mishnat Chassidim). on the outside of a mezuzah opposite the empty space left between the two passages.2The Kessef Mishneh cites the Zohar (Vol. III, 266a) which states that Shaddai should be written opposite the word, V'hayah. There is no difficulty in this, since [the addition is made] outside.3See also the Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 288:15) who states that it is also common to write the letters, כוזו במוכסז כוזו, opposite the words, י-ה-ו-ה א-להנו י-ה-ו-ה, on the outer side of a mezuzah. These letters are the letters which follow the letters in those names of God - i.e., the כ follows the י, the ז follows the ו.Those, however, who write the names of angels, other sacred names, verses, or forms, on the inside [of a mezuzah] are among those who do not have a portion in the world to come.4In Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 11:12, the Rambam states:A person who whispers an incantation over a wound and then recites a verse from the Torah, who recites a verse over a child so that he will not become scared, or who places a Torah scroll or tefillin over a baby so that it will sleep, is considered to be a soothsayer or one who casts spells. Furthermore, such people are included among those who deny the Torah, because they relate to the words of the Torah as if they are cures for the body, when, in fact, they are cures for the soul, as [Proverbs 3:22] states: "And they shall be life for your soul."The inclusion of these people among "those who do not have a portion in the world to come" is based on Hilchot Teshuvah 3:8, which makes such a statement about "those who deny the Torah." Not only do these fools nullify the mitzvah,5As stated in the previous halachah, any addition made on the inside of the mezuzah invalidates it. (Significantly, the Shulchan Aruch 288:15 states that it is forbidden to add to the inside of the mezuzah, but does not explicitly say that the mezuzah becomes invalidated.) but furthermore, they make from a great mitzvah [which reflects] the unity of the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, the love of Him, and the service of Him,6These are the subjects discussed in the two passages written within the mezuzah. a talisman for their own benefit. They, in their foolish conception, think that this will help them regarding the vanities of the world.7The Rambam's statements have aroused questions from many commentaries who note that, in several places, the Talmud associates a mezuzah with Divine protection - e.g., Menachot 33b, the Jerusalem Talmud, Pe'ah 1:1.The Kessef Mishneh resolves this difficulty explaining that, although a mezuzah affords Divine protection, that protection comes, in and of itself, in reward for the fulfillment of the mitzvah. There is no need for any additions on man's part. Indeed, a person who makes additions to the mezuzah in an attempt to increase its influence demonstrates that he is concerned with "his own benefit" and "the vanities of the world" and not with the fulfillment of God's mitzvah. Therefore, he deserves the Rambam's severe words of criticism. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 19.1. Our translation follows the standard text of the Mishneh Torah. The Kessef Mishneh mentions another version which states "at the beginning or the end of the line." That version parallels the apparent source for the halachah, Menachot 31b.2. This custom is also recorded by Rav Yitzchak Alfasi, and earlier, in the halachot of Rav Yehudai Gaon. It is not clear when this custom was begun.3. As mentioned in Halachah 2, a space is left at the beginning of the line so that the passage, V'hayah im shamo'a, will be written in the s'tumah form.
It is a mitzvah to write al ha'aretz on the final line [of a mezuzah], either at the beginning or in the middle of the line. It has become universally accepted custom for scribes to write [mezuzot] with 22 lines, with al ha'aretz at the beginning of the final line.These are the letters that appear at the beginning of each line in order: shema, י-ה-ו-ה, hadevarim, l'vanecha, uv'shochbicha, beyn, v'hayah, m'tzaveh, b'chol, yoreh, esev, pen, v'hishtachavitem, hashamayim, va'avad'tem, v'samtem, otam, otam, baderech, uvish'arecha, asher, al ha'aretz.
When [a mezuzah] is folded,1As the Rambam states, the intent is that the mezuzah be rolled. Folding a mezuzah is very undesirable, because it will cause the letters to crack. it should be rolled from the end of the line to its beginning2Menachot 31b states that a mezuzah should be rolled fromechad to Shema. The Rambam uses different terminology because, as stated in the previous halachah, the first line of the mezuzah does not end with echad. so that when a reader rolls it open, he will be able to read from the beginning of the line to the end.3i.e., when one unrolls the mezuzah, the initial word of the line appears first.After rolling it, one should place it in a tube made of reed, wood, or any other substance and affix it to the doorpost of one's entrance with a nail.4The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 289:4) states that one should affix it "with nails." The intent is that the mezuzah should be firmly affixed so that it is not dangling from one side. Alternatively, one should hollow out the doorpost and place the mezuzah within.5As mentioned in Halachah 8, one should not place it deeper than a handbreadth within the doorpost.
Before affixing it on the doorpost of the entrance, one should recite the blessing:1as is done before the fulfillment of a positive commandment. This blessing should also be recited again when affixing a mezuzah which falls from the doorpost. There is a question whether a mezuzah should be recited when affixing it after removing it to have it checked (Pitchei Teshuvah 289:1). "Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to affix a mezuzah."One2Significantly, in Hilchot Berachot 11:12-13, the Rambam states that when one affixes a mezuzah for a colleague, the blessing should conclude, "concerning the affixing of a mezuzah."Although the verses which relate the command to affix a mezuzah state, "And you shall write...." should not recite a blessing when writing [the mezuzah], because affixing it fulfills the mitzvah.313 In the listing of the mitzvot at the beginning of these halachot and in Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 15), the Rambam also states that the mitzvah is to "affix a mezuzah."With regard to the blessings, see Hilchot Berachot 11:8, which states:For every mitzvah whose performance fulfills one's obligation, one recites the blessing when one performs it. Whenever a mitzvah has a further commandment involved after its performance, one should not recite a blessing until one performs the latter commandment. For example, when one makes a sukkah, a lulav,... tefillin, or a mezuzah, one does not recite a blessing when one makes them.... When does one recite the blessing? When one dwells in the sukkah, shakes the lulav,... wears the tefillin, or affixes the mezuzah.Note also the comments of the Siftei Cohen 289:1, who writes that the blessing, Shehecheyanu, is not recited before affixing a mezuzah.
If one suspends [a mezuzah] within a pole,1i.e., rather than placing the mezuzah in a tube affixed to the doorpost, one places the mezuzah within a pole which stands next to - but is not permanently affixed to - the doorpost it is unacceptable, because it has not been affixed.2Deuteronomy 6:9 states that a mezuzah must be placed "on your gates." Unless the mezuzah is affixed to the gateway, it does not meet this criteria (Menachot 32b). If one positions it behind the door, it is as if one has done nothing.3Deuteronomy, ibid., states that a mezuzah must be placed "on the doorposts of your houses" and not "within the doorposts" (Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 11:9).The Kitzur Shulchan Aruch, ibid., states that if one fears that the mezuzah will be stolen or defaced, it may be placed within the door. It should, however, be placed on the back of the doorpost, but not on the wall next to the doorpost. (See also Chapter 6, Halachah 12.)Should one hollow out the doorpost and place a mezuzah within it horizontally, as the rods were put through the rings [in the Sanctuary],4See Exodus 26:26-29. it is unacceptable.5Rather, the mezuzah should stand directly upright. This opinion is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 289:6). The Ramah, however, notes the opinion of Rabbenu Tam, who favors the horizontal position, explaining that if it is placed vertically, it is unacceptable.Accordingly, the Ramah suggests affixing the mezuzah at a slant, thereby adhering to both views. This is the common custom at present. Should one place it deeper than a handbreadth [within the doorpost], it is unacceptable.6This also is not "on the doorposts of your houses."Should one cut a reed in half and insert a mezuzah within, and afterwards connect this reed with other reeds, making a doorpost for the house from them,7Although if the reed with the mezuzah had been affixed to an existing doorpost, it would have been acceptable. In this instance, it is unacceptable, because the affixing of the mezuzah preceded the making of the doorpost of the entrance.8As the Rambam explains in Hilchot Tzitzit 1:16, Deuteronomy 22:12 states that one should "make fringes" on one's garments. Menachot 40b states that this teaches us that we must make the tzitzit and not use those which are already made.Menachot 33b states that the same principle applies here. Since the mezuzah was placed inside the pole before it became part of the doorpost, it is not acceptable.
A mezuzah [placed] on private [property] should be checked1at least twice in seven years, and a mezuzah [placed] on public [property]2e.g., at the entrance to a courtyard or to a city. (See Chapter 6, Halachah 8.) should be checked twice in fifty years,3Rashi, Yoma 11a, explains that if more stringent requirements were instituted, it is likely that they would be ignored. Every individual would rationalize that it is somebody else's responsibility. lest a letter have become torn or faded.4A small crack can render the mezuzah unacceptable. Since it is affixed within a wall,5as opposed to tefillin, whose checking is governed by different requirements. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 11.) there is the possibility that it will decay.6At present, it is customary to check mezuzot more frequently. The ink and parchment we use are different, and there is a greater tendency for letters to fade or crack. Also, there are many scribes whose calligraphy is not professional, and errors which render the mezuzah unacceptable are frequently discovered.[For the above reasons, it is also customary to wrap mezuzot in plastic to prevent the possibility of decay.]
Everyone is obligated [to fulfill the mitzvah of] mezuzah, even women and slaves.1Since mezuzah is a positive commandment whose fulfillment is not limited to a specific time, its fulfillment is incumbent on all Jews. Minors2who are exempt from the obligation to perform any mitzvot mid'oraita ("according to Torah law"), should be educated to affix a mezuzah to [the doors of] their homes.3as part of the Rabbinic command to educate them to perform mitzvot.A person who rents a dwelling in the diaspora, and a person who rents4It would appear that if one purchases a dwelling - even in the diaspora - one is obligated to affix a mezuzah immediately. a room in a hotel in Eretz Yisrael, are exempt from the obligation [to affix a] mezuzah for thirty days.5As explained in Chapter 6, Halachah 1, a person is obligated to place a mezuzah only on a permanent dwelling. Hence, until this time period has passed, these dwellings are not considered to be permanent. One who rents a house in Eretz Yisrael, however, is obligated [to affix a] mezuzah immediately.6Because of the importance of dwelling in Eretz Yisrael, even a temporary dwelling is of significance (Menachot 44a, Tur, Yoreh De'ah 286).
When a person rents a dwelling to a colleague, the tenant is obligated to obtain a mezuzah and affix it.1Even though the Torah states that a mezuzah must be placed on the entrance to "your house," Bava Metzia 101b states that this refers to the person living within, and not the owner. [This applies] even if he2the tenant would pay to have it affixed.3Even if the tenant offers to pay the owner to find a mezuzah and affix it, the owner is not required to accept the offer. The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 291:2) adds that even if a person rents a house on the condition that it has mezuzot, and he discovers that they are lacking, he may not withdraw from the rental agreement on the grounds that the agreement was based on a misconception. [The rationale is] that a mezuzah is an obligation incumbent on the person dwelling [in the house], and is not incumbent on the house.4Compare to Hilchot Tzitzit 3:10, which states that tzitzit "are not an obligation on the garment, but on the person who possesses the garment."These statements, however, must be understood in the context of Hilchot Berachot 11:2, which states:There are positive commandments which a person is required to pursue and make every effort to fulfill - e.g., tefillin, sukkah, lulav, and shofar. These are called obligations, since a person is obliged to fulfill them.... There are other mitzvot which are not obligations, but rather are left to the person's volition - for example, a mezuzah and a guardrail. A person is not obligated to live in a house which requires a mezuzah so that he could fulfill the mitzvah of mezuzah. Should he desire, he may dwell in a tent or a ship for his entire life.To summarize, according to the Rambam the mitzvah of mezuzah is incumbent on the person (gavra) and not on the house (cheftza). Nevertheless, it is incumbent upon him only when he lives in a house that requires a mezuzah.When [the tenant] leaves [the dwelling, however], he should not take it with him5for leaving the house without a mezuzah leaves it open to undesirable influences (Tosafot, Bava Metzia, ibid.). Alternatively, removing a mezuzah may bring harm to the person who removes it (Sefer Chasidim). unless the dwelling belongs to a gentile.6or will be rented to a gentile. Note the Hagahot Maimoniot, which state that a dwelling which a Jew rents from a gentile does not require a mezuzah. This opinion is not, however, accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 286:23) In that instance, he should remove it when he leaves.7lest the gentile desecrate it. Note the comments of the Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 291:2), who states that it is forbidden to give a mezuzah to a gentile to affix on his door. Nevertheless, if the Jew is frightened that refusing the gentile will generate severe negative feelings, he may leave him the mezuzah.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
There are ten requirements that must be met by a house for the person who dwells within to be obligated to affix a mezuzah.1The Rambam's choice of phraseology emphasizes the concept mentioned in the previous halachah: that the mezuzah is the obligation of the dweller and not the dwelling. If one of the requirements is lacking, there is no obligation for a mezuzah.2It appears that all these requirements are mid'oraita, postulated by Torah law. They are:a) for the area [of the dwelling] to be four cubits by four cubits or3See Halachah 2. more;b) for it4the entrance to have two5Note the Turei Zahav 287:1 and the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 11:11, which state that if an entrance has a doorpost on the right side and a wall which continues on the left side, a mezuzah should be affixed without a blessing. If the doorpost is on the left side, and the wall continues on the right, there is no need for a mezuzah. doorposts;6According to most authorities, the doorpost need not be an addition to the walls of the house. Even if the entrance to the house does not have a frame attached to it, but rather the wall of the house itself serves as the doorpost attached to it, a mezuzah is required. Note the statements of the Turei Zahav 287:1. (See also Halachah 3.)c) for it7the entrance to have a lintel;d)8a beam above the doorposts. According to many authorities, the ceiling of the house is not considered to be a lintel. (See also Halachah 4.) for it9the dwelling to have a roof;e)10See Halachah 5. for it11the entrance to have doors;f)12The Ra'avad, Rabbenu Asher, and others differ with the Rambam's opinion. In a responsum attributed to the Rambam, his view is explained as follows: The Torah states that a mezuzah should be placed "on your gates." This expression implies an entrance with doors.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 286:15) obligates us to place a mezuzah even on entrances which do not have doors. Nevertheless, in deference to the Rambam's opinion, the Siftei Cohen 286:25 states that a person should not recite a blessing when affixing such a mezuzah. (See also Halachah 5.) for the entrance to be at least ten handbreadths13If the entrance is not at least this high, it is not fit to be used by adults. (See also Halachah 4.) high;g) for the dwelling not to be consecrated;h)14See Halachah 6. for it to be intended for human habitation;i)15This principle is not accepted by all authorities. See Halachah 7. for it to be intended to be used for a dignified16See Halachah 9.j) for it to be a permanent dwelling. - See Halachah 9. dwelling;j) for it to be a permanent dwelling.
A dwelling which is less than four cubits1A cubit is approximately 48 centimeters according to Shiurei Torah, and 58 centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. by four cubits does not require a mezuzah.2Any smaller area would not be considered fit for a dwelling (Rabbenu Asher). If its area is equal to sixteen square cubits, although it is circular, pentagonal, and needless to say, if it is rectangular,3The Or Sameach explains the advantage of a rectangular shape based on Hilchot Tzara'at 14:6, which states that only a square or rectangular-shaped building is considered to be a house with regard to the impurity of tzara'at. since its area is equal to the above-mentioned figure, it requires a mezuzah.4Rabbenu Asher does not accept the Rambam's view. Although the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 286:13) accepts the Rambam's view, in deference to Rabbenu Asher's opinion, the Siftei Cohen 286:23 states that one should not recite a blessing when affixing such a mezuzah.The Merchevat HaMishneh does not agree with the Shulchan Aruch's interpretation of the Rambam's words, and explains that the Rambam is referring to a circular building whose circumference is large enough to contain a square four cubits by four cubits. Compare with Hilchot Sukkah 4:7.As explained in Halachah 8, a mezuzah must be affixed to an entrance which leads to another entrance which requires a mezuzah even if the former entrance would not require a mezuzah in its own right. Accordingly, we must say that this halachah is speaking about an independent structure and not a room in a house.
An excedra, a structure with three walls and a roof,1An excedra was a very common structure in Greek and Roman architecture that was also frequently employed in Jewish homes. It resembled a porch with three sides enclosed and the fourth side left open. (At times, both the third and fourth sides were left open. See Hilchot Sukkah 4:8,9.)It was covered by a roof which contained an aperture to allow sunlight to enter. Decorative pillars were placed at each of the corners of the aperture. does not require a mezuzah even though it has two pillars on the fourth side.2According to the Kessef Mishneh, this decision applies even if doors are affixed to the pillars. Though the pillars resemble the doorposts of an entrance, a mezuzah is not required because The pillars are intended as supports for the roof, and not as doorposts.3When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 286:6) states that if the excedra has a wall (even if it is low) on the fourth side as well, a mezuzah is required. According to this decision, most porches that have pillars at their entrance require a mezuzah.Similarly, a roof without walls4If, however, it has four walls, even though large openings are left in them, a mezuzah is required (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah, loc. cit.). which stands on pillars, even though shaped like a house, does not require a mezuzah, because it has no doorposts. The pillars are intended5primarily, not to serve as doorposts, but to support the roof.6See Menachot 33b.
[The following rules apply to] a house which has a doorpost on either side and an arch above the two doorposts instead of a lintel. If the1portions of the doorposts2which stand straight and are not part of the arch are ten handbreadths high or more, it requires a mezuzah.3since it has both two doorposts of at least ten handbreadths each and a lintel. If they are not ten handbreadths high, [the entrance] does not require [a mezuzah], because it does not have a lintel.4The Rambam's phraseology has aroused questions from the commentators. Though all agree that a mezuzah is not required, most maintain that the reason is not that the entrance does not have a lintel - for the arch takes the place of the lintel - but rather because the entrance is not of the required height, ten handbreadths.The Turei Zahav 287:3 explains that were the doorposts to be ten handbreadths high, the archway would be considered as the lintel. Since they are not ten handbreadths high, the archway is considered to be part of the doorposts, and thus, the entrance is considered to be lacking a lintel.
A house that does not have a roof does not require a mezuzah.1Although a gate to a courtyard or a city requires a mezuzah even though the area enclosed by its walls is open, a house is different; unless it is covered by a roof, it does not require a mezuzah. (See Yoma 11b.) If a portion of [a building] was covered by a roof and a portion was not, the [following ruling] appears to me2Throughout the Mishneh Torah, the expression "appears to me" indicates a decision for which the Rambam has no explicit source in the texts of the previous generations. [as appropriate]: If the covered portion is near the entrance,3and the covered portion is four cubits by four cubits (Kessef Mishneh; Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 286:14). Note, however, the Or Sameach, which does not require the covered portion to be this size. it requires a mezuzah.4See also the Pit'chei Teshuvah 286:13, which states that a part of a house which is customarily built without a roof requires a mezuzah.The doors should be attached, and afterwards, a mezuzah affixed.5Though this statement, based on the following passage from Menachot 33a, is accepted by all halachic authorities (See Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 289:3), its interpretation has been a source of controversy based on the difference of opinion (see Halachah 1) between the Rambam and other authorities whether an entrance without doors requires a mezuzah or not. The Talmud states:The exilarch built a house. He requested of Rav Nachman: "Affix a mezuzah for me."Rav Nachman told him: "Attach the doors first."The commentaries maintain that, according to the Rambam, Rav Nachman was telling the exilarch that if the doors were not attached before the mezuzah was affixed, it is invalid. Since an entrance without doors does not require a mezuzah, affixing it before the doors would create a problem: as explained in Chapter 5, Halachah 8, the doors must be affixed first. Other authorities explain that Rav Nachman made this statement only because it was necessary to determine the direction the doors would open in order to establish the proper side of the doorway on which to place the mezuzah.
[The gates to] the Temple Mount,1There was a wall around the complex of the Temple Mount separating it from the remainder of the city of Jerusalem. It had five gates, as described in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:2. its chambers, courtyards,2Within the Temple, there were many different chambers and courtyards; they are described in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, Chapter 5. and, similarly, entrances to synagogues3which are referred to as "sanctuaries in microcosm" (Megillah 29a) and houses of study4Since students often eat and sleep in a house of study, it is customary to place mezuzot there (Tur, Yoreh De'ah 286). The Shulchan Aruch (286:10) suggests affixing a mezuzah without reciting a blessing beforehand. which do not have apartments in which people live do not require mezuzot, because they are consecrated.5Yoma 11b derives this concept from the exegesis of Deuteronomy 6:9: "And you shall write them on the doorposts of your homes." The Temple is not "your home," a private dwelling, and therefore does not require a mezuzah.The Chatam Sofer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 281) asks: Since the Chamber of Parhedrin was the only portion within the Temple Courtyard used as a person's dwelling, why does the Rambam state that these entrances do not require mezuzot because they are consecrated? Since they are not used as a dwelling, why would one think they require a mezuzah?The Chatam Sofer explains that the Temple is a dwelling - in fact, the ultimate dwelling, the resting place of the Divine Presence. Nevertheless, since it is not a dwelling for humans, it does not require a mezuzah.A synagogue in a village in which guests reside requires a mezuzah. Similarly, a synagogue in a metropolis, if it has an apartment, requires a mezuzah.6The Nimukei Yosef (Halachot Katanot) explains that synagogues in villages would generally have apartments for guests, because the villagers' homes were usually not large enough to accommodate them. In contrast, in large cities, there were generally enough people willing to invite guests to their homes, and thus it was unnecessary for a synagogue to have a guest apartment.All the gates in the Temple complex did not have mezuzot, with the exception of the Gate of Nicanor7The central gate to the Temple Courtyard. (See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:5.)The Gate of Nicanor required a mezuzah because it was the gate directly before the Chamber of Parhedrin. As explained in Halachah 8, the gate of a courtyard which leads to a dwelling requires a mezuzah. Based on this rationale, Rav Kapach asks why the gates before the Gate of Nicanor did not require a mezuzah, since they led to a gate which led to a dwelling. and those8the other six gates to the Temple Courtyard further within,9The Kessef Mishneh and others note that the Rambam's text differs from his source (Yoma, loc. cit.), which reads "the Gate of Nicanor and the Chamber of Parhedrin, which was further within." He does explain, however, that the Rambam's version is acceptable: Since all these gates lead to the Chamber of Parhedrin, they therefore require a mezuzah.Rav Kapach supports this interpretation, noting that the Chamber of the Hearth also served as a dwelling for the priests, and hence, the gate to it would require a mezuzah. According to this interpretation, this gate is also included, while according to our text of the Talmud, it is not. and the entrance to the Chamber of Parhedrin,10This term means "officer of the king," and was used as a derisive reference to the High Priests of the Second Temple period, who were not righteous and would purchase this position from the ruling authorities for lavish bribes (Yoma 8b). because this chamber served as a dwelling for the High Priest during the seven days11Note Yoma 10b, which states that the obligation to place a mezuzah on the gate of Nicanor and the Chamber of Parhedrin applies only during these seven days and not throughout the entire year. Nevertheless, since as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 11, one should not remove a mezuzah after leaving a dwelling, the mezuzah should remain there (Rav Kapach). when he was separated [from his home in preparation for the Yom Kippur service].12See Yoma 2a, Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 1:3.
A storage house for straw, a barn for cattle, a woodshed, or [other] storage rooms1Rav David Arameah notes that there are commentaries who point to a contradiction between these statements and Hilchot Melachim 7:5, where the Rambam states that a soldier who is excused from the battlefield for building a new house (see Deuteronomy 20:5), is released for constructing one of these structures.He explains, however, that the Rambam's phraseology clearly indicates how this difficulty can be resolved. In Hilchot Melachim, the Rambam states that these structures are "fit to dwell in." In this halachah, he states that they are not "set aside for their use."A house requires a mezuzah only when a person dwells in it. Accordingly, since these structures are not used for that purpose, they do not require a mezuzah. To receive an exemption from military service, all that is necessary is to build a house "fit to dwell in." Since it is possible to use these structures for that purpose, the exemption is granted. do not require a mezuzah [as can be inferred from Deuteronomy 6:9, which requires that a mezuzah be placed on] "your homes"2i.e., a house which is set aside for your use - i.e., for human habitation. This principle is not accepted by all authorities. Based on the opinion of the Tur and others, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 286:1-2) requires that a mezuzah be affixed to such structures. - i.e., a house which is set aside for your use - thus excluding the above and their like.3provided they are not also used as dwellings by humans.Therefore, [if] a barn [is also used] by women as a dressing room,4The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 286:2) emphasizes that if the women stand there naked, it is improper for a mezuzah to be affixed. it requires a mezuzah, since it is used as a dwelling by a human being.5For this reason, a large walk-in closet requires a mezuzah. A guardhouse, an excedra, a porch, a garden, and a corral do not require a mezuzah6even if they possess roofs, four walls, and doors. Note the decisions of the Tur (Yoreh De'ah 286) and other Ashkenazic authorities, which obligate placing a mezuzah on these structures if they conform to all the other necessary requirements. since they are not dwellings.7for humans. If dwellings which require a mezuzah open up to these structures,8Based on the following halachah, this decision would apply even if these structures also lack other requirements a building must have for a mezuzah to be placed upon it. they require a mezuzah.9not only on the door between them and the dwelling, but on an entrance which leads to them from the outside (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 286:8).
Accordingly, gates to courtyards, gates to alleys, and gates to cities1e.g., the gates to the old city of Jerusalem and towns,2even though the areas to which they lead are not covered by roofs and are not dwellings all require a mezuzah, since houses which require a mezuzah open up to them.3Yoma 11a relates that the obligation to affix mezuzot on such structures is derived from the inclusion of the word, "And on your gates" (Deuteronomy 6:9 . This implies that even structures which are not themselves "homes" should have mezuzot on their entrances. Even when there are ten structures4We have translated the term batim loosely. Manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah substitute the term "entrances." leading one to each other,5For example, a gate to a courtyard opens to a gate to an alleyway, which leads to a further alleyway, which leads to a courtyard.... should the innermost one6meet the ten conditions mentioned in Halachah 1 and thus require a mezuzah, they all require [mezuzot].7because of it. Therefore, [our Sages] stated: A gate which opens up from a garden to a courtyard requires a mezuzah.8The Rambam rarely mentions references to any source other than the T'nach. In this instance when he does, the definition of the source to which he refers is a matter of question.Most commentaries cite the Rambam's source as Menachot 33b. The passage there, however, speaks of a gate leading from a room to a garden or from a room to a courtyard. The Kiryat Melech cites a reference in Chapter 2 of the tractate of Mezuzah, which describes precisely the situation mentioned by the Rambam.
A toilet, a bathhouse, a mikveh,1even when used only for the purpose of ritual immersion a tannery,2which is characterized by a foul smell, since feces are often used in the processing of leather. and the like, do not require a mezuzah, since they do not constitute a dignified dwelling.3Yoma 11b explains that this exclusion is implied by the commandment to place a mezuzah on our "homes." Only a dignified dwelling, like a home, requires a mezuzah.A sukkah on the holiday of Sukkot,4If, however, one dwelled in such a structure for the entire year, a mezuzah would be required. and a house on a ship5Although the commentaries accept this law in principle, they question the Rambam's source. Among the possibilities offered are the Midrash Tannaim, Parashat Va'etchanan, and the Jerusalem Talmud, Megillah 4:12.The latter source compares tefillin to mezuzah and explains that the mitzvah of tefillin has an advantage, because it is fulfilled by those who travel in the desert or journey upon the sea. From this, one can conclude that the mitzvah of mezuzah is not fulfilled at sea. do not require a mezuzah, for they do not constitute a permanent dwelling.6The same principle applies to other dwellings of a temporary nature. Based on this principle, the Birchai Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 286) exempts patients in a hospital or inmates in prison of the obligation to have a mezuzah on their doors.Similarly,[With regard to] the two booths of a potter, one inside the other:7In Talmudic times, a potter would set up two booths, an inner booth, where he would live and store his belongings, and an outer booth, where he would work and exhibit his wares (Sukkah 8b). The inner booth requires a mezuzah. However, The outer booth does not require a mezuzah,8Sukkah (loc. cit.) asks: Although the outer booth is not a dwelling and, therefore, does not, in and of itself, require a mezuzah, perhaps a mezuzah should be affixed because it leads to the inner booth? The Talmud answers because it9the outer booth is not a permanent structure.10and only an entrance of a permanent nature can be considered an "entrance to an entrance" and is required to have a mezuzah (Kessef Mishneh). Note the Ra'avad and Rashi, who interpret the passage from Sukkah differently. Stores in a market place do not require a mezuzah because they are not permanently used as a dwelling.11Note the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 11:14, which states that this law applies only to stalls used for business fairs that are left vacant after the fair is over. If, however, merchandise is continually left in a store, a mezuzah is required.
A dwelling1or room which has many doorways requires a mezuzah for each and every doorway,2that meets the ten qualifications mentioned above. even though one generally enters and leaves through only one of them.3Even if a doorway is never used. As long as the potential for using it exists, a mezuzah is required. If, however, the doorway is barred closed so that it will not be used, no mezuzah is necessary.A small entrance between a dwelling and a loft requires a mezuzah.4On the surface, this statement, is unnecessary. Clearly, such an entrance would require a mezuzah. Perhaps the Rambam is implying that a mezuzah is required even though the opening lies horizontally in the roof of the house. There is a difference of opinion on this matter, and the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 11:20 requires a mezuzah only on an entrance that stands upright. When there is a separate room in a house, or even one room which leads to another room,5This law reflects how dramatically socio-economic standards have changed. In Talmudic times and in the Rambam's era, a dwelling which had more than one large room was an unusual phenomenon. it is necessary to affix a mezuzah on the doorway to the innermost room, the doorway to the outer room, and the doorway to the house,6There is no maximum number of mezuzot in a house. since all of them are used for the purpose of dwelling and are permanent structures.7The Kessef Mishneh states that this law is self-evident, based on the Rambam's statements in Halachah 8. The commentaries explain, however, that the above halachah describes a situation where many entrances require a mezuzah because of another room. In this instance, each of the rooms itself requires a mezuzah.
When a person frequently enters and leaves through an entrance between a synagogue and a house of study1which do not require a mezuzah, as mentioned in Halachah 6 above, and his own house, that entrance requires a mezuzah.2because the fact that it is an entrance to one's own house is considered of predominant importance.When there is an entrance between two houses,3or more particularly, between two rooms in the same house [the position of the mezuzah] is determined by the door-hinge.4This principle is called heker tzir (Menachot 33a). The mezuzah is placed on the side on which the hinge can be seen.5i.e., the side to which the door opens. This halachah is very significant with regard to contemporary homes, which possess many rooms, and it is necessary to determine the side of the entrance on which the mezuzah should be placed. The Rambam explains that this is determined by the direction to which the door opens: The mezuzah is placed on the right side of the entrance to the room to which the door opens.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 289:3) quotes the Rambam's decision. The Turei Zahav 289:4 and the Siftei Cohen 289:6 mention two other factors:a) The order in which one enters the rooms from the entrance to the house. The room which is closer to the entrance to the house is considered as leading to the room which is further removed, and the mezuzah is placed on the right side of the entrance to the latter room;b) The importance of the rooms. The room which is less important is considered as leading into the room which is more important, and the mezuzah is placed on the right side of the entrance to the latter room.These principles are also significant if an entrance has no doors or has sliding doors. The above concepts apply only to rooms within a house. If the door leads to the public thoroughfare, the mezuzah is always placed on the right-hand side as one enters the house.
Where is the mezuzah affixed? At the inside of the entrance,1Menachot 32b explains that the Hebrew uvish'arecha, translated as "on your gates," can also be rendered "within your gates." Note the commentary on Chapter 5, Halachah 8, which explains that, when there is no other alternative, the mezuzah may be affixed inside the entrance, on the back of the doorpost. within a handbreadth of the outer edge of the doorpost,2Menachot 33b gives two reasons for this position: a) so that one will encounter God's name as soon as one enters one's home;b) so that the protective influences aroused by the mezuzah will affect a greater portion of the home. at the beginning of the top third of the entrance.3Menachot 33a derives this concept from the fact that the Torah teaches the mitzvah of mezuzah directly after the mitzvah of tefillin. Just as tefillin are placed on the upper portion of one's arm, a mezuzah should be placed on the upper portion of the entrance. (Note the Nekudot HaKessef 289, who objects to this decision.) If it was affixed higher up,4Note the Ra'avad, who states that when a doorway is very high, the mezuzah should be placed at the height of one's shoulders. (See Siftei Cohen 289:4.) it is acceptable as long as it is at least a handbreadth below the lintel.5Rabbenu Asher and the Ashkenazic authorities maintain that the mezuzah may be placed next to the lintel.It must be placed at the right-hand side6This law applies even when a house is owned by a left-handed person (Ramah, Yoreh De'ah 289:2). as one enters the house.7Yoma 11b explains that the word veitecha, "your house," can also be interpreted, "as you enter," implying that the mezuzah should be positioned as one enters a house or room. If it is placed on the left-hand side, it is invalid.8It is not considered as if one has fulfilled the mitzvah at all.A house belonging to partners requires a mezuzah.9Yoma, loc. cit., explains that although Deuteronomy 6:9 uses the singular form for "your house," it does not exclude houses belonging jointly to many people.The Kessef Mishneh relates that it would have been more appropriate to mention this law at the beginning of the chapter; nevertheless, the Rambam mentions it here because it is derived from the same Talmudic passage as the preceding law.Note the Kitzur Shulchan Aruch 11:19, which states that an entrance which one shares with a gentile does not require a mezuzah.
A person must show great care in [the observance of the mitzvah of] mezuzah, because it is an obligation which is constantly incumbent upon everyone.[Through its observance,] whenever a person enters or leaves [the house], he will encounter the unity of the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, and remember his love for Him. Thus, he will awake from his sleep and his obsession with the vanities of time, and recognize that there is nothing which lasts for eternity except the knowledge of the Creator of the world. This will motivate him to regain full awareness and follow the paths of the upright.Whoever wears tefillin on his head and arm, wears tzitzit on his garment, and has a mezuzah on his entrance, can be assured that he will not sin, because he has many who will remind him. These are the angels, who will prevent him from sinning, as [Psalms 34:8] states: "The angel of God camps around those who fear Him and protects them."Blessed be God who offers assistance.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 18) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 613) count this mitzvah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for each and every Jewish man2With this expression, the Rambam excludes women and minors. The Sefer HaChinuch (loc. cit.) explains that although this mitzvah is not associated with a specific time, since women are not obligated to study Torah, they are also not required to fulfill this mitzvah. Note the Sha'agat Arieh (Responsum 35), who objects and obligates women in this mitzvah. to write a Torah scroll for himself, as [implied by the commandment (Deuteronomy 31:19)]: "And now,3Although this command was addressed to Moses, the fact that the plural form of the word "write" is used indicates that the command was addressed to the entire people. write down this song4the song Ha'azinu for yourselves,"5The above is a quote from Sanhedrin 21b. The Talmud, however, does not explain how this verse serves as a commandment to write a Torah scroll. The following interpretation is the Rambam's. i.e., write down the [entire] Torah which contains this song. [The basis for this interpretation is] that the Torah should not be written passage by passage.6See Halachah 14.Even if a person's ancestors left him a Torah scroll, it is a mitzvah to write one himself.7The Sefer HaChinuch (loc. cit.) explains that this was intended so that there would be many Torah scrolls available to allow everyone the opportunity to study. Alternatively, a person will be far more motivated to study in a new scroll which he produced himself. If a person writes the scroll by hand, it is considered as if he received it on Mount Sinai.8Taking the effort to write the scroll oneself indicates that, had the person lived at the time the Torah was given, he also would have joined the Jews in traveling to Mount Sinai to receive it (Nimukei Yosef, Menachot). If he does not know how to write9a scroll according to all the particular halachic requirements himself, [he should have] others write it for him.10i.e., he should hire a scribe or purchase a Torah scroll. Menachot 30a states: "A person who purchases a Torah scroll in the public market is like someone who grabs a mitzvah in the marketplace." Rashi maintains that purchasing a Torah scroll fulfills a mitzvah, but the mitzvah is not as complete as if one had written the scroll oneself. The Ramah, however, states (Yoreh De'ah 270:1) that if a person merely purchases a Torah scroll without checking it, he does not fulfill the mitzvah at all.Note the statements of the Tevuot Shor, which explain that if another person can perform a mitzvah in a more complete manner than one is able to do oneself, it is preferable to commission him to do so as one's agent. In this instance, since most people cannot write a Torah scroll as attractive and halachically accurate as a professional scribe, it is preferable to hire the latter to write one's scroll.Anyone who checks even a single letter of a Torah scroll is considered as if he wrote the entire scroll.11Unless the scroll is checked, it cannot be used (See Halachah 12). Checking also involves effort.In his Hilchot Sefer Torah, Rabbenu Asher explains that, at present, this mitzvah is also fulfilled by writing chumashim, texts of the Talmud, and other books of Torah law. This concept is also quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 270:2).The Turei Zahav (270:4) explains that Rabbenu Asher's intention was not that there is no longer a mitzvah in writing a Torah scroll (for it is impossible that a change in circumstance will nullify a Biblical command), but that the original mitzvah has been extended to include these other texts.Since even according to Rabbenu Asher's view, there is a mitzvah for each person to write a Torah scroll for himself, it is difficult to comprehend why we do not see many individuals trying to fulfill this mitzvah. This question is particularly pertinent in light of the Rambam's statements at the conclusion of the list of positive commandments in Sefer HaMitzvot, where he describes the writing of a Torah scroll as a mitzvah which a person is obligated to fulfill.It is possible to explain that since many people are not capable of actually writing a Torah scroll themselves and do not have the financial resources to purchase one and check it, they fulfill this mitzvah through purchasing letters in a Torah scroll written by the community (Pit'chei Teshuvah 270:1; Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 24).
A king is commanded to write another Torah scroll1Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 17) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 503) count this mitzvah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for himself, for the sake of his sovereignty,2This scroll must be written while the king is in office. If he wrote it beforehand, even if he knew that he would inherit the throne, he does not fulfill this mitzvah. in addition to the scroll which he possessed while a commoner,3The Rambam does not state "which he wrote while a commoner." His choice of phraseology implies a leniency. Were the king to inherit a scroll from his family, he need not write two scrolls (one to fulfill the mitzvah of writing a Torah scroll and one "for the sake of his sovereignty"). Writing a single scroll is sufficient (Kessef Mishneh, Hilchot Melachim 3:1). as [Deuteronomy 17:18] states: "And when he sits on his royal throne, he shall write...."4Writing this scroll makes the king conscious that there exists an authority above his own (Sefer HaChinuch, loc. cit.). This scroll should be checked against the scroll in the Temple Courtyard5The Rambam's source is the Jerusalem Talmud (Sanhedrin 2:6). A Torah scroll must be checked for accuracy against an existing scroll. There was a scroll kept in the Temple Courtyard for this purpose. by the Supreme Sanhedrin.The one which he possessed while he was a commoner should be placed in his storage chambers,6The intent is not that it should be hidden away, but that - in contrast to the scroll he writes as king - it need not accompany him at all times. Rather, like a Torah scroll kept by a common person, it should be kept in a storage closet. and the one that he wrote7or had written for him - while he was a king, should be with him at all times. - except in the circumstances mentioned in the following halachah. - or had written for him - while he was a king, should be with him at all times. When he goes out to war, his Torah scroll should be with him. When he returns, it should be with him. When he sits in judgment, it should be with him.8Sanhedrin 21b states that the king should "wear the scroll on his arm like an amulet, as it is written, 'I have set God before me at all times. Since He is at my right hand, I will not be budged' (Psalms 16:8 ." When he dines, it should be opposite him,9but not with him, lest it become soiled by food. as [Deuteronomy 17:19] states: "And it shall be with him and he shall read it10He alone. This scroll is reserved for the king's personal use. None of his subjects may study from it (Tosefta, Sanhedrin 4:4). all the days of his life."
If a king did not possess a Torah scroll before he became king, he must write two Torah scrolls after he ascends the throne: one to place in his storage chambers,1thus fulfilling the mitzvah incumbent upon every Jew and the other to accompany him at all times,2fulfilling the mitzvah incumbent upon him as king. Deuteronomy 17:18 explicitly states that the scroll associated with his royal position should be his "second Torah scroll." never leaving his presence except at night,3The Or Sameach suggests amending the text based on the Sifre, which requires the king to have his Torah scroll with him at night (except when sleeping). As support for this change, the Tzafnat Pane'ach quotes Hilchot Melachim 3:5:He should be involved in Torah study and the needs of Israel by day and by night, as it is said: "It should accompany him and he should read it all the days of his life." when he enters the bathhouse, the toilet, or when he sleeps.4even during the day. Deuteronomy 17:19 states, "It should accompany him and he should read it." Sanhedrin 21b concludes: Where he can read it, it should accompany him; excluding places like those mentioned above, where it is not permitted to recite words of Torah. (See Hilchot Melachim 3:1.)
A Torah scroll which was written on unruled [parchment]1See Chapter 1, Halachah 12. or which was written with portions on g'vil and portions on k'laf2See Chapter 1, Halachah 7, for a definition of these terms. is invalid.3because the portions appear as two different scrolls. It must be written either entirely on g'vil or entirely on k'laf.4As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 8, it is preferable to write a scroll on g'vil. Nevertheless, as explained in the commentary, at present, it is customary to write on k'laf.How should a Torah scroll be written? One should write with very careful and attractive calligraphy,5Shabbat 133b interprets Exodus 15:2: "This is my God and I will glorify Him," to mean "perform mitzvot before Him in a beautiful manner... make a beautiful Torah scroll... with beautiful ink, a beautiful pen, and a skilled scribe." leaving the space the size of a small letter6a yud between each word7On one hand, the words (and similarly, the letters mentioned below) should not be too close to each other lest one be unable to differentiate between them. Conversely, leaving too large a gap between them is not attractive. and a hairbreadth's space between each letter.8See the conclusion of Chapter 8. The space of a line should be left between each line.9Leaving this space between the lines makes the text easier to read.10The length of each line should be thirty letters, so that one can write the word למשפחושיכם, the longest word in the Torah. The Rambam and similarly, Menachot 30a, write this world in a full form, containing a vav, and thus containing ten letters. Nevertheless, according to our tradition, the word never appears with a vav in the Torah and thus contains only nine letters. The length of each line should be thirty letters so that one can write the word למשפחותיכם three times.11The Hagahot Maimoniot states that this is approximately a handbreadth. This should be the width of every column.12The Siftei Cohen (272:3) states, however, that this figure is not a hard and fast rule, and everything depends on the penmanship of the particular scribe. (See also Tosafot, Menachot 30a.) A line should not be shorter than this, lest the column appear like a note;13The Rambam's phraseology differs slightly from his source, Menachot, loc. cit., which states: "One should not write [a scroll] with many columns [i.e., with short columns], lest it appear like a letter." nor wider than this, so that one's eyes will not wander through the text.14i.e., a person will become confused which line he is on (Menachot, loc. cit.).
One should not reduce the size of a letter1i.e., write it narrower than usual in order to leave the proper amount of space between one passage and another.2This refers to the following situation. A passage ends in the middle of the line and the next passage is s'tumah (see Chapter 8, Halachah 2). Thus, space for nine letters must be left between the two passages. The scribe should not write the letters narrower than usual to allow him to fit them in the space which is left. Instead, at the outset, he should plan the scroll in a manner in which such difficulties will not arise.The Turei Zahav (273:2) writes that if the scribe does not plan properly and is forced to write narrower letters, the scroll is not disqualified.Should [a scribe] have to write a word with five letters [at the end of a line, and there not be sufficient space for them all], he should not write two within the column and three beyond its margins.3Note the K'nesset HaGedolah, which questions whether the scroll is disqualified if written in this manner. From the Rambam's phraseology here and in Halachah 9, it appears that he considers this a preference, but not an absolute requirement. This view is stated in the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 273:5). Rather, he should write three within the column, and two beyond its margins.4Thus, the majority of the word is within the margins. If there is no room on the line to write [at least] three letters, he should leave an empty space and continue at the beginning of the [next] line.5The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 273:3) articulates the Rambam's thoughts, explaining that the scribes should leave empty spaces rather than elongate the letters (for doing so distorts their shape). At present, the latter practice has, nevertheless, become common.
Should [a scribe] have to write a two-letter word [after completing a line], he should not write it between the columns.1Although one is allowed to write two letters of a five-letter word outside a column's margins, it is not proper to write an entire word there even if it consists of only two letters (Kessef Mishneh). Instead, he should write it at the beginning of the [following] line.2even though it will cause him some difficulty in spacing out the following line.[The following rules apply] if one had to write a word3In one of his responsa, the Rambam states that this should not be done with God's name. See Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 276:8). of ten4As stated above, according to our tradition, the longest word in the Torah has only nine letters. - or more5Though there are no words with more than nine letters in the Torah, the megillah contains one eleven-letter word. The same rules that apply to writing a Torah scroll apply in its composition. or fewer6letters in the middle of a line, and less space than necessary remained within the column: If it is possible to write half of the word within the column, with [only] half extending beyond the margin, he should. - Though the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 273:4) quotes the Rambam's decision as halachah, theSiftei Cohen 273:4 (based on the opinion of Rabbenu Asher) maintains that one should not write more than two letters outside a column's margins. Significantly, in the laws of tefillin (Orach Chayim 32:33), the Shulchan Aruch also quotes Rabbenu Asher's view. - letters in the middle of a line, and less space than necessary remained within the column: If it is possible to write half of the word within the column, with [only] half extending beyond the margin, he should. If that is not possible, he should leave an empty space and continue at the beginning of the next line.7Note the commentary at the conclusion of the previous halachah.
One should leave four empty lines between each of the books of the Torah, neither more, nor less, starting the next book at the beginning of the following line.1Note the Pitchei Teshuvah (273:1), which states that one should not conclude any of the first four books of the Torah on the final line of a column.One should complete the entire Torah in the middle of the line at the bottom of the column. If many lines remain in the column, he should write shorter lines,2The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 272:4) states that one may also write the words with taller letters which take up several lines each. beginning at the beginning of the line, but not completing it,3This differs from Rashi's interpretation of Menachot 30a, which maintains that one should write the lines in pyramid form. so that the words לעיני כל ישראל4These are the final words of the Torah. Concluding in the middle of the line is a clear indication that these are the Torah's final words (Turei Zahav 272:6). are in the middle of the line at the bottom of the column.
One should be careful regarding the oversized letters, the miniature letters,1According to tradition, each letter appears once in the Tanach in a form smaller than all the other letters, and once in a form larger than all the other letters. the letters that are dotted,2At times, shapes resembling asterisks are place above letters in the Torah. Each time letters are written in such a manner, several exegetical interpretations are offered explaining the deviation from the norm.The Hebrew word nekudot is also used to refer to the signs which serve as vowels in the Hebrew language. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 274:7) disqualifies the use of a text which includes these signs. the letters that have abnormal shapes3e.g.,the pe'in that are bent over, and the crooked letters - See the Chatam Sofer, Responsum 265. - e.g., the pe'in that are bent over - and the crooked letters that the scribes have copied from each other in a chain of tradition.4Rarely are these factors mentioned in the Talmud or the early codes. Rather, traditions regarding these letters were handed down from scribe to scribe.[Similarly,] care should be taken regarding the crowns5i.e., on which letter to place a crown(s) and the number [of crowns placed on a letter].6The number of crowns is not uniform There are some letters that have [only] one crown, and others that have seven crowns.7Menachot 29b states that when Moses ascended to heaven, he found God attaching crowns to the letters of the Torah. When he questioned God concerning their purpose, God told him that, in the future, there would be a man (Rabbi Akiva) who would derive mountains upon mountains of laws from each particular crown.There is a serious difference of opinion between the Rambam and Rabbenu Asher regarding the crowns. Rabbenu Asher maintains that crowns should be placed on the letters שעטנ"ז ג"ץ. The Rambam maintains that the letters on which the crowns are placed is a matter of tradition extending back to Moses. In practice, today, it is customary to place crowns on the letters שעטנ"ז ג"ץ at all times, and to place crowns on certain other letters depending on tradition. All these crowns are shaped like8tiny zeiynin. They should be as thin as a hair.
All the above matters were mentioned only because this is the most perfect way of performing the mitzvah. Should one, however, alter the structure [of a scroll from that] mentioned above or not be precise regarding the placement of the crowns, [the scroll is acceptable]5There is a difference of opinion in this regard between the Rambam and Rabbenu Asher, who maintains that a Torah scroll lacking crowns is disqualified. As explained in the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 9, the Shulchan Aruch advises adding all the necessary crowns before using the scroll. if all the letters were written as they should be.[Similarly,] if one wrote the lines closer together, separated them further, lengthened them, or shortened them,6See Halachah 6 regarding these three factors. the scroll is acceptable, provided one letter does not touch another,7See the conclusion of Chapter 8. If the letters touch, they must be separated before the Torah scroll may be used (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 274:4). no letters are omitted, extra letters are not added,8See Halachot 11-13. the shape of even a single letter is not altered, and the [form of the passages, whether] p'tuchah or s'tumah, is not changed.9See Halachah 11 and Chapter 8, Halachah 3.
There are other practices which, although they are not mentioned in the Talmud, have been followed by scribes as tradition, transferred from generation to generation. They include that:a) the number of lines in each column not be less than 48 nor greater than 60;b) there is a space of approximately nine letters left empty between each passage, so that one could write the word אשר three times; c) that the five lines above the song recited at the Red Sea begin with the words: haba'im, bayabashah, י-ה-ו-ה and b'Mitzrayim, and that the five lines below that song begin with the words: vatikach, achareha, sus, vayetz'u, and vayavo'u.d) that the six lines above the song, Ha'azinu begin with the words: v'a'idah, acharei, haderech, b'acharit, l'hach'iso, and k'hal, and that the five lines below that song begin with the words: vayavo, l'daber, asher, hazot, asher.
All the above matters [were mentioned]1in the previous halachah only because this is the most perfect way of performing the mitzvah. If one deviated from them, [the scroll] is not disqualified.2only because this is the most perfect way of performing the mitzvah. If one deviated from them, [the scroll] is not disqualified. In contrast,3There are more serious scribal errors that can render a scroll unfit for use. if one wrote the short form of a word that should be spelled using a long form, or the long form of one that should be spelled using a short form,4As mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 3, there are times when the Hebrew vowels cholam and shuruk are written with a letter vav, and times when that letter is omitted. Similarly, there are times when the vowel chirik is written with a yud, and times when that letter is omitted.The expression malei, rendered as "full form," refers to the form that includes the extra letter. Chaseir, rendered as "short form," refers to the form that lacks the extra letter. [the scroll] is disqualified.5Although in its present condition, the scroll cannot be used for a public Torah reading, as explained in the following two halachot, the scroll is not necessarily totally disqualified. In certain circumstances, it can be corrected and then used.6[The same ruling applies if, in circumstances where one word is written in the Torah scroll and a different word is read] There are several instances when, although one word is written in the Torah scroll, a different word is recited when the Torah is read publicly. Both the written text of the Torah and the traditional way in which it is read have their source in the revelation at Sinai (Nedarim 37b). [The same ruling applies if, in circumstances where one word is written in the Torah scroll and a different word is read] - e.g.,yishkavenah is read instead of yishgalenah (Deuteronomy 28:30), and uvat'chorim is read instead of uva'folim (Deuteronomy7In these instances, both the words share approximately the same meaning; however, the term that is read in public is slightly less harsh than the term actually written in the Torah. 28:27  - one writes the word that is read [instead of the word that is written].8See the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 275:6).Similarly, if one wrote a passage that should be p'tuchah as s'tumah, or one that should be s'tumah as p'tuchah,9See Chapter 8, Halachot 1 and 2. or if one wrote another passage from the Torah10other than the songs in the form of one of the songs,11i.e., the song of celebration after the crossing of the Red Sea or the song Ha'azinu or wrote one of the songs in the form of another passage,12See the conclusion of Chapter 8. [the scroll is disqualified].13See the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 275:1-5). It does not have the holiness of a Torah scroll and, instead, is considered as one of the chumashim from which children are taught.14In Talmudic times, even children would learn from scrolls. These scrolls, however, could not be used for the communal Torah readings; they have the same level of holiness as sacred texts that are printed today. Compare to Halachah 14.
A Torah scroll1The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 279:1) quotes the ruling of the Hagahot Maimoniot, who applies this principle to the other books of the Tanach and, also, to other sacred texts, such as the Talmud. (See also Rashi, Ketubot 19b.) that is uncorrected should not be left [unattended to]2lest the error it contains cause a person to err regarding a law or Torah concept. for more than thirty days.3As apparent from Bava Metzia 118a, this is a period that our Sages generally granted to correct various problems. Rather, it should either be corrected4as mentioned in the following halachah or entombed.5as mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachah 3.A Torah scroll that has three6or fewer errors in each column should be corrected. If it has four, it should be entombed.7For a scroll with more corrections than this will not be attractive (Menachot 29b). Should the majority of a scroll have been checked to be accurate8The Kessef Mishneh interprets this to mean that the majority of the letters of the scroll are written properly, even if there are three or more errors in most of the columns. This interpretation is quoted as halachah by the Siftei Cohen 279:4. The Ziv Mishneh differs, and interprets this as meaning that the majority of the columns of the scroll are written properly. and there are four9or more errors in each column of the remainder of the scroll, the scroll should be corrected, provided there is at least one column of the defective portion that has fewer than four errors.10Tosafot, Menachot, loc. cit., emphasizes that this leniency is granted only when the column was written correctly at the outset. If this column also had been corrected, it may not serve as the basis for the correction of the entire scroll.
When does the above apply? When one wrote the short form of a word instead of the long form, and one will thus be forced to insert the [extra] letters between the lines.10If so many words are written between the lines, the scroll will not be attractive and it is therefore disqualified. If, however, one wrote the long form of a word instead of the short form, one may correct the scroll even if there are many errors on each page. In such an instance, one removes a letter instead of inserting it.11The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 279:4) suggests rewriting the other words on the line with a slightly elongated script, so that an empty space will not be left.
It is permitted to write a scroll containing each of the five books of the Torah individually.1See Ketubot 103b, which relates how Rabbi Chiyya wrote five Torah scrolls and gave each one to a different child to learn from, in order to preserve Torah study among the Jewish people. These scrolls do not have the sanctity of a Torah scroll.2As mentioned in Hilchot Tefillah 12:23, these scrolls may not be used for the communal Torah readings, nor must they be awarded the same degree of respect as a kosher Torah scroll.One should not write3In one of his responsa, the Rambam explains that this prohibition also applies to embroidering or engraving passages from the Torah. a scroll that contains several passages,4See Halachah 1 and commentary which use this law as the basis for the derivation of the mitzvah to write a Torah scroll. nor should one write a scroll5containing verses from the Torah for a child to learn from.6Surely, writing passages from the Torah for other purposes is forbidden. In the above-mentioned response, the Rambam criticizes people who write passages from the Torah as amulets or for other similar purposes. This is, nevertheless, permitted if one [ultimately] intends to complete an entire book of the Torah.7Ketubot 103b relates that Rabbi Chiya wrote five scrolls, each containing one of the books of the Torah and gave them to five different children to study.Rabbenu Yitzchak Alfasi (in his notes on Gittin 60a) differs, and allows passages from the Torah to be written for instruction. Even though this is forbidden by the letter of Torah law, the Rabbis allowed such scrolls to be written to enable people who could not afford to have an entire book of the Torah written for them to teach their children.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 283:2) quotes the Rambam's decision, while the Siftei Cohen (283:3) accepts Rabbenu Yitzchak Alfasi's position. It is permitted to write a scroll with [verses from the Torah] when one writes three words in a line spaced out disjointedly.8Our translation is based on the responsum mentioned above. The Rambam's intent is that each line contains only three words and that no line is positioned directly below (or in any other organized pattern), so that the passage will not appear as a single entity.The source for this law is Gittin 60a, which relates that Queen Heleni had a golden tablet made on which was inscribed the passage for a sotah, so that the priests would not have to copy it from a Torah scroll on every occasion. Because of the prohibition against writing passages from a Torah scroll separately, this tablet was written in the above manner. (Note a somewhat different description of this tablet in the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Sotah 2:4.)
It is permitted to include [all the books of] the Torah, the Prophets, and the Holy Scriptures in a single scroll.1See, however, the following halachah, which describes the status of such a scroll.Four empty lines should be left between each book of the Torah,2as stated above, Halachah 7 and three empty lines between each book of the Prophets.3Our text of Bava Batra, 13b, which serves as the source for this halachah, appears to indicate that four lines should be left between each book of the Prophets as well. Note, however, Soferim 2:4, which, like the Rambam, mentions leaving only three lines. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 283:1) quotes the Rambam's decision. One should also leave three lines between each book of the twelve [minor] prophets,4Although they are considered in their entirety as a single book of the Bible, this distinction between the works of each prophet should be made.5Although some of the minor prophets - e.g., Hoshea and Amos (see the Rambam's introduction to the Mishneh Torah) - chronologically preceded Isaiah, because of the size of their books they were included as a unit (Bava Batra, loc. cit.). so that should one desire to cut, he may do so.6Based on Bava Batra, loc. cit., the Kessef Mishneh maintains that there is an error in the published version of the text and that it should read as follows:One should also leave three lines between each book of the twelve [minor] prophets. [Alternatively, within the works of the prophets,] one may complete [a book] at the end [of a column] and start [the following one] at the beginning [of the following column], so that should one desire to cut, he may do so.Rav David Arameah sees no reason to amend the text, and explains that the space is left between the books, "so that should one desire to cut, he may do so."This is the order of the Prophets: Joshua, Judges, Samuel, Kings,7The division of Samuel and Kings into two books was first introduced by the Vulgate, the Church's translation of the Bible into Latin. Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Isaiah,8Although chronologically, Isaiah preceded Jeremiah and Ezekiel, because of thematic connection, Bava Batra 14b favors the order quoted by the Rambam:The Book of Kings ends with a description of the destruction of the First Temple. This is also the theme of the majority of Jeremiah's prophecies. The Book of Ezekiel begins with the theme of destruction and exile, but concludes with visions of Mashiach's coming. Afterward, it is followed by the Book of Isaiah, which focuses primarily on the Messianic redemption. the Twelve [Minor Prophets].This is the order of the Holy Scriptures: Ruth, Psalms, Job,9These three books are arranged in chronological order, according to the opinion that maintains that Job lived in the time of King Solomon. Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, the Song of Songs,10Rashi, Bava Batra, loc. cit., explains that King Solomon wrote these three books in this order, completing the Song of Songs in his old age. Lamentations, Daniel, Esther, Ezra,11These texts are also in chronological order. According to the Talmud, the books of Ezra and Nechemiah are a single text. (See also Sanhedrin 93b.) Chronicles.12which was written by Ezra in Babylon (Bava Batra 15a).
All sacred texts may be written only on a ruled [surface]. [This applies] even if they are written on paper. One may write three words without ruling [the surface on which they are written]. Writing any more than that is forbidden.A scroll that includes the Torah, the Prophets, and the Holy Scriptures does not possess the same degree of holiness as a Torah scroll. Rather, it is like a scroll containing one of the books of the Torah, because the addition [of a book in the scroll] is equivalent to having omitted one.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
There are two forms for a passage1The Torah is divided into 669 passages, each containing one or more verses. There are two structures with which they are written: p'tuchah (described in this halachah) and s'tumah (described in the following halachah). which is written as p'tuchah:2P'tuchah literally means "open." This name is given because an empty space is left on the preceding line. [One form is used] when one completes [the previous passage] in the midst of the line.3as explained below, leaving an empty space large enough to contain nine letters. Then, one should leave the remainder of the line empty and begin the passage that is p'tuchah at the beginning of the following line.4All the halachic authorities accept the use of this form for a passage written as p'tuchah.When is [this form] used? When the empty space is large enough to contain nine letters.5In Chapter 7, Halachah 10, the Rambam defines this measure as enough space to write the word רשא three times. In this context, the Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 275) states that, after the fact, a scroll is not disqualified if a space necessary to write nine yuddim is left open. If, however, the empty space is very small or one concludes [the previous passage] at the end of the line, one should leave one line totally empty and begin the passage that is p'tuchah at the beginning of the third line.6Rabbenu Asher differs, and maintains that, in such an instance, the passage written as p'tuchah should be begun on the second line, but a space large enough to contain nine letters should be left at the beginning of the line.Because of this difference of opinion, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 275:2) suggests that the scribes structure their text so that the passage that precedes a passage which is p'tuchah always ends in the middle of the line, leaving a space large enough to contain nine letters and one word of the new passage. All authorities agree that this form is setumah. The Ramah adds, however, that if that is not possible, one should write the passage according to the Rambam's decision.
There are three forms for a passage that is written as s'tumah:1S'tumah means "closed." [One form is used] when one completes [the previous passage] in the midst of the line. Then, one should leave the above-mentioned amount of empty space2The space must be large enough to contain nine letters. and begin writing at least one word of the passage written as s'tumah at the end of the line. Thus, there will be a space in the middle [of the line].3Rabbenu Asher also accepts this as a proper form for a s'tumah passage.When there is not enough room left on the line to leave this amount of space open and write at least one word at the end of the line, one should leave the entire space empty, then leave an empty space at the beginning of the second line,4There is a debate among the authorities (See Turei Zahav 32:25; Shulchan Aruch HaRav 32:51) if it is necessary that the space of nine letters be left open on a single line or if it is sufficient that the sum total of the space at the end of the previous line and the beginning of the new line be equal to this measure. and begin writing the passage to be written as s'tumah in the middle of the second line.When one completes the previous passage at the end of the line, one should leave a space of the above-mentioned size at the beginning of the second line and begin writing the passage to be written as s'tumah in the middle of the line.5Rabbenu Asher does not accept the Rambam's opinion on this, and requires different forms in these instances for a passage to be written as s'tumah.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 275:2) maintains that a scribe should structure his text so that all the passages that precede a passage to be written as s'tumah end at the beginning of a line, so that one can leave the required space and fit in one word of the new passage. The Ramah adds, however, that if that is not possible, one should write the passage according to the Rambam's decisions.Thus, a passage written as p'tuchah always begins at the beginning of the line, and a passage written as s'tumah always begins in the middle of the line.
A scroll that has errors regarding the long and short form of letters can be corrected and checked as explained above.6See Chapter 1, Halachah 16; Chapter 7, Halachot 12-13. In contrast, if:one erred with regard to the space between passages and wrote a passage that should be written as p'tuchah as s'tumah, or one that should be written as s'tumah as p'tuchah;one left an empty space where a [new] passage does not [begin];one continued writing in the normal manner without leaving a space between passages; orone changed the form of the songs,7The Rambam is referring to the form of the song sung after the crossing of the Red Sea, and the song Ha'azinu. He describes their proper form at the conclusion of the following halachah.Significantly, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 275:3) rules that, although a Torah scroll is disqualified if one writes either of these two songs in the same form as the rest of the Torah, if one writes them in a way that differs both from the usual form of the Torah and the manner in which these songs are customarily written, the scroll is not necessarily disqualified. the scroll is disqualified and may never be corrected.8In one of his responsa, Rabbenu Asher explains that this is not an absolute statement. The scribe may correct the text by erasing the passage that has been written improperly. Nevertheless, this will not generally be done, because:a) if the passage contains God's name, it is forbidden to erase it; or b) leaving the required space between passages may cause the space for the passages themselves to be too cramped.The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 275:1) quotes Rabbenu Asher's opinion. Instead, one must remove the entire column on which it is written.
Since I have seen great confusion about these matters in all the scrolls I have seen, and similarly, the masters of the tradition who have written down and composed [texts] to make it known [which passages] are p'tuchot and which are s'tumot are divided with regard to the scrolls on which to rely, I saw fit to write down the entire list of all the passages in the Torah that are s'tumot and p'tuchot, and also the form of the songs. In this manner, all the scrolls can be corrected and checked against these [principles].9In his introduction to the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam outlines the goals he had in composing the text:to compose a work that clarifies... the entire Oral Law, setting it in order without question or difficulty... revealing all the laws to the great and the small regarding each and every mitzvah.The goal of presenting the Oral Law in a form that could be put in practice by every Jew is clearly expressed in these halachot that give precise instructions enabling each individual to compose a kosher Torah scroll.The scroll on which I relied on for [clarification of] these matters was a scroll renowned in Egypt, which includes all the 24 books [of the Bible]. It was kept in Jerusalem for many years so that scrolls could be checked from it. Everyone relies upon it because it was corrected by ben Asher,10This appears to refer to the scribe Aharon ben Moshe, from the tribe of Asher, who lived in Tiberias in the generation following Rav Sa'adiah Gaon and was renowned for his knowledge of grammar (Shalshelet HaKabbalah).who spent many years writing it precisely, and [afterward] checked it many times.I relied [on this scroll] when I wrote a Torah scroll according to law. The Book of Genesisיהי רקיע יקוו המים יהי מאורות ישרצו המים תוצא הארץ ויכלו אלה תולדות השמים כולן פתוחות והן שבע פרשיות אל האשה אמר ולאדם אמר שתיהן סתומות ויאמר יי' אלהים פתוחה והאדם ידע זה ספר ויחי שת ויחי אנוש ויחי קינן ויחי מהללאל ויחי ירד ויחי חנוך ויחי מתושלח ויחי למך ויחי נח אחת עשרה פרשיות אלו כולן סתומות וירא יי' אלה תולדת נח שתיהן פתוחות ויאמר אלהים לנח וידבר אלהים אל נח ויאמר אלהים אל נח שלשתן סתומות ויהיו בני נח ואלה תולדת בני נח שתיהן פתוחות וכנען ילד ולשם ילד שתיהן סתומות ויהי כל הארץ שפה אחת אלה תולדת שם שתיהן פתוחות וארפכשד חי ושלח חי ויחי עבר ויחי פלג ויחי רעו ויחי שרוג ויחי נחור ויחי תרח כולן סתומות השמונה פרשיות ויאמר יי' אל אברם ויהי רעב ויהי בימי אמרפל שלשתן פתוחות אחר הדברים ושרי אשת אברם ויהי אברם ויאמר אלהים אל אברהם ארבעתן סתומות וירא אליו פתוחה ויסע משם ויי' פקד את שרה שתיהן סתומות ויהי בעת ההוא ויהי אחר ויהי אחרי הדברים ויהיו חיי שרה ארבעתן פתוחות ואברהם זקן סתומה ויסף אברהם ואלה תלדת ישמעאל ואלה תולדת יצחק ויהי רעב ארבעתן פתוחות ויהי עשו ויהי כי זקן יצחק ויצא יעקב שלשתן סתומות וישלח יעקב פתוחה ויבא יעקב ותצא דינה שתיהן סתומות ויאמר אלהים וירא אלהים ויהיו בני יעקב ואלה תלדות עשו ארבעתן פתוחות אלה בני שעיר סתומה ואלה המלכים וישב יעקב ויהי בעת שלשתן פתוחות ויוסף הורד מצרימה סתומה ויהי אחר הדברים ויהי מקץ שתיהן פתוחות: ויגש אליו ואלה שמות ואת יהודה שלשתן סתומות ויהי אחרי הדברים ויקרא יעקב שמעון ולוי יהודה זבולן יששכר כולן פתוחות והן שש דן גד מאשר נפתלי בן פרת יוסף חמשתן סתומות בנימין פתוחה There are 43 passages that are p'tuchot and 48 passages that are s'tumot, 91 passages in their entirety.11The first passage in each book of the Torah is not mentioned, since it is governed by different rules (Kessef Mishneh). There is some debate among the commentaries concerning the exact text of the Mishneh Torah. Also, there are different traditions regarding several of these passages. Accordingly, today, a scribe should write a scroll based on a Torah scroll that is accepted as correct, and not from this list.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
A Torah scroll should not be written in a way which causes its length to exceed its circumference, or its circumference to exceed its length.What is the appropriate length? When the scroll is written on g'vil, six handbreadths - i.e., 24 thumbbreadths. When the scroll is written on k'laf, it may be more or less, provided that the length is equal to the circumference. If one wrote a scroll on g'vil less than six handbreadths long and concentrated one's writing, or [wrote a scroll] more than six handbreadths long and spread out one's writing, if the length is equal to the circumference, it has been written in the proper manner.
The following margins should be left [on each column]: Below the column: four thumbbreadths; above the column: three thumbbreadths; and between each column: two thumbbreadths.[To allow for these margins,] one should leave an additional thumbbreadth at the beginning and the end of each portion of parchment and room to sew the parchments together. Thus, when one sews all the portions of parchment together, there will be two thumbbreadths between each column throughout the entire scroll.One should also leave an extra portion of parchment at the beginning and the end of the scroll, to wind around its staves.All these measures are part of [performing] the mitzvah [in the optimum manner]. If one decreased or increased any of them, [the scroll] is not disqualified.
How should a person structure the scroll [he is writing] so that its length will be equal to its circumference? He should begin by making equal portions of parchment, each having a standard width of six handbreadths.Afterwards, he should wind the parchments, each in the same manner, making one tight coil. He should continue adding to the coil, winding the parchments tightly until the circumference of the coil is six handbreadths, the width of the parchment. He should measure with a red cord that [is long enough] to surround the entire coil.
Afterwards, one should make a measuring rod, forty or fifty thumbbreadths long. Each thumbbreadth on the rod should be divided into halves, thirds, and quarters, so that it will be possible to have exact measurements, including even half and quarter thumbbreadths.One should measure each piece of parchment with this rod to determine its length in thumbbreadths. In this manner, one can calculate the length in thumbbreadths of the entire coil.
Afterwards, one should take two or three other parchments [as an experiment] to check the size of one's writing. One should write a [sample] column.It is obvious that the length of the column [used for the writing] will be seventeen thumbbreadths, since three thumbbreadths are left for a margin above the column and four thumbbreadths are left for a margin below. The width of the column, however, varies according to the thickness of one's writing. Similarly, the number of lines within each column varies according to the writing. The space of a line should be left between each two lines.
After one writes the experimental column as one desires, one should measure the column with the rod. Then one should add the two thumbbreadths to be left between columns and calculate the number of columns one will have in the entire coil [should one continue] using the same [size] writing.Once one knows the number of columns [for which there is space in the coil], one should calculate according to the scroll from which one is writing whether the entire Torah will be able to be contained in the number of columns there are in the coil based on this [size] writing.If the entire Torah can be contained within this number of columns, [the scroll] will be [written in the] desired [fashion]. If, according to one's calculations, there are more columns than necessary to contain the Torah, one should write with a broader script, so that fewer columns will be included. One should write another [experimental] column [and recalculate until the calculations are resolved].If, according to one's calculations, there are fewer columns than necessary to contain the Torah, one should write with a thinner script, so that more columns will be included. One should write another [experimental] column and recalculate until the calculations are resolved.
After one knows the width of the column and the measure of one's writing, one takes the coil [of parchment] and divides each parchment into columns according to the [size of the] column with which one experimented and made the [above] calculation, ruling each column. When more than three or four fingerbreadths remain after the final column [which fits onto] the portion of parchment, one should leave only a thumbbreadth and the space necessary to sew it and cut off the rest.One need not worry that, ultimately, additional parchments will have to be added to the coil to compensate for the portions which were cut off. This is not a factor of circumstance, because the writing will cause [the size of the scroll] to be extended [only] according to the number of columns [originally calculated].
Similarly, if one desires to make the width of the scroll more than six [thumbbreadths] or less than six [thumbbreadths], one should follow similar calculations. Thus, the length of the scroll will be equal to the circumference, neither less nor more, provided one does not err in his calculations.
The thumbbreadth mentioned in all these calculations - and in all other Torah measurements - refers to the width of a normal person's thumb. We have calculated this measure precisely and found it to be equal to the width of seven average barley-corns when placed next to each other in a cramped manner. This is equivalent to the length of two barley-corns amply spaced apart.Whenever the term "handbreadth" is mentioned, it refers to four of these thumbbreadths. Whenever the term cubit is mentioned, it refers to six handbreadths.
In the Torah scroll which I wrote, the width of each column was four thumbbreadths [with the exception of the] columns on which the Song of the Red Sea and the song Ha'azinu were written; they were six thumbbreadths wide. There were 51 lines in each column and 226 columns in the entire scroll. [In its entirety,] the scroll was approximately 1366 thumbbreadths long.
The six thumbbreadths beyond the number that one would arrive at by calculation were used for the margin of the scroll left at the beginning and the end. I wrote the scroll from parchment made from ram skin.Should one desire to write a scroll using these measurements or deviating from them only slightly - i.e., adding or subtracting two or three columns, there is no necessity to trouble oneself with calculations; without any difficulty one will have a scroll whose length is equal to its circumference.
One should not write fewer than three columns on a piece of parchment, nor [should one write] more than eight columns. If one has a piece of parchment large enough to contain nine columns, one should divide it in two, one portion containing five columns, and one portion four columns.When does the above apply? At the beginning of the scroll or in the middle. At the end of the scroll, however, even if there is one verse in one column, that column may be written on a separate piece of parchment and sewn together with the other parchments.
When one sews the parchments together, one should use only sinews from a kosher species of animal or beast. [Sinews taken from] animals which died without being ritually slaughtered or which were killed by wild beasts [are, nevertheless, acceptable].This is a halachah transmitted to Moses on Mount Sinai. Therefore, if one did not sew them with sinews, or used sinews from a non-kosher animal, the scroll is unacceptable until one removes the threads and sews them again.
When sewing all the pieces of parchment together, one should not sew the entire length of the parchment. Rather, one should leave a certain portion unsewn on both the top and bottom of the parchment, so that the parchment will not tear in the middle when the Torah is rolled.Two staves of wood should be made for a [Torah scroll], one at the beginning and one at the end. One should sew the parchment left over at the beginning and the end [of the scrolls] to these staves with sinews, so that it can be rolled around [these staves]. Space should be left between the staves and the columns of writing.
When a tear in a Torah scroll is contained within two lines, [it is sufficient to] sew [the tear]. If it [extends to] three [or more], [it] should not be sewn.When does the above apply? With regard to an old Torah scroll which one cannot recognize as having been processed with gallnut juice. If, however, one can recognize that the parchment was processed with gallnut juice, one may sew it, even if the tear extends to three [lines]. Similarly, [if there is a tear] between columns or between words, one may sew it.All these tears may be sewn only with the sinews which are used to sew the parchments together. When sewing, one must be careful that a single letter is not omitted or has its form distorted.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
Thus, it can be concluded that there are twenty factors that1each in its own right - can disqualify a Torah scroll. If a scroll contains one of these factors, it does not have the sanctity of a Torah scroll, but rather is considered like a chumash used to teach children - i.e., although it is still considered to be a sacred text, it does not have the same degree of holiness as a Torah scroll. (See also Chapter 7, Halachah 14, and Hilchot Tefillah 11:14.) - each in its own right - can disqualify a Torah scroll. If a scroll contains one of these factors, it does not have the sanctity of a Torah scroll, but rather is considered like a chumash used to teach children. It may not be used for a public Torah reading.2There is an apparent contradiction between this ruling and one of the Rambam's responsa, which states:It is permitted to recite a blessing when reading from a Torah scroll that has been invalidated. This practice was carried out in the presence of the geonim, Rav Yosef HaLevi and Rav Yitzchak Alfasi, without protest....The blessing is not dependent on the scroll from which the scroll is read... but on the reading itself....The Kessef Mishneh attempts to resolve this difficulty, explaining that the responsum deals with a circumstance when there is no proper Torah scroll available. In contrast, the decision rendered here is a priori in nature (לכתחילה) The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 143:2-3), however, rules that a blessing may not be recited on such a scroll. See also Hilchot Tefillah 12:23.They are:a) that the scroll was written on parchment from a non-kosher animal;b)3See Chapter 1, Halachah 10. that the scroll was written on parchment from a kosher animal that was not processed;c)4See Chapter 1, Halachot 6-9 and 14. [that the scroll was written on parchment] that was not processed with the intention that it be used for a Torah scroll;d)5See Chapter 1, Halachah 11. that it was written on [the side6See Chapter 1, Halachah 9 of the parchment] that is not appropriate for writing; i.e., on g'vil on the side of the flesh, and on k'laf on the side of the hair;7See Chapter 1, Halachah 9.e) that a portion was written on g'vil and a portion on k'laf;8See Chapter 7, Halachah 4.f) that it was written on duchsustos;g) that it was written on unruled [parchment];h)9See Chapter 1, Halachah 12, and Chapter 7, Halachah 4. that it was written with [an ink] other than a black ink that remains [without fading];i)10See Chapter 1, Halachah 5. that it was written in a language other [than L'shon HaKodesh];j)11See Chapter 1, Halachah 19. that it was written by a nonbeliever or others whose writing is not12See Chapter 1, Halachah 13. acceptable;k) that the names of God were not written with the proper intention;l)13See Chapter 1, Halachah 15. that even a single letter was omitted;m) that even a single letter was added;n)14See Chapter 1, Halachah 2, and Chapter 7, Halachah 9. that one letter touches another;o)15See Chapter 1, Halachah 19, and the conclusion of Chapter 8. that the form of a letter is distorted so that it cannot be read, or so that it would be read as another letter. This applies regardless of whether the distortion was caused by the original writing, a perforation, a tear, or an erasure;p)16See Chapter 1, Halachot 19-20; Chapter 7, Halachah 9; and Chapter 9, Halachah 15.p) that additional space was left between letters, so that a word would appear as two words, or that too little space was left between words, so that two words appear as one; - See the conclusion of Chapter 8.q) that the form of the passages; - i.e., one wrote a passage that should have appeared p'tuchah as s'tumah, or vice versawas altered; - See Chapter 8, Halachah 3.r) that the form of the songs; - the song of the Red Sea and the song Ha'azinuwas altered; - See Chapter 8, ibid.s) that other passages were written in the form of the songs - See Chapter 7, Halachah 11.t) that the parchments were sewn together using [thread made from anything other] than animal sinews.; - See Chapter 9, Halachah 13.Any other factors were mentioned only as the most proper way of fulfilling the mitzvah and are not absolute requirements. - Sefer Kovetz adds one more disqualification: that a Torah scroll was written with half of God's name within the line and half added outside the line (Chapter 1, Halachah 16). that additional space was left between letters, so that a word would appear as two words, or that too little space was left between words, so that two words appear as one;q) that the form of the passages was altered;r) that the form of the songs was altered;s) that other passages were written in the form of the songs;t) that the parchments were sewn together using [thread made from anything other] than animal sinews.Any other factors were mentioned only as the most proper way of fulfilling the mitzvah and are not absolute requirements.
A proper Torah scroll is treated with great sanctity and honor.1This general principle is the foundation for the remaining halachot in this chapter. It is forbidden for a person to sell a Torah scroll even if he has nothing to eat.2The Rambam's words (quoted from Megillah 27a) should not be taken absolutely literally. Surely, if a person is in danger of dying of hunger, he may sell a Torah scroll. Rather, this refers to an instance when a person lacks a source of income and is required to sustain himself from charity (Kessef Mishneh). (See also Ramah, Yoreh De'ah 270:1; Siftei Cohen 270:2.) [This prohibition applies] even if he possesses many scrolls or if he [desires to] sell an old scroll in order to purchase a new one.3Rabbenu Manoach explains that the reason for the latter ruling is that, despite one's resolve, circumstances may arise, and ultimately, one may never buy the new scroll. Accordingly, if the new scroll has already been completed and an agreement concluded, the old scroll may be sold. The Siftei Cohen 270:3, however, forbids a sale even under these circumstances. (Compare to Hilchot Tefillah 11:12.)A Torah scroll may never be sold except for two purposes:a)4Tosafot (Bava Batra 8b) states that a Torah scroll may also be sold to redeem captives. From Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 8:10-11, it appears questionable whether the Rambam would accept this point. to use the proceeds to study Torah;b)5for Torah study leads to the performance of mitzvot. This is the purpose of a person's life (Megillah, ibid.). to use the proceeds to marry.6An unmarried person leads an unstable, unsatisfied existence (Megillah, ibid.).[Even in these instances, permission to sell is granted only] when the person has nothing else to sell.7Megillah, ibid., states that a person will never see any blessings from the proceeds of this sale. See also Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 282:18), which quotes a debate whether a person is allowed to use the proceeds of the sale for his personal use.Note the Turei Zahav 282:13, which states that it is forbidden to use one sacred text as a prop for another one.
A Torah scroll that has become worn or disqualified should be placed in an earthenware container1Thus, it will be preserved (Megillah 26b). and buried next to a Torah sage. This is the manner in which it should be entombed.The mantle2The precise translation of the term mitpachat is a matter of question. Among the alternative translations that appear possible from different Talmudic sources are the curtains hanging on the ark, clothes placed within the ark on which the scrolls are placed, the cloth on which the Torah is placed on the reading platform, and the sash used to tie the Torah closed. of a scroll that has become worn should be used to make shrouds for a corpse that has no one to bury it.3In Hilchot Eivel 3:8, the Rambam discusses the laws regarding a corpse that has no one to bury it. Here, however, the term appears to refer to a poor person whose family cannot afford shrouds. (See Mishnah Berurah 154:21). This is the manner in which it should be entombed.4The Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 282) states that although this ruling allows a person to use a mantle for this purpose, there is no obligation to entomb it in this fashion. It may be buried with other sacred articles.
The [following] are all considered to be sacred articles: a container that was prepared to be used for a Torah scroll and within which a scroll had actually been placed,5The Rambam is alluding to the concepts mentioned in Chapter 4, Halachah 9, that for an article to be considered as sacred in nature, it must have been made for a holy intent and actually used for that purpose. The container he mentions refers to the Sephardic custom in which a Torah scroll is held in a wooden or metal box. and similarly, a mantle, a movable ark or cabinet in which a Torah scroll is placed6Our translation follows Rav Kapach's commentary, which explains that a teivah is a movable ark with a flat roof; a migdal, a movable ark with a slanted roof. Others have noted that the termmigdal could refer to the permanent ark described in Hilchot Tefillah 11:2-3. - [this applies] even though the scroll is within its container - and similarly, a chair that was prepared for a Torah scroll to be placed upon it7When two scrolls are taken out for the communal Torah reading, one is placed on this chair while the other is being read. Many authorities require the second scroll to be held by a person while the first scroll is being read. and upon which a scroll had actually been placed. They are forbidden to be discarded. Instead, when they become worn out or broken, they should be entombed.In contrast, the platform on which the chazan stands while holding the Torah scroll8See Hilchot Tefillah 11:3. and tablets used for the instruction of children9This would appear to refer to tablets used to teach children to read. If the tablets contain a Biblical verse, they also must be treated as sacred articles. are not sacred in nature.10They do not have the same level of holiness as a Torah scroll. They are endowed - as are all elements of a synagogue - with a certain dimension of holiness, as explained in Hilchot Tefillah 11:15.Similarly, the decorative silver and gold pomegranates that are made for a Torah scroll are considered sacred articles and may not be used for mundane purposes, unless they were sold with the intention of purchasing a Torah scroll or chumash with the proceeds.11If, when purchasing these articles, the congregation or donors made a stipulation that they could ultimately be used for mundane purposes, it is permitted to do so. (See Hilchot Tefillah, ibid.; Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 154:8.)
It is permissible to place a Torah scroll on another Torah scroll and, needless to say, upon chumashim.12This applies to scrolls on which between one and four of the five books of the Torah are written, and not to printed texts. Chumashim may be placed upon books of the Prophets or of the Sacred Writings.13Books of the Prophets and the Sacred Writings may be placed upon each other without distinction. In contrast, books of the Prophets or the Sacred Writings may not be placed on chumashim, nor may chumashim be placed on Torah scrolls.All sacred writings, even texts of Torah law and allegories, may not be thrown.14From Eruvin 98a and Soferim 3:12, it would appear that the meaning of this statement is that one should hand sacred texts to a colleague rather than throw them. Nevertheless, there are authorities who also interpret this as a prohibition against wantonly discarding the texts. (See also Hilchot Yesodei Torah 6:8 and commentary.) It is forbidden to enter a lavatory wearing a amulet containing verses from the sacred writings unless it is covered with leather.15See Chapter 4, Halachah 17, which explains these concepts with regard to tefillin. Although the passages in tefillin are covered by leather, there are distinct differences between them and these amulets:a) The compartments of the tefillin are also holy and are made for the specific purpose of holding the tefillin. Therefore, they are not considered to be a container. See Halachah 7 (Kinat Eliyahu).b) The shin - one of the letters of God's name - is embossed on the tefillin (Rabbenu Manoach).
A person should not enter a bathhouse, lavatory,1since it is unbecoming to bring a Torah scroll into such places. (See also Chapter 7, Halachah 3.) or cemetery while holding a Torah scroll,2It is forbidden to perform mitzvot next to a corpse or in a cemetery, because by doing so, one appears to be mocking the dead, who cannot serve God in this manner (Berachot 18a). Holding a Torah scroll itself fulfills a mitzvah even when one does not study from it (Kessef Mishneh). even if it is covered by a mantle and placed in its container.3As explained in the previous and the following halachot, a Torah scroll that is covered by its usual containers is considered as if it is openly revealed. He should not read from the scroll until he moves four cubits away from the corpse4See Chapter 4, Halachah 23; Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:2. or from the lavatory.5See Chapter 4, Halachah 17; Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:8.There are certain versions of the Mishneh Torah that state: "until he moves four cubits away from the corpse, bathhouse, or lavatory." Since the Rambam does not mention the obligation of moving away from a bathhouse in Chapter 4 or in Chapter 3 of Hilchot Kri'at Shema, we can assume that he does not feel that it is necessary, and that as soon as one steps outside of the bathhouse he may recite words of Torah.A person should not hold a Torah scroll while naked.6Megillah 32a states: "A person who holds a Torah scroll while naked is buried naked." Noting the difficulty with the simple interpretation of this statement, the Talmud interprets it to mean, "buried naked of the merit of this mitzvah."Our translation follows the Bnei Binyamin, who interprets "naked" as modifying "a person," and not the scroll. There are authorities who interpret the Talmud's statement to mean that one should not hold a Torah scroll while the scroll is uncovered. See the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 147:1). Note also the Noda BiYhudah (Orach Chayim, Responsum 7), who discusses the Rambam's perspective on this law. (See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTum'ah 9:5; the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Yadayim 3:3.) It is forbidden to sit on a couch on which a Torah scroll is placed.7The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 3:5) relates that Rabbi Eliezer accidentally sat down on a couch on which a Torah scroll was placed. When he discovered it, he recoiled in shock as if facing a snake.The Siftei Cohen 282:8 relates that this law does not apply if the Torah scroll is placed on another article that lifts it up at least a handbreadth (three handbreadths is more desirable) above the couch. The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 282:7) states that the same restriction applies to other sacred texts as well. (See also Siftei Cohen 282:9.)
It is forbidden to engage in intimate relations in a room where a Torah scroll is located,16See Chapter 4, Halachah 24. until one either:a) removes the scroll;b) places it in a container, and then places that container in a container that is not intended for it. If, however, the container is intended for it, even ten containers, one over the other, are considered as a single entity;17Significantly, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 282:8) does not accept the Rambam's view on this issue and forbids relations under these circumstances. Placing a sacred article in two containers is sufficient for tefillin or other sacred texts, but not for a Torah scroll. orc) constructs a divider at least ten handbreadths high.18The Pit'chei Teshuvah 282:10 states that a curtain is not acceptable as a divider.[The above applies] only when there is no other room available. If there is another room available, one may not engage in intimate relations unless one removes the Torah scroll.
Any impure person, even [a woman in] a niddah state or a gentile, may hold a Torah scroll and read it. The words of Torah do not contract ritual impurity.19Note a slightly different application of this concept in Hilchot Kri'at Shema 4:8. This applies when one's hands are not soiled or dirty with mud. [In the latter instance,] one should wash one's hands and then touch the scroll.
Whenever a person sees a Torah scroll being carried, he must stand before it. Everyone should remain standing until the person holding the scroll reaches his destination and stands still, or until they can no longer see the scroll.20Kiddushin 33b states: If we stand in honor of a Torah sage, surely we should stand before the Torah itself. (Compare to the laws governing standing before a sage, Hilchot Talmud Torah 5:7, 6:1.) Afterward, they are permitted to sit.21Note the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 149:1), which states that after the Torah is read, it is customary to accompany it back to where it is kept.
It is a mitzvah to designate a special place for a Torah scroll22This applies to the construction of an ark. Wherever a Torah scroll is held, in a home as well as a synagogue, such a structure should be built. and to honor it and glorify it23The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 282:1) emphasizes that "it" refers to the place of the Torah scroll. The ark must be treated with honor. in an extravagant manner. The words of the Ten Commandments are contained in each Torah scroll.A person should not spit before a Torah scroll, reveal his nakedness before it, take off his footwear before it,24Our translation follows the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah. Other versions read, "stretch out one's feet before it." or carry it on his head like a burden. He should not turn his back to a Torah scroll unless it is ten handbreadths higher than he is.
A person who was journeying from one place to another with a Torah scroll should not place the Torah scroll in a sack, load it on a donkey, and then ride on [the beast]. If, however, he is afraid of thieves, it is permissible. If there is no danger, he should carry it in his bosom while riding the animal, and journey [onward].Anyone who sits before a Torah scroll should sit with respect, awe, and fear, because [the Torah] is a faithful testimony [of the covenant between God and the Jews] for all the inhabitants of the earth, as [Deuteronomy 31:26] states: "And it will be as a testimony for you."25The proof-text chosen by the Rambam is somewhat difficult. It states that the Torah will be "testimony for you," while previously he spoke of its being "testimony for all the inhabitants of the earth." This difficulty can be resolved by interpreting the proof-text, "It will be testimony about you" - i.e., the Torah will be testimony to all the inhabitants of the world that an essential bond exists between God and the Jewish people. The awareness that the Torah communicates this concept should naturally, without effort, bring a person to "sit with respect, awe, and fear" in the presence of a Torah scroll (Likkutei Sichot, Shavuot 5747).A person must honor a Torah scroll [to the full extent] of his potential. The Sages of the early generations26Avot 4:6. Significantly, in his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam interprets this statement slightly differently. said: "Whoever desecrates the Torah will have his person27גופו translated as "person," literally means "body." Honoring a Torah scroll, the body of the Torah as it were, will bring honor to one's physical being. desecrated by people. Whoever honors the Torah will have his person honored by people."28The Rambam reverses the order of the Mishnah in order to conclude positively.Blessed be God who offers assistance.
