=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Each and every man possesses many character traits. Each trait is very different and distant from the others.1Many commentaries assume that the Rambam is stating simply that there are many personality types, which he proceeds to describe: e.g., the angry man, the calm man, etc. They quote various sources in support of this viewpoint, among them Berachot 58a: "Whoever sees a multitude of Jews recites the blessing: 'Blessed is...the wise who knows the hidden secrets,' because just as their natures are not similar, neither are their faces."However, by stating that the many character traits are possessed by "each and every man," it is possible that Rambam is implying more than that there are people with different traits. Though in Moreh Nevuchim (The Guide to the Perplexed) 2:40 the Rambam himself elaborates upon that idea, it can be said that here his intent is different. He is emphasizing the degree to which each individual's personality is a combination of different traits, which may be unrelated and even distant from each other. Anger, generosity, and modesty, for example, can be found together in the same person, much in the same way that tenants of all sorts - unrelated to each other - can be housed in a common building.To illustrate these traits, the Rambam employs concrete examples of extreme personalities, so that the contrasts can be appreciated more easily.One type of man is wrathful; he is constantly angry. [In contrast,] there is the calm individual who is never moved to anger,2Obviously, anger or passivity are not these individuals' only traits. Surely, they share the full spectrum of human emotions. However, in these individuals, these traits are most prominent.See Halachah 2:3 for a further discussion of anger. or, if at all, he will be slightly angry, [perhaps once] during a period of several years.3or, if at all, he will be slightly angry, [perhaps once] during a period of several years.There is the prideful man and the one who is exceptionally humble.4Chapter 2, Halachah 3, also deals at length with the contrasts between pride and humility. There is the man ruled by his appetites - he will never be satisfied from pursuing his desires,5Kohelet Rabbah 1:34 states: "No person will die having accomplished [even] half of what he desires." This statement is difficult to comprehend since there appear to be many successful individuals who achieve their desires. Nevertheless, their accomplishments do not necessitate that their desires will be satisfied. As the Midrash continues: "A person who possesses 100 silver pieces desires 200. One who possesses 200 desires 400."Desire itself is never satisfied. Instead, it puts the person on a constantly moving treadmill, with ever-increasing aims. As soon as one reaches one goal, he instinctively begins the pursuit of another. and [conversely,] the very pure of heart, who does not desire even the little that the body needs.6This pair of contrasting personality types deal with a person's appetites which can be satisfied by sensual experience. For example, gluttony is stimulated and satisfied by taste. In contrast, the traits mentioned below - the desire for money or the lack of desire for it - do not involve the senses.There is the greedy man, who cannot be satisfied7Literally, "whose soul is not satisfied." Perhaps the Rambam uses "soul," both here and with regard to the man ruled by his sensual appetites, because it is the desire that characterizes the man, not the performance of an action as such. A man may never indulge his passion for food, or actually amass money and yet, be gluttonous or greedy. Though, in practice, his ability to gratify his ambitions may be limited by external factors, the desires of his soul are, nonetheless, unlimited. with all the money in the world, as [Ecclesiastes 5:9] states: "A lover of money never has his fill of money."8Here, the Rambam describes an example where the desire for money becomes a goal in itself. In contrast, a man who gathers money so that he can buy things or achieve power is not interested in money per se. Although he may be faulted for different reasons, he is not greedy for money. On the other hand, for the "lover of money," money itself becomes his raison d'etre. [In contrast,] there is the man who puts a check on himself;9literally, he "cuts himself short." II Kings 19:26 employs a similar usage of the root ketzar: "And the inhabitants are broken, with shortened (i.e., weakened or useless) arms." he is satisfied with even a little, which is not enough for his needs, and he does not bother to pursue and attain what he lacks.10This refers to a lazy person, who will not bestir himself even for that which is necessary. In Chapter 2, Halachah 7, this type is described clearly as: "lazy and an idler." This is the description, too, in the Rambam's Introduction to Avot - Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4.There is [the miser,]11In contrast to the "lover of money" mentioned above, the miser is not as bent on acquiring new wealth as much as hoarding the money and possessions he has.who torments himself with hunger, gathering [his possessions] close to himself. - The terminology the Rambam uses emphasizes the miser's need to be close to his money and possessions. Similar, but not exactly correspondent, expressions are found in the Bible (Proverbs 13:11 and the Talmud (Bava Kama 80a). who torments himself with hunger, gathering [his possessions] close to himself. Whenever he spends a penny of his own, he does so with great pain. [Conversely,] there is [the spendthrift,] who consciously wastes his entire fortune.12Chullin 84b gives examples of such behavior: wearing linen clothing, using glass utensils, and hiring workers without supervising them.All other traits follow the same pattern [of contrast]. For example: the overly elated and the depressed;13The Rambam is not referring to an average optimist and a pessimist. Rather, he describes personalities who do not have a grip on reality. onain is the term used for the bereaved who has not yet buried his dead. mehulal, the other extreme, is used by Jeremiah 51:7 to refer to a state of intoxication and delirious drunkenness. the stingy and the freehanded;14Our translation of shua is clearly evident from Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 7:11. It follows that chili represents the opposite extreme. (See also Ibn Ezra, Isaiah 32:5.)The difference between this pair of traits and the miser-spendthrift pair mentioned above is that the latter refers to a person's conduct toward himself, while the former refers to his conduct with regard to others. The stingy man, unlike the miser, may spend money for his own needs, but is tightfisted when others are concerned. By the same token, a freehanded man need not necessarily indulge himself, though he is generous when giving charity. Though this may sound praiseworthy, when taken to extremes it can also prove dangerous, because a person may hurt himself in the process of giving excessively to another. (See Lechem Mishneh.) the cruel and the softhearted; the coward and the rash. and the like.15We find a longer treatment of personal characteristics in the Rambam's Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4.
Between each trait and the [contrasting] trait at the other extreme, there are intermediate points, each distant from the other.1The Lechem Mishneh understands this as follows: Let us imagine a line drawn from one extreme to another - between the stingy and the freehanded, for example. All who are neither stingy nor freehanded stand between them. They are all intermediate, whether they tend towards stinginess or freehandedness. Each point along this imaginary line stands apart - "is distant" - from the others on that line. In a diagram, this idea might be depicted as follows:X-----*-------*------*-------*----------*---------*XStingy intermediate points freehanded.However, it is highly unlikely that all the Rambam wishes to teach us is that there are many intermediate points of temperament between the extremes. After all, that is self-evident. Furthermore, in each set of associated temperaments - for example, stinginess and freehandedness - only three points on the line are of importance to the Rambam in clarifying his view of personality development: the two extremes and the midpoint. Why should he mention all the other intermediate possibilities?Thus, it appears that the Rambam is telling us that there is a midpoint temperament between each pair of contrasting extremes. Given the entire range of human temperaments, there are a number of midpoints which are not necessarily related to each other. For example, the midpoint for generosity may be very different from the midpoint for humility. Thus, in Halachah 1, the Rambam stated that our personality traits are "different and distant;" in this halachah, he makes a parallel statement about the midpoints.With regard to all the traits: a man has some from the beginning of his conception,2i.e., the Rambam distinguishes between genetic traits and those that are acquired. in accordance with his bodily nature.3Here, we see an interrelation between body and soul. Certain temperaments are produced by or relate to particular physical characteristics.[In Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam states: "From the outset of a person's [life], he has neither virtues nor vices...." However, there is not necessarily a contradiction between Shemoneh Perakim and this halachah. The possession of certain character traits does not determine whether one will use them for a vice or a virtue.] Some are appropriate to a person's nature and will [therefore] be acquired more easily than other traits.4i.e., these traits are not transferred genetically. However, a person is born with a tendency towards them.In Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam elaborates on this issue at length. He explains that some people are born with a brain whose internal chemistry is prone to intellectual achievement. However, if this person does not develop this tendency, he will not automatically become a thinker.Similarly, others have leanings towards courage or cowardice. Nevertheless, these are merely tendencies, and they will not manifest themselves unless consciously developed. Also, these tendencies are, at all times, subject to man's control. We are granted free will, and choose our course of behavior. Some traits he does not have from birth. He may have learned them from others,5In Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam writes: "From his youth, one becomes accustomed to acting in accordance with the accepted behavior of one's family and locale." In these few words, the Rambam includes all the people who might influence a person's character development: his parents, siblings, teachers, peers, and others. Also, note Chapter 6, Halachah 1. or turned to them on his own.6There are two ways of acquiring such traits This may have come as a result of his own thoughts,7i.e., an intuitive realization of the correctness of a certain course of behavior stemming from one's own creative thought. or because he heard that this was a proper trait for him, which he ought to attain.8i.e., through study a person understands the value of a certain character trait and sets out to acquire it. [Therefore,] he accustomed himself to it until it became a part of himself.9Unlike the inborn or easily acquired traits, these qualities must first be accepted intellectually. Then, through habitual actions, they become part of the personality. (See Halachah 7 for a detailed explanation of such a process of behavioral modification.)
The two extremes of each trait, which are at a distance from one another, do not reflect a proper path.1i.e., the path described in this and the following halachot. It is not fitting2except in certain cases, as explained in Chapter 2, Halachah 3. that a man should behave in accordance with these extremes3if that his nature or teach them to himself.4and modify his behavior in this direction.In Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam elaborates on this concept, contrasting hedonism with asceticism, and pointing out how neither represents a healthy and mature approach to life.If he finds that his nature leans towards one of the extremes5i.e., a genetic trait, as mentioned in the previous halachah or adapts itself easily to it,6a trait which is easily acquired because of the individual's natural tendencies, as mentioned in the previous halachah. or, if he has learned one of the extremes7the third type of trait mentioned in the previous halachah. and acts accordingly, he should bring himself back to what is proper8See Chapter 2, Halachah 2, for an extensive description of the process of correcting one's excesses of temperament. and walk in the path of the good [men].9i.e., the path that good men follow. This translation is based on the fact that the word "path" is in the singular, while the modifier "good" is in the plural. This is the straight path.10Perhaps the Rambam is borrowing a biblical phrase here: "That you walk in the path of the good, and guard the way of the righteous" (Proverbs 2:20).The nature of "the straight path" is explained in detail in the following halachah.
The straight path:1This expression is also used in Avot 2:1. In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam cites his explanation of the middle path in the fourth chapter of Shemonah Perakim. This [involves discovering] the midpoint temperament of each and every trait that man possesses [within his personality.]2i.e., a path develops out of a series of midpoints. This refers to the trait which is equidistant from either of the extremes, without being close to either of them.3These statements echo the opening remarks of the fourth chapter of Shemonah Perakim:The good acts are those balanced ones midway between two extremes. Both of the extremes are bad - one reflects excess and the other, want. The virtues [good traits] are temperaments and habits which are midway between these two bad tendencies.These actions [good actions] are produced as a result of these [the good] traits.Despite the similarity between the Rambam's statements here and those quoted, there is a slight difference. Here, the Rambam focuses on good traits, while in Shemonah Perakim, he emphasizes good actions.Therefore, the early Sages instructed a man to evaluate his traits,4The Rambam appears to be referring to Sotah 5b: "Whoever evaluates his paths in this world will merit and witness God's salvation." to calculate them and to direct them along the middle path,5At the conclusion of Chapter 4 of Shemonah Perakim, the Rambam writes:When a man weighs his actions constantly and directs them towards their midpoints, he will be on the most elevated human plane possible. He will thereby approach God and grasp His will. This is the most perfect path in the service of God.Constant introspection is a necessary element in any program of personal and spiritual growth. Even when a person has the highest goals, unless he frequently looks himself squarely in the mirror and examines his behavior, he may make gross errors. so that he will be sound {of body}.6We have enclosed the words "of body" with brackets because they are not found in authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah and are problematic. Though a properly balanced temperament may also lead to physical health, this does not appear to be the Rambam's intent.If the Hebrew bigufo is omitted as suggested, the meaning of shaleim would be altered from "sound" to "complete" or "perfect."For example: he should not be wrathful, easily angered; nor be like the dead, without feeling, rather he should [adopt] an intermediate course; i.e., he should display anger7Our translation is based on Chapter 2, Halachah 3. (Note also the commentary of the Knesset HaGedolah.) only when the matter is serious enough to warrant it,8The Rambam appears to be referring to matters which evoke personal feelings. Nevertheless, the Misrat Moshe interprets this passage as referring to an instance in which Torah law would require a display of anger - e.g., a colleague's transgression of Torah law. in order to prevent the matter from recurring. Similarly, he should not desire9This refers to physical desire. anything other than that which the body needs and cannot exist without, as [Proverbs 13:25] states:10The Rambam quotes supporting verses for only two of the "intermediate traits;" perhaps, because his description of the middle-of-the-road position for these traits might appear to veer toward one extreme. We might expect the intermediate point between gluttony and its opposite extreme to be eating to one's satisfaction. However, here we are told that we should desire only what is sufficient in order to exist.However, the Rambam is not telling us to deny ourselves satisfaction. Deuteronomy 8:10 teaches: "You shall eat and be satisfied, and bless God, your Lord." Based on that verse, Berachot 48b explains that we are obligated to recite grace only when we feel physically satisfied. (The Rambam quotes this concept in Hilchot Berachot 1:1.) In Chapter 3, Halachah 1, and in Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, he elaborates on the negative aspects of asceticism.Thus, his intent cannot be that we deny our desires, but rather that we school ourselves to desire and feel satisfied with what we need, without excess. This is a dominant theme in the sections on diet in Chapter 4, and those describing the conduct of a Torah sage in Chapter 5. "The righteous man eats to satisfy his soul."11The verse continues: "But the belly of the wicked will want." The commentaries note that the contrast between the two does not center on the quantity of food they eat, but on the attitude with which they eat it. Because the righteous are not given over to pursuit of gratification, they can be satisfied. Conversely, it is the gluttony of the wicked which actually causes their want.Note also the Midrashic interpretations of this verse:"The righteous..." This refers to Eliezer, who said to Rebecca: "Let me sip a little water" (Genesis 24:17) - a single sip."And the belly of the wicked will want." This refers to Esau, who said to Jacob: "Stuff me..." (Genesis 25:30). Rabbi Yitzchak ben Zeira said: he opened his mouth agape like a camel and said: "I will open my mouth and you put it in" (Tanchumah; Pinchas 13; BaMidbar Rabbah 21:18).Also, he shall not labor in his business except to gain what he needs for immediate use, as [Psalms 37:16] states:12Here again, the Rambam quotes a Biblical verse, because his definition of an intermediate path may seem extreme. The verse also clarifies that the Rambam is not denigrating the idea of work, but excessive preoccupation with one's profession as a means of acquiring possessions.It is highly unlikely that the Rambam would criticize work per se. Note Proverbs 6:6: "Sluggard, go to the ant, see its ways and become wise;" and Berachot 8a:He who enjoys the toil of his hands is greater than one who fears God..., as it is stated: "If you eat of the work of you hands, you are fortunate and will possess the good" (Psalms 128:2)."You are fortunate" - in this life, and "will possess the good" - in the world to come.The Rambam, himself, quotes the latter passage in Hilchot Talmud Torah 3:11. Thus, the Rambam is not criticizing a person for working hard, but rather teaching us that work and its profits should not be our greatest priorities. "A little is good for the righteous man."13The verse in its entirety expresses a contrast: "A little is better for the righteous man than the great wealth that many [of the] wicked possess." Note the commentary of ibn Ezra: "The righteous man will be happier with his small lot than the wicked with their great wealth."He should not be overly stingy14The printed editions of the Mishneh Torah have yikfotz (close his hand). However, most manuscripts use the term: yikabetz (gather).Yikfotz recalls Deuteronomy 15:7: "Do not close your hand from your needy brother." Thus, the contrasting extreme would be freehandedness. Yikabetz, like vikubatz in Halachah 1, reflects miserly behavior, the opposite of which is being a spendthrift. The variant texts might reflect a difference of opinion as to which opposing extremes the Rambam had in mind. nor spread his money about, but he should give charity according to his capacity15See Hilchot Arachin 8:12-13, which places restrictions on the extent of one's generosity. and lend to the needy as is fitting.16Lending is also a form of charity. In Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 10:7, the Rambam lists eight degrees of charity. The highest is the support of a fellow Jew who has become poor by giving him loans or the like. He should not be overly elated and laugh [excessively],17Such expressive "happiness" is often a sign of inner discontent and suffering. nor be sad and depressed in spirit. Rather, he should be quietly happy at all times,18his joy should be a composed sense of satisfaction.[In this context, see the Ramah's conclusion of his notes to Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim (697:1) in which he quotes Proverbs 15:15: "A good-hearted person is always celebrating."] with a friendly countenance.19In his commentary on Avot 1:14, the Rambam defines "a friendly countenance" as "a spirit of will and gentility." The same applies with regard to his other traits.20In Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam mentions many other "intermediate traits." Among them:Courage is the midpoint between arrogance and fear. Humility is the intermediate between pride and meekness. Earnestness is the intermediate between boasting and lowliness....Patience is the intermediate between rashness and insensitivity...This path is the path of the wise.21i.e., those whose behavior is controlled by their intellect Every man whose traits are intermediate and equally balanced can be called a "wise man."22Note the contrast to the "pious" of the following halachah. Though the published editions of the Mishneh Torah include this line as the final concept in our halachah, many of the authoritative manuscripts place it as the beginning of Halachah 5.
A person who carefully [examines] his [behavior],1in an effort to achieve the desired intermediate path and therefore deviates slightly from the mean2to compensate for a possible error in calculating that mean. to either side is called pious.3In Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam explains that one can refine and correct his behavior by balancing a tendency for excess in one direction by intentionally forcing oneself to adopt the opposite extreme. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 2.) He continues:Therefore, the pious did not allow themselves to fix their traits at the midpoint, but would bend slightly to the side of excess or want as a hedge and a guard.He goes on to explain that, even for the pious, these extremes are not ends in themselves, but means to help them overcome natural tendencies. Thus, both the pious and a person of underdeveloped character may act in an extreme manner. However, the difference between them is that the behavior of the pious is carefully calculated with the intent of refining his personality, while the underdeveloped person does so without thought, as a natural response to his whims and fancies.What is implied?4i.e., how is this concept exemplified? One who shuns pride5At first glance, the choice of pride as an example is rather problematic, because in Chapter 2, Halachah 3, the Rambam states:There are traits for which it is forbidden for a person to follow an intermediate path.... Such a trait is pride...The proper path is not that a person should merely be humble, but rather hold himself very lowly...Therefore, our Sages commanded: "Be very, very humble of spirit."It is possible to explain that because of the negative aspects of the quality of pride, the middle path that one should follow in regard to it does not resemble the middle paths of the other traits and may appear as an extreme. Pride represents one extreme, its converse being absolute lack of concern for self to the extent that one walks around in rags. Between these extremes are a number of intermediate points: modesty - which might normally be considered as the intermediate level; humility - which the Rambam considers as the true middle path; and extreme humility - which is pious behavior (Lechem Mishneh). See also the commentary on the halachah cited above.Possibly, it is the exaggerated contrasts in this set of traits that make it the most fitting example to demonstrate the principle of the middle path that the Rambam espouses. These gross differences allow for the possibility of clear distinctions. and turns to the other extreme6The Lechem Mishneh emphasizes that one need not actually adopt the other extreme, but rather, he should tend his behavior in that direction. and carries himself lowly is called pious. This is the quality of piety.7which represents a deviation from the mean. However, if he separates himself [from pride] only to the extent that he reaches the mean and displays humility, he is called wise. This is the quality of wisdom.8In his commentary on Avot 5:6, the Rambam contrasts the wise and the pious:A boor is one who lacks both intellectual and ethical development...A wise man possesses both these qualities in a complete way, as is fitting.A pious man is a wise man who increases his piety - i.e., his emotional development - until he tends toward one extreme, as explained in Chapter 4 [of Shemonah Perakim], and his deeds exceed his wisdom.Thus, the wise man is one whose ethical behavior has been developed to the point at which it reflects his intellectual sophistication. He is able to appreciate the mean of each trait and express it within the context of his daily life. The pious man also possesses this quality, but due to his desire for ultimate self-refinement, he is willing to sacrifice himself and tend slightly to the extreme in certain instances.Although in this halachah, the Rambam differentiates between the middle path - the path of the wise - and "beyond the measure of the law" - the path of the pious, in Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 5:11 he describes how, "according to the greatness of the Sage, should be the care he takes to go beyond the measure of the law." Thus, it appears that a truly wise man will ultimately seek pious ways. The same applies with regard to other character traits.9i.e., there is a mean which is the path of wisdom, and a deviation from that course with a positive intent, which is the path of piety.The pious of the early generations10This expression is borrowed - out of context - from the Mishnah, Berachot 5:1. would bend their temperaments from the intermediate path towards [either of] the two extremes. For some traits they would veer towards the final extreme,11excess (Shemonah Perakim, Chapter 4) for others, towards the first extreme.12lack (ibid.). Depending on the circumstances involved, deviation to either extreme can produce positive results. This is referred to13by our Sages... as [behavior] beyond the measure of the law.14We find this expression used in a number of Talmudic passages. For example, Bava Metzia 30b relates that Rabbi Yishmael, Rabbi Yossi's son, was on a journey. A porter traveling the same road asked him to help lift a load of wood. Rabbi Yishmael was a distinguished scholar, and, therefore, this base task would have been demeaning for him. Nevertheless, rather than refuse the porter entirely, Rabbi Yishmael purchased his entire load from him. This was considered as behavior beyond the measure of the law.See also Berachot 7a and 45b, Bava Kama 100a, Bava Metzia 24b. However, in these and other Talmudic passages where the term is used, the emphasis appears to be on the ethical or legal imperative involved, without stressing the aspect of character development. [Note Hilchot Aveidah 11:7, the Shulchan Aruch, Choshen Mishpat 259:3 and 263:3, and Sefer Mitzvot Katan (Positive Commandment 49), which mention our obligation to go beyond the measure of the law.]Thus, the Rambam appears merely to be borrowing the term used by the Sages without referring to any specific instance. The path of behavior prescribed by one's intellect corresponds to law, and an intentional deviation from that course for the sake of piety is "beyond the measure of the law."We are commanded15The Sifre (on Deuteronomy 13:5  states: 'You shall walk after God, your Lord' - this is a positive commandment." The Zohar (Ki Tetze, p. 270) also makes a similar statement. However, neither source elaborates.Among the Geonim, the Ba'al Halachot Gedolot does list it as a commandment. Rav Sa'adiah Gaon does not include it as a specific commandment.Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 8) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 610) include this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. However, the Rambam's inclusion of this commandment as one of the 613 mitzvot is somewhat problematic. In Shoresh 4 of his introduction to Sefer HaMitzvot, he states that he does not include any "general mitzvah" which does not involve a specific activity in his reckoning of the 613 mitzvot. For this reason, "Observe My statutes" (Leviticus 19:19) or "Be holy" (Leviticus 19:2) are not included in the 613 mitzvot. On the surface, the command the Rambam mentions here also seems to be an all encompassing charge to develop ourselves spiritually without any specific activity.Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, was asked this question, and he explained that here the specific activity implied by this commandment is the development of our emotions and character traits. A somewhat deeper perspective can be gained from the Rambam's own description of the mitzvah. When listing the mitzvot at the beginning of these halachot, he states that the mitzvah is "to imitate God's ways" and in Sefer HaMitzvot, he defines the mitzvah as "to imitate Him, blessed be He, according to our potential."The implication of these statements is that man has a constant obligation to carry out all of his deeds and guide the progress of his emotional development with the intent of imitating God. (See Likkutei Sichot, Tavo 5748, and note the commentary on the following halachah.) to walk in these intermediate paths16Despite the Rambam's praise of piety, his very description of it as "beyond the measure of the law" implies that, though it is desirable, it cannot be considered as obligatory.and they are good and straight paths - as [Deuteronomy 28:9] states: "And you shall walk in His ways." - The Rambam describes this mitzvah in the following halachah. Indeed, the authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah include the paragraph we have just explained as the beginning of Halachah 6. As emphasized in the introduction to this text, the Rambam has structured the Mishneh Torah with the intent of "revealing all the laws to the great and to the small with regard to each and every mitzvah." He does not mention philosophical and ethical concepts unless they are halachot - i.e., practical directives for our behavior.In this context, we can understand the structure of this chapter. The Rambam set out to describe the mitzvah of following God's ways. As stated in this halachah, he perceives this to mean developing our personalities by emulating the qualities which the Creator reveals. As he states in the following halachah, those qualities are identical with the middle path of human behavior. Therefore, in the initial halachot of this chapter, the Rambam sets out to describe the nature of human personality and the ideal temperaments - the middle path - that man should seek to achieve. Having laid down this foundation, he is able to define that mitzvah in this halachah and begin offering directives for its fulfillment in Halachah 7.[Our Sages] taught [the following] explanation of this mitzvah - The Rambam appears to be referring to the Sifre, Ekev 11:22, which he quotes in Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.). That explanation is also paralleled in the Mechiltah (Exodus 14:2  and Shabbat 133b.It must be noted that other Talmudic and Midrashic sources interpret the commandment to imitate God in a different light. Note Sotah 14a:[Deuteronomy 13:5 states]: "You shall walk after God, your Lord." Is it possible for man to walk after the Divine Presence? Has it not been stated: "Behold, God, your Lord, is a consuming fire" (Deuteronomy 4:24 ?Rather, [it means] one should follow the qualities of God.Just as He dresses the naked..., you, too, should dress the naked;God visited the sick...; you, too, should visit the sick;God comforted the bereaved...;you, too, should comfort the bereaved;God buried the dead...; you, too, should bury the dead.In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam mentions emulating both God's deeds and His qualities. Similarly, Sefer HaChinuch, in its description of this mitzvah, and the Kiryat Sefer in his commentary - both here in Hilchot De'ot and also in Hilchot Eivel - mention both deeds and qualities.There is not necessarily a contradiction between these two emphases. As mentioned above, our actions reflect our personalities. Therefore, it follows that developing our characters in the manner outlined by the Rambam in this halachah will ultimately produce the good deeds mentioned by our Sages in the passage from Sotah.Nevertheless, deed is often not a reflection of character. A person with many severe character faults may still do good deeds. Hence, for the "resemblance of God" to be complete, it is not sufficient merely to perform positive deeds. Rather, a person must undergo internal change by developing his character. Therefore, the Rambam focuses more on this aspect of the commandment.Just as He is called "Gracious," you shall be gracious; Just as He is called "Merciful," you shall be merciful; Just as He is called "Holy," you shall be holy; - Neither the Sifre nor the other sources quoted above mention the trait of holiness. Rather, the third trait mentioned is "piety." Perhaps, since the Rambam gave a specific definition for piety in the previous halachah within his conception of personality development, he does not mention it in the present context to prevent any possible confusion.In a similar manner, the prophets - The Rambam's choice of words is somewhat surprising since many of these expressions are also found in the Torah as well as in the prophetic works. However, in the Torah these titles are mentioned by Moses or the other prophets. Perhaps this is the Rambam's intent.called God by other titles: "Slow to anger," "Abundant in kindness," "Righteous," "Just," "Perfect," "Almighty," "Powerful," and the like. - In Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 1:11-12 and in detail in Moreh Nevuchim (Guide to the Perplexed), Vol. I, Chapters 53 and 54, the Rambam explains that these names are not descriptions of God, who cannot be defined by any specific quality. To do so would limit Him and detract from His infinite and transcendent state of being.Rather, the use of these titles must be understood as follows: God brings about activities, which, had they been carried out by man, would have been motivated by these emotional states. For example, instead of utterly destroying the Jews after the sin of the Golden Calf, God allowed our people to continue. Were such a deed to have been performed by a human ruler, we would describe him as "slow to anger." Though that term cannot serve as a description for God - for He cannot be described - the Torah and the prophets referred to Him by such terms with the following intent.[They did so] to inform us that these are good and just paths. - i.e., God acted in ways which we identify with these qualities - and the Torah and the prophets mention these actions - because these are attributes which man should strive to achieve.A person is obligated to accustom himself to these paths and [to try to] resemble Him - Likkutei Sichot (ibid.) states that with the latter phrase, the Rambam is adding a new thought. As explained above, God cannot be described by any particular quality. If He manifests a quality, it is for a specific intent.In Moreh Nevuchim (ibid., Chapter 54), the Rambam mentions that the leader of a country should act in a similar manner.Sometimes he will be merciful and generous to some people - not because of his feelings and natural compassion, but because they are deserving of such treatment.Sometimes he will bear a grudge, seek revenge, and rage against certain people - not out of feelings of anger... - but in order to produce positive results....The ultimate ideal man can achieve is to imitate God according to his potential... i.e., to have our deeds resemble His deeds.For this reason, human behavior should not be motivated by the spontaneous expression of emotion. Rather, man's emotions should arise as the result of a deliberate process of thought.This reflects themes brought out in the previous halachot of this chapter: that a person must constantly evaluate and review his emotions (Halachah 4); that it is a wise man who is able to appreciate the middle path (Halachah 5).This is what is meant by the imitation of God: that a person not be controlled by the unchecked expression of his emotions. Rather, he should control his feelings and, motivated by his desire to resemble God, search to find the correct and proper quality, the middle path, appropriate to the situation at hand.to the extent of his ability. - for man is ultimately finite in nature, and no true resemblance to God is possible.How can one train himself to follow these temperaments to the extent that they become a permanent fixture of his [personality]? - Having established personality development as a mitzvah in the previous halachah, the Rambam begins his explanation of how this mitzvah is fulfilled.He should perform - repeat - and perform a third time - Thus, a person's deeds will shape his character traits.In this process of personal change, the stress is on the repetition of an act, and not on its quantity or intensity. In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 3:15, the Rambam writes that giving a thousand coins to one person at one time is not as effective in stimulating feelings of generosity as giving a single coin one thousand times.As mentioned in Halachah 4, though the Rambam's explanations in this chapter parallel those of the fourth chapter of Shemonah Perakim, the texts differ in stressing actions (as the opening lines of that chapter imply), or on character development, which is the theme of our text.For this reason, the two texts also perceive the process of causation differently. In Shemoneh Perakim, the Rambam states: "These actions [good actions] are produced as a result of these [the good] traits," while here he sees the traits being produced by the actions.Nevertheless, the two texts do not actually contradict each other. Both statements are true. Our deeds reflect our personalities, and they also help shape those personalities. Generally, this means that a person's behavior will reinforce and strengthen the character traits that motivated those very deeds. However, this chapter - and more particularly, this halachah - deals with a person who has made a commitment to change and refine his character. Therefore - based on his intellect and the directives of the Torah, rather than his spontaneous feelings - he chooses to perform deeds that will bring about this process of inner change.which conform to - reflect and are motivated by...the standards of the middle road temperaments - described in Halachot 4 and 5.He should do this constantly, until these acts are easy for him and do not present any difficulty. - A trait possessed by a person produces activities naturally and spontaneously. However, if one has not acquired a trait as yet, certain actions will be foreign to his nature, and one must trouble himself to perform them.For example, a liberal man gives charity naturally; the miser must force himself to give. The action for each is the same, but not the inner feelings.Then, these temperaments will become a fixed part of his personality. - If the miser continues to give frequently, he will find that he no longer feels like a miser, but has become liberal in heart as well as in hand.Since the Creator - The Rambam uses the term yotzer - literally "the One who forms" - (which appears only one other time in the Mishneh Torah: Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 1:7).The Rambam describes God as the Creator with reference to the Divine qualities he describes in these halachot. Before the existence of the world and man, there would be no purpose for God to reveal these qualities, for until man's creation, no one could learn from or emulate them.[The word yotzer may also be used because of its connection to the word yeitzer, meaning drive or inclination. (See Rashi, Genesis 2:7.)]is called by these terms and they make up the middle path which we are obligated to follow, this path is called "the path of God." - As stated in the commentary on the previous halachah, "the path of God" involves controlling our emotions by using our intellect, so that our behavior is, to the extent that is possible for man, an objective response to a situation. In this manner, our behavior bears a resemblance to God's transcendence of worldly matters.This is [the heritage] which our Patriarch Abraham taught his descendants - See the Midrash Tanchumah, Shofetim 15:And what are the ways of God? Righteousness and justice, as it is stated: "And they will keep the path of God to do righteousness and justice" (Genesis 18:19).as [Genesis 18:19] states: "for I have known Him so that he will command his descendants...to keep the path of God." - Since the path of God is mentioned in the context of Abraham's service, it appears that walking in those ways is not synonymous with the performance of the 613 commandments - for they had not been given in Abraham's time. Rather, it must refer to ethics, qualities like righteousness and justice, which are mentioned in that verse.One who follows this path brings benefit and blessing to himself, as [the above verse continues]: "so that God will bring about for Abraham all that He promised." - The Rambam concludes his description of the obligation to develop our characters with the assurance that, ultimately, this course of behavior will bring us benefit and blessing. - and they are good and straight paths - as [Deuteronomy 28:9] states: "And you shall walk in His ways."
1As emphasized in the introduction to this text, the Rambam has structured the Mishneh Torah with the intent of "revealing all the laws to the great and to the small with regard to each and every mitzvah." He does not mention philosophical and ethical concepts unless they are halachot - i.e., practical directives for our behavior.In this context, we can understand the structure of this chapter. The Rambam set out to describe the mitzvah of following God's ways. As stated in this halachah, he perceives this to mean developing our personalities by emulating the qualities which the Creator reveals. As he states in the following halachah, those qualities are identical with the middle path of human behavior. Therefore, in the initial halachot of this chapter, the Rambam sets out to describe the nature of human personality and the ideal temperaments - the middle path - that man should seek to achieve. Having laid down this foundation, he is able to define that mitzvah in this halachah and begin offering directives for its fulfillment in Halachah 7. [Our Sages] taught [the following] explanation of this mitzvah:2The Rambam appears to be referring to the Sifre, Ekev 11:22, which he quotes in Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.). That explanation is also paralleled in the Mechiltah (Exodus 14:2 and Shabbat 133b.It must be noted that other Talmudic and Midrashic sources interpret the commandment to imitate God in a different light. Note Sotah 14a:[Deuteronomy 13:5 states]: "You shall walk after God, your Lord." Is it possible for man to walk after the Divine Presence? Has it not been stated: "Behold, God, your Lord, is a consuming fire" (Deuteronomy 4:24 ?Rather, [it means] one should follow the qualities of God.Just as He dresses the naked..., you, too, should dress the naked;God visited the sick...; you, too, should visit the sick;God comforted the bereaved...;you, too, should comfort the bereaved;God buried the dead...; you, too, should bury the dead.In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam mentions emulating both God's deeds and His qualities. Similarly, Sefer HaChinuch, in its description of this mitzvah, and the Kiryat Sefer in his commentary - both here in Hilchot De'ot and also in Hilchot Eivel - mention both deeds and qualities.There is not necessarily a contradiction between these two emphases. As mentioned above, our actions reflect our personalities. Therefore, it follows that developing our characters in the manner outlined by the Rambam in this halachah will ultimately produce the good deeds mentioned by our Sages in the passage from Sotah.Nevertheless, deed is often not a reflection of character. A person with many severe character faults may still do good deeds. Hence, for the "resemblance of God" to be complete, it is not sufficient merely to perform positive deeds. Rather, a person must undergo internal change by developing his character. Therefore, the Rambam focuses more on this aspect of the commandment.Just as He is called "Gracious," you shall be gracious;3Neither the Sifre nor the other sources quoted above mention the trait of holiness. Rather, the third trait mentioned is "piety." Perhaps, since the Rambam gave a specific definition for piety in the previous halachah within his conception of personality development, he does not mention it in the present context to prevent any possible confusion.Just as He is called "Merciful," you shall be merciful;Just as He is called "Holy," you shall be holy;In a similar manner, the prophets4The Rambam's choice of words is somewhat surprising since many of these expressions are also found in the Torah as well as in the prophetic works. However, in the Torah these titles are mentioned by Moses or the other prophets. Perhaps this is the Rambam's intent. called God by other titles: "Slow to anger," "Abundant in kindness," "Righteous," "Just," "Perfect," "Almighty," "Powerful," and the like.5In Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 1:11-12 and in detail in Moreh Nevuchim (Guide to the Perplexed), Vol. I, Chapters 53 and 54, the Rambam explains that these names are not descriptions of God, who cannot be defined by any specific quality. To do so would limit Him and detract from His infinite and transcendent state of being.Rather, the use of these titles must be understood as follows: God brings about activities, which, had they been carried out by man, would have been motivated by these emotional states. For example, instead of utterly destroying the Jews after the sin of the Golden Calf, God allowed our people to continue. Were such a deed to have been performed by a human ruler, we would describe him as "slow to anger." Though that term cannot serve as a description for God - for He cannot be described - the Torah and the prophets referred to Him by such terms with the following intent. [They did so] to inform us that these are good and just paths.6i.e., God acted in ways which we identify with these qualities - and the Torah and the prophets mention these actions - because these are attributes which man should strive to achieve. A person is obligated to accustom himself to these paths and [to try to] resemble Him7Likkutei Sichot (ibid.) states that with the latter phrase, the Rambam is adding a new thought. As explained above, God cannot be described by any particular quality. If He manifests a quality, it is for a specific intent.In Moreh Nevuchim (ibid., Chapter 54), the Rambam mentions that the leader of a country should act in a similar manner.Sometimes he will be merciful and generous to some people - not because of his feelings and natural compassion, but because they are deserving of such treatment.Sometimes he will bear a grudge, seek revenge, and rage against certain people - not out of feelings of anger... - but in order to produce positive results....The ultimate ideal man can achieve is to imitate God according to his potential... i.e., to have our deeds resemble His deeds.For this reason, human behavior should not be motivated by the spontaneous expression of emotion. Rather, man's emotions should arise as the result of a deliberate process of thought.This reflects themes brought out in the previous halachot of this chapter: that a person must constantly evaluate and review his emotions (Halachah 4); that it is a wise man who is able to appreciate the middle path (Halachah 5).This is what is meant by the imitation of God: that a person not be controlled by the unchecked expression of his emotions. Rather, he should control his feelings and, motivated by his desire to resemble God, search to find the correct and proper quality, the middle path, appropriate to the situation at hand. to the extent of his ability.8for man is ultimately finite in nature, and no true resemblance to God is possible.
How can one train himself to follow these temperaments to the extent that they become a permanent fixture of his [personality]?He1Having established personality development as a mitzvah in the previous halachah, the Rambam begins his explanation of how this mitzvah is fulfilled. should perform2repeat - and perform a third time - Thus, a person's deeds will shape his character traits.In this process of personal change, the stress is on the repetition of an act, and not on its quantity or intensity. In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Avot 3:15, the Rambam writes that giving a thousand coins to one person at one time is not as effective in stimulating feelings of generosity as giving a single coin one thousand times.As mentioned in Halachah 4, though the Rambam's explanations in this chapter parallel those of the fourth chapter of Shemonah Perakim, the texts differ in stressing actions (as the opening lines of that chapter imply), or on character development, which is the theme of our text.For this reason, the two texts also perceive the process of causation differently. In Shemoneh Perakim, the Rambam states: "These actions [good actions] are produced as a result of these [the good] traits," while here he sees the traits being produced by the actions.Nevertheless, the two texts do not actually contradict each other. Both statements are true. Our deeds reflect our personalities, and they also help shape those personalities. Generally, this means that a person's behavior will reinforce and strengthen the character traits that motivated those very deeds. However, this chapter - and more particularly, this halachah - deals with a person who has made a commitment to change and refine his character. Therefore - based on his intellect and the directives of the Torah, rather than his spontaneous feelings - he chooses to perform deeds that will bring about this process of inner change. - repeat - and perform a third time - the acts which conform to3reflect and are motivated by... the standards of the middle road temperaments.4described in Halachot 4 and 5. He should do this constantly, until these acts are easy for him and do not present any difficulty.5A trait possessed by a person produces activities naturally and spontaneously. However, if one has not acquired a trait as yet, certain actions will be foreign to his nature, and one must trouble himself to perform them.For example, a liberal man gives charity naturally; the miser must force himself to give. The action for each is the same, but not the inner feelings. Then, these temperaments will become a fixed part of his personality.6If the miser continues to give frequently, he will find that he no longer feels like a miser, but has become liberal in heart as well as in hand.Since the Creator7The Rambam uses the term yotzer - literally "the One who forms" - (which appears only one other time in the Mishneh Torah: Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 1:7).The Rambam describes God as the Creator with reference to the Divine qualities he describes in these halachot. Before the existence of the world and man, there would be no purpose for God to reveal these qualities, for until man's creation, no one could learn from or emulate them.[The word yotzer may also be used because of its connection to the word yeitzer, meaning drive or inclination. (See Rashi, Genesis 2:7.)] is called by these terms and they make up the middle path which we are obligated to follow, this path is called "the path of God."8As stated in the commentary on the previous halachah, "the path of God" involves controlling our emotions by using our intellect, so that our behavior is, to the extent that is possible for man, an objective response to a situation. In this manner, our behavior bears a resemblance to God's transcendence of worldly matters. This is [the heritage] which our Patriarch Abraham taught his descendants,9See the Midrash Tanchumah, Shofetim 15:And what are the ways of God? Righteousness and justice, as it is stated: "And they will keep the path of God to do righteousness and justice" (Genesis 18:19). as [Genesis 18:19] states: "for I have known Him so that he will command his descendants...to keep the path of God."One10Since the path of God is mentioned in the context of Abraham's service, it appears that walking in those ways is not synonymous with the performance of the 613 commandments - for they had not been given in Abraham's time. Rather, it must refer to ethics, qualities like righteousness and justice, which are mentioned in that verse. who follows this path brings benefit and blessing to himself, as [the above verse continues]: "so that God will bring about for Abraham all that He promised."11The Rambam concludes his description of the obligation to develop our characters with the assurance that, ultimately, this course of behavior will bring us benefit and blessing.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
To those who are physically sick, the bitter tastes sweet and the sweet bitter. Some of the sick even desire and crave that which is not fit to eat, such as earth and charcoal, and hate healthful foods, such as bread and meat - all depending on how serious the sickness is.Similarly, those who are morally ill desire and love bad traits, hate the good path, and are lazy to follow it. Depending on how sick they are, they find it exceedingly burdensome.Isaiah 5:20 speaks of such people in a like manner: "Woe to those who call the bad good, and the good bad, who take darkness to be light and light to be darkness, who take bitter to be sweet and sweet to be bitter." Concerning them, Proverbs 2:13 states: "Those who leave the upright paths to walk in the ways of darkness."What is the remedy for the morally ill? They should go to the wise, for they are the healers of souls. They will heal them by teaching them how to acquire proper traits, until they return them to the good path.Concerning those who recognize their bad traits and do not go to the wise to heal them, Solomon Proverbs 1:7 said: "Fools scorned wisdom and correction."
How are they to be healed? We tell the wrathful man to train himself to feel no reaction even if he is beaten or cursed. He should follow this course of behavior for a long time, until the anger is uprooted from his heart.The man who is full of pride should cause himself to experience much disgrace. He should sit in the lowliest of places, dress in tattered rags which shame the wearer, and the like, until the arrogance is uprooted from his heart and he returns to the middle path, which is the proper path. When he returns to this middle path, he should walk in it the rest of his life.One should take a similar course with each of the other traits. A person who swayed in the direction of one of the extremes should move in the direction of the opposite extreme, and accustom himself to that for a long time, until he has returned to the proper path, which is the midpoint for each and every temperament.
There are temperaments with regard to which a man is forbidden to follow the middle path. He should move away from one extreme and adopt the other.Among these is arrogance. If a man is only humble, he is not following a good path. Rather, he must hold himself lowly and his spirit very unassuming. That is why Numbers 12:3 describes our teacher Moses as "very humble" and not simply "humble". Therefore, our Sages directed: "Hold oneself very, very lowly." Also, they declared: "Whoever is arrogant is as if he denied God's presence, as implied by Deuteronomy 8:14: 'And your heart will be haughty and you will forget God, your Lord.' Furthermore, they said: "Whoever is arrogant should be placed under a ban of ostracism. This applies even if he is only somewhat arrogant."Anger is also an exceptionally bad quality. It is fitting and proper that one move away from it and adopt the opposite extreme. He should school himself not to become angry even when it is fitting to be angry. If he should wish to arouse fear in his children and household - or within the community, if he is a communal leader - and wishes to be angry at them to motivate them to return to the proper path, he should present an angry front to them to punish them, but he should be inwardly calm. He should be like one who acts out the part of an angry man in his wrath, but is not himself angry.The early Sages said: Anyone who becomes angry is like one who worships idols. They also said: Whenever one becomes angry, if he is a wise man, his wisdom leaves him; if he is a prophet, his prophecy leaves him. The life of the irate is not true life.Therefore, they have directed that one distance himself from anger and accustom himself not to feel any reaction, even to things which provoke anger. This is the good path.This is the way of the righteous: They accept humiliation, but do not humiliate others; they listen when they are shamed, but they do not answer; they do this with love and are joyous in their sufferings. Of them, Judges 5:31 states: "And those who love Him are like the sun when it comes out in its strength."
One should always cultivate silence and refrain from speaking, except with regard to matters of knowledge or things that are necessary for his physical welfare. It was said that Rav, the disciple of our saintly teacher, Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi, never uttered an idle word in all his days - which is what the conversation of most people consists of.One should not speak at length even about matters involving one's physical needs. On this point, our Sages commanded us and said: "Whoever speaks at length brings on sin." They also said: "I have found nothing better for one's person than silence."Similarly, when speaking about matters of Torah or knowledge, one's words should be brief, but rich in content. This is what the Sages commanded with their statement: "One should always teach his students with brevity." In contrast, if one's words are many and the content scant, that is foolishness, of which Ecclesiastes 5:2 states: "The dream comes with a multitude of subjects, and the voice of the fool with a multitude of words."
Silence is a safeguard for wisdom.Therefore, one should not hasten to answer, nor speak at length. He should teach his students in calm and tranquility without shouting or wordiness. This is what Solomon stated: "The words of the wise are heard in tranquility" (Ecclesiastes 9:17).
A person is forbidden to act in a smooth-tongued and luring manner. He should not speak one thing outwardly and think otherwise in his heart. Rather, his inner self should be like the self which he shows to the world. What he feels in his heart should be the same as the words on his lips.It is forbidden to deceive people, even a non-Jew. For example, one should not sell a gentile the meat of an animal which has not been ritually slaughtered as if it were ritually slaughtered meat, nor a shoe made from the hide of an animal which has died of natural causes as if it were made of the hide of a slaughtered animal. One should not press his colleague to share a meal with him when he knows that his colleague will not accept the invitation, nor should he press presents upon him when he knows that his colleague will not accept them. He should not open casks supposedly for his colleague which he must open for sale, in order to deceive him into thinking that they have been opened in his honor. The same applies with all matters of this sort.It is forbidden to utter a single word of deception or fraud. Rather, one should have only truthful speech, a proper spirit and a heart pure from all deceit and trickery.
One should neither be constantly laughing and a jester, nor sad and depressed, but happy. Our Sages declared: "Jesting and lightheadedness accustom one to lewdness." They also directed that a man should not laugh without control, nor be sad and mournful, but receive everyone in a friendly manner.Similarly, he should not be greedy, rushing for wealth and possessions, nor lazy and an idler from work. Rather, he should be of a goodly eye and limit his business endeavors so that he may occupy himself with Torah study. He should be happy with the little which is his lot.He should not be quarrelsome, of envious temperament, full of desires, nor pursue honor. Our Sages have said: "Envy, desire and honor remove a man from life in this world."The general principle is that one should follow the midpoint quality of each temperament until all his traits are aligned at the midpoint. This is what is implied by Solomon's statement: "Make even the turning of your foot and make all your ways firm" (Proverbs 4:26).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
A person might say, "Since envy, desire, [the pursuit] of honor, and the like, are a wrong path and drive a person from the world,1With these statements, the Rambam obviously refers to the mishnah from Avot which he quoted at the conclusion of the previous chapter. Having decried the traits mentioned there, he explains that his condemnation is directed against excessive materialism, but not against all involvement in worldly affairs. I shall separate from them to a very great degree and move away from them to the opposite extreme."2I.e., asceticism For example, he will not eat meat, nor drink wine, nor live in a pleasant home, nor wear fine clothing, but, rather, [wear] sackcloth and coarse wool and the like3In Shemoneh Perakim, Chapter 4, the Rambam makes a similar - but more lengthy - condemnation of asceticism. There he also mentions other ascetic practices - refraining from sleep and seeking solitude in the mountains and deserts. - just as the pagan priests do.4This translation follows the published texts of the Mishneh Torah which state: kohanei haovdei kochavim. However, many manuscripts and early printed editions state kohanei Edom - "Roman priests," which would seem to indicate that the Rambam had hermitlike Catholic monastic orders in mind.This, too, is a bad path and it is forbidden to walk upon it.5In Shemoneh Perakim (ibid.), the Rambam explains that, at certain times, many of the pious adopted ascetic practices as a safeguard against excessive involvement in materialism. However, they never regarded such practices as a goal in their own right. Others observed their behavior and mistook asceticism for an end rather than a means to achieve the middle path.From the Rambam's statements in Shemoneh Perakim, it would appear that there are two drawbacks to asceticism:a) It might lead a person to poor health, illness, and a lack of strength which would prevent him from serving God as the Rambam states in Halachah 3. b) A person might err and feel that he has fulfilled his obligation to serve God through these ascetic practices. As a result, he may never feel the need to dedicate himself to the service of God as He prescribed in the Torah.There is a third disadvantage that is stressed heavily by the teachings of Kabbalah and Chassidut and may be hinted at by the Rambam's statements in the following halachot.The Zohar (Vol. II, p. 42b) states that God created the world "in order to let Himself be known." Similarly, Tanya (Chapter 33) explains that God created the world because He desired to have a dwelling place in the lower worlds. Thus, a person who tends to otherworldliness and asceticism, defeats God's purpose in creation. Whoever follows this path is called a sinner [as implied by Numbers 6:11's] statement concerning a nazarite: "and he [the priest] shall make an atonement for him, for his having sinned regarding [his] soul."6A nazarite is forbidden to become impure through any contact with a dead body for the extent of his nazarite vow. If he contracts such impurity, he is required to bring a special sin offering. See Numbers, Chapter 6, Hilchot Nezirut, Chapters 6-8. Our sages declared:7Ta'anit 11a. [Interestingly, the author of this statement, Rabbi Eliezer HaKfar, is also the author of the statement (Avot, ibid.) that "envy, desire, and the pursuit of honor, drive a person from the world."] If the nazarite who abstained only from wine requires atonement, how much more so does one who abstains from everything.8If the nazarite who abstained only from wine requires atonement, how much more so does one who abstains from everything. Therefore, our Sages directed man to abstain only from those things which the Torah denies him and not to forbid himself permitted things by vows and oaths9One should not conclude that the Rambam completely disapproves of vows and oaths. At the conclusion of Hilchot Nedarim (13:23), the Rambam states: "Whoever takes a vow in order to stabilize his temperaments and correct his deeds, is zealous and praiseworthy."In Hilchot Nedarim, he gives examples of people who were excessively inclined to a particular quality who take vows to correct their faults (in a manner reminiscent of his advice in the beginning of Chapter 2 of these halachot). Rather, what the Rambam criticizes in our halachah is abstention for the sake of abstention. [of abstention].10Note the Jerusalem Talmud, Kiddushin 4:12:Rav Chizkiyah the priest said in the name of Rav: "A person will ultimately be called to judgment for everything which his eye saw and which he did not taste."Rav Lazar was concerned because of this teaching. He saved his pennies and would [purchase] and eat from every fruit once a year. Thus, our Sages stated:11The Jerusalem Talmud, Nedarim 9:1 Are not those things which the Torah has prohibited sufficient for you that you must forbid additional things to yourself?This12In Shemoneh Perakim (ibid.), the Rambam prefaces this statement with the following comment: "Our Sages have made statements about this subject which are more marvelous than any others that I have ever seen."This general statement also refers to those who fast constantly. - In Shemoneh Perakim, the Rambam also criticizes excessive fasting. He quotes the prophet, Zechariah, who questions the motives of the Jews' fasts (7:5): "Was it for Me that you fasted?" and exhorts them to "Practice true justice, and show kindness and mercy every man to his brother" as the proper service of God. To underscore this point, he concludes with the prophecy (ibid. 8:19) that even the public fasts will ultimately be transformed into festivals and days of rejoicing. general statement also refers to those who fast constantly. They are not following a good path, [for] our Sages13Ta'anit 11a have forbidden a man to mortify himself by fasting.14The phrase "to mortify himself" is significant here. The Rambam (Hilchot Ta'anit 1:4; 1:9) himself mentions that the Sages commanded both the community and the individual to fast in times of distress.The Rambam's statements have been questioned by the Rashba (Responsa 431 and 688) and by the Lechem Mishneh based on Nedarim 10a. However, the commentaries note that Shmuel, the author of the statement in Ta'anit, also states (Bava Kama 91a) that one may fast. Here, the Rambam's statements are directed against self- mortification and asceticism and not against fasting per se.Nevertheless, it must be noted that in Hilchot Teshuvah, when the Rambam describes "the paths of Teshuvah" (3:4), he makes no mention of fasting. Of all the above, and their like, Solomon directed and said: "Do not be overly righteous and do not be overly clever; why make yourself desolate?" (Ecclesiastes 7:16)15The midrashic works have not interpreted this verse in the manner suggested here. However, we find other Spanish Jewish Sages who followed this interpretation. See Duties of the Heart 3:25, Ibn Ezra in his commentary to Ecclesiastes.Note that this verse uses the two terms - the righteous (tzadik and the wise (chacham) - which the Rambam has used to designate the man with a ideal traits.The placement of this halachah raises questions. One might have expected it to appear in the previous chapter which deals with other excesses and deviations from the middle path. However, it is possible to explain that, in its present position, it serves as a preface to the following halachot which explain how our service of God and connection to Him can be established within the context of our material reality. Thus, when viewed as a totality, this chapter emphasizes how Judaism desires that religious fulfillment be found within the context of our day to day life, rather than in otherworldly "spiritual" activities..
A person should direct his heart and the totality of his behavior to one goal,1In Shemoneh Perakim, Chapter 5, the Rambam addresses himself to many of the concepts mentioned in this and the following halachah. He begins that chapter with the declaration:A person must control all the powers of his soul with [his] intellect... and concentrate on a single goal at all times: To comprehend God, blessed be He, to the extent that man can know Him.All of his activities: what he does, the way he rests, and what he says should lead to this goal. becoming aware of God, blessed be He.2Literally, the term means "The Name," but obviously, it refers to the Master of The Name. The [way] he rests, rises, and speaks should all be directed to this end.3In the previous Halachah, the Rambam condemned asceticism and otherworldliness. In this Halachah, he stresses the desired intent of our worldly involvement, to know God.In Chapter 1, Halachah 6, the Rambam introduced a religious component into the development of an ethical personalty, pointing out that we must "imitate" God's qualities. In this halachah, he adds a further point. All of man's actions are to be taken in an atmosphere of God-awareness.The concept of knowing God recalls the opening Halachah of the Mishneh Torah:The fundamental [principle] upon which all fundamental [principles are based] and the pillar of the wisdoms is to know that there is a Primary Being.In both halachot, the Rambam emphasizes how the knowledge of God is not an abstract, intellectual past-time, but rather an all- encompassing commitment, embracing every aspect of our experience. Torah living does not confine God to the synagogue or the house of study, but provides us with a means to relate to Him within every dimension of our lives (Al HaTeshuvah).For example: when involved in business dealings or while working for a wage, he should not think solely of gathering money. - i.e., he should not view the acquisition of money as an end in its own right.For example: when involved in business dealings or while working for a wage, he should not think solely of gathering money. Rather, he should do these things,4as a means... so that he will be able to obtain that which the body needs5food, drink, a home and a wife. - However, as the Rambam continues in the following Halachah, the maintenance of physical well-being is also not an end in its own right. Rather, it is also only a means for the service of God.Similarly, when he eats, drinks and engages in intimate relations, he should not intend to do these things solely for pleasure - In Shemoneh Perakim (ibid.), the Rambam also uses the expression "solely for pleasure," indicating that the Rambam does not advocate a life without physical pleasure. (Note also the passage from the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Sanhedrin 7:4, quoted below.)There is nothing wrong with enjoying food, for example, as long as one does so within the framework of maintaining health. Indeed, in Shemoneh Perakim, the Rambam emphasizes how one may use pleasure to encourage himself to perform the acts necessary to maintain his health. - food, drink, a home and a wife.Similarly, when he eats, drinks and engages in intimate relations, he should not intend to do these things solely for pleasure to the point where he will eat and drink only that which is sweet to the palate and engage in intercourse for pleasure. Rather, he should take care to eat and drink only in order to be healthy in body and limb.6The Rambam has just laid down the principle that all of man's actions are to be carried out in a framework of awareness of God. Yet, to exemplify this principle, he speaks not of awareness of God, but of avoiding indulgence and maintaining one's health. The Rambam introduces the maintenance of health as an immediate - and intermediary - goal which will provide us with a program of concrete action.Therefore, he should not eat all that the palate desires like a dog or a donkey.7In Shemoneh Perakim (ibid.), the Rambam states: "In such an activity, a person is just like an animal. It is not an action man undertakes because he is a man, but rather, one that he undertakes because he is an animal." Rather, he should eat what is beneficial for the body, be it bitter or sweet. Conversely, he should not eat what is harmful to the body, even though it is sweet to the palate.8The Rambam gives a full list of proper eating habits in the following chapter. Here, he cites only selected examples: For example: a person with a warm constitution should not eat meat or honey, nor drink wine,9as Solomon has stated in a parable: The eating of much honey is not good (Proverbs 25:27). One should drink endive juice, even though it is bitter, - this is given as a remedy for a warm liver constitution (Maimonides' Medical Aphorisms). as Solomon has stated in a parable: The eating of much honey is not good (Proverbs 25:27). One should drink endive juice, even though it is bitter, for then, he will be eating and drinking for medical reasons only, in order to become healthy and be whole10for a man cannot exist without eating and drinking. - for a man cannot exist without eating and drinking.Similarly, he should not have intercourse except to keep his body healthy11See Chapter 4, Halachah 19, for a discussion of this matter. and to preserve the [human] race.12The Ra'avad mentions a third reason for intercourse - granting one's wife her conjugal rights The Rambam does not mention that issue here because, in these chapters he focuses on those behaviors in which a person engages voluntarily as an expression of his personal desires. He discusses a man's conjugal obligations later in the Mishneh Torah, in Hilchot Ishut, Chapter 14 (Kessef Mishneh). Therefore, he should not engage in intercourse whenever he feels desire,13See also Chapter 5, Halachah 4, which discusses the frequency of intimate relations. but when he knows that he requires a seminal emission for medical reasons or in order to preserve the [human] race.14In his commentary to the mishnah, Sanhedrin 7:4, the Rambam writes:The intent of intimate relations is the preservation of the species and not only pleasure. The aspect of pleasure was only introduced in order to arouse the creations toward that ultimate goal...The proof of this is that desire and pleasure cease after ejaculation for this was the entire goal for which our instincts were aroused. If the goal were pleasure, satisfaction would continue as long as man desired.
A person who accustoms himself to live by [the rules of] medicine does not follow a proper path if his sole intention is that his entire body and limbs be healthy1The Rambam puts the maintenance of health mentioned in the previous halachah into proper perspective. It is not to be pursued as a goal in its own right. Rather, it should be appreciated as merely a means to enable one to reach an awareness of God. The Rambam develops this idea at length in Shemoneh Perakim Chapter 5. There, he states:A person should have the intention while eating, drinking, having intercourse, sleeping, awakening, moving, and resting, [that he does so] for the purpose of his physical health alone.His intention in [seeking] physical health should be to prepare for the soul healthy and sound vessels to acquire wisdom and intellectual and emotional advantages until he reaches the goal of [knowing God]. and that he have children who will do his work and toil for him.2i.e., though procreation is a valid reason for intimate relations, one's intent in procreation should not be selfish. Rather, he should have the intent that his body be whole and strong, in order for his inner soul to be upright so that [it will be able] to know God.3The Rambam also elaborates on the interrelation between the attainment of physical health and spiritual achievement in the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 27.Heath is necessary as part of one's process of striving to know God... For it is impossible to understand and become knowledgeable in the wisdoms when one is starving or sick, or when one of his limbs pains him.4The Maggid of Mezeritch would say: "A small hole in the body creates a large hole in the soul." [Similarly,] one should intend to have a son [with the hope that] perhaps he will be a wise and great man in Israel.5This is the desired goal in procreation - to perpetuate the nation, not only physically, but also spiritually.Thus, whoever walks in such a path all his days will be serving God constantly; even in the midst of his business dealings, even during intercourse for his intent in all matters is to fulfill his needs so that his body be whole to serve God. - In Shemoneh Perakim (ibid.), the Rambam associates such behavior with Deuteronomy 6:5: "Love God, your Lord, with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your might." The course of action described enables us to dedicate every aspect of our being toward the love of God as prescribed by this verse.Even when he sleeps, if he retires with the intention that his mind and body rest, lest he take ill and be unable to serve God because he is sick, then his sleep is service to the Omnipresent, blessed be He. - Perhaps, the Rambam uses this name for God to convey the concept that just as God's presence pervades all existence, our service of Him must encompass all aspects of our lives.On this matter, our Sages - Avot 2:15Thus, whoever walks in such a path all his days will be serving God constantly; even in the midst of his business dealings, even during intercourse for his intent in all matters is to fulfill his needs so that his body be whole to serve God.Even when he sleeps, if he retires with the intention that his mind and body rest, lest he take ill and be unable to serve God because he is sick, then his sleep is service to the Omnipresent, blessed be He.On this matter, our Sages have directed and said: "And all your deeds should be for the sake of Heaven."6In Shemoneh Perakim (ibid.), the Rambam elaborates upon this statement as follows:Our Sages included this entire concept in the most succinct expression possible... When one meditates on this concise statement, one wonders how they could describe in its entirety an idea so awesome that many books were written about it without encompassing it totally. Without a doubt, [the statement] was made with Divine inspiration.The commentaries note that Beitzah 16a stated concerning Hillel: "All of his deeds were for the sake of Heaven," and associates that with the following narrative in VaYikra Rabbah 34:3.Hillel bid his students farewell. They asked him where he was going He told them that he was going to perform a mitzvah. They discovered that he was going to the bathhouse and asked him to explain his previous statements. He told them: Since the human body is created in the image of God, it is a mitzvah to wash oneself. This is what Solomon declared in his wisdom: "Know Him in all your ways7Avot D'Rabbi Natan 17:7 also associates the above statement with this Biblical quote. Berachot 63b describes this verse as: "A small passage upon which all the fundamentals of Torah depend." Note also the Rambam's comments in Shemoneh Perakim, ibid.Likkutei Sichot, Vol. III, notes that the rules of Torah scholarship would have called for the quotation of the Biblical verse before the quote from our Sages. However, the Rambam chooses this sequence because it reflects a progression in the service of God."All of your deeds should be for the Sake of Heaven" implies that the deeds are not themselves holy, merely that they are directed toward a Godly intent. "Know Him in all your ways" implies that a bond with God can be established within the context of our physical activity itself. and He will straighten your paths" (Proverbs 3:6).8In Iggerot HaKodesh, the Ramban interprets the state described in this clause as a natural product of the elevated rung of service mentioned in the previous clause. When a person develops an all encompassing bond with God, Divine light will illuminate all his paths.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
Since maintaining a healthy and sound body is among the ways of God - for one cannot understand or have any knowledge of the Creator, if he is ill - therefore, he must avoid that which harms the body and accustom himself to that which is healthful and helps the body become stronger.They are as follows: a person should never eat unless he is hungry, nor drink unless thirsty. He should never put off relieving himself, even for an instant. Rather, whenever he [feels the] need to urinate or move his bowels, he should do so immediately.
One should not eat until his stomach is full. Rather, [he should stop when] he has eaten to close to three quarter's of full satisfaction.One should drink only a small amount of water during the meal, and mix that with wine. When the food begins to be digested in his intestines, he may drink what is necessary. However, he should not drink much water, even when the food has been digested.One should not eat until he has checked himself thoroughly that he does not need to relieve himself. He should not eat until he has taken a stroll which is sufficient to raise his body temperature.Alternatively, he should work or exert himself in some other way. The rule is that he should engage his body and exert himself in a sweat-producing task each morning. Afterwards, he should rest slightly until he regains composure and [then, he should] eat. If he were to bathe in hot water after exerting himself, it would be beneficial. Afterwards, he should wait a short while and eat.
One should always eat while seated or reclining on his left side. He should not walk about, ride, exert himself, subject his body to startling influence, nor take a stroll until the food has been digested in his intestines. Anyone who takes a stroll or exerts himself after eating brings serious and harmful illnesses upon himself.
Together, day and night make up [a period of] twenty four hours. It is sufficient for a man to sleep a third of this period; i.e., eight hours. These should be towards the end of the night, so that there be eight hours from the beginning of his sleep until sunrise. Thus, he should rise from his bed before sunrise.
One should not sleep face down or on his back, but on his side - on his left side at the beginning of the night and on the right side at the end of the night. He should not retire shortly after eating, but should wait some three or four hours.One should not sleep during the day.
Laxative foods such as grapes, figs, mulberries, pears, melons, certain types of cucumbers and certain types of zucchini should be eaten first, before the meal. One should not eat them together with his main meal. Rather, he should wait until they have descended from the upper stomach and [then] eat his meal.Foods which are constipating, such as pomegranates, quinces, apples, and crustumenian pears should be eaten immediately after the meal and not in quantity.
A person who desires to eat poultry and meat in one sitting, should eat the poultry first. Similarly, if he desires to eat both eggs and poultry, he should eat the eggs first. If [he desires to eat] both meat of large cattle and that of small cattle, he should eat the meat of small cattle first; [i.e.,] he should always eat the lighter fare first and the heavier fare afterwards.
In the summer, one should eat unseasoned foods without many spices and use vinegar. In the rainy season, one should eat seasoned foods, use many spices, and eat some mustard and chiltit.One should follow these principles in regard to cold climates and hot climates, [choosing the food] appropriate to each and every one of them.
There are foods which are extremely harmful and it is proper that one should never eat them, for example: large fish that are aged and salted, cheese which is aged and salted, truffles and mushrooms, meat which is aged and salted, wine from the press, cooked food which has been left over until it produces an odor, and any food with a bad smell or a very bitter taste. These are like poison to the body.There are [other] foods which are harmful, but their harmful effects do not compare to those first [mentioned]. Therefore, a person ought to eat them only sparingly and after intervals of many days. He should not eat them regularly as his main fare or constantly as a sidedish with his food.[They are] large fish, cheese and milk which has been left over for more than twenty-four hours after the milking, the meat of large oxen or he-goats, horse-beans, lentils, chickpeas, barley bread, matzot, cabbage, leeks, onions, garlic, mustard and radishes. All of these are harmful foods. It is fitting that he should eat them very sparingly and only in the rainy season, abstaining entirely in the summer. [Of these], horse-beans and lentils alone, should not be eaten either in the summer or winter. Squash may be eaten in the summer season.
There are foods which are harmful, but less so than these. They are water fowl, young pigeons, dates, bread roasted in oil or kneaded in oil, flour which has been sifted so well that no bran is left, fish brine and pickled fish oil. They ought not to be eaten in quantity.A man who is wise, overcomes his desires, is not drawn by his appetites and eats nothing of the aforementioned unless he needs them for a medical reason, is [indeed] heroic.
One should always avoid fruits. He should not eat of them in quantity even [when] dried and, it goes without saying [when they are] fresh. When they are not sufficiently ripe, they are like swords to the body. Carobs, too, are always harmful.All pickled fruits are harmful and should be eaten only sparingly in summer weather and in hot climates. Figs, grapes and almonds are always beneficial, both fresh and dried. One may eat of them as much as he requires. However, he should not eat them constantly even though they are the most beneficial of fruits.
Honey and wine are harmful to the young and wholesome for the old. Certainly, this applies in the rainy season. In summer, one should eat two-thirds of what he eats in the winter.
A person should always try to have loose movements throughout his life, tending slightly towards diarrhea. This is a cardinal principle in medicine: Whenever one suffers from constipation or has difficulty moving his bowels, serious diseases will beset him.How can he induce loose movements if he has mild constipation? If he is a young man, each morning, he should eat well-cooked halimi which have been seasoned in olive-oil, pickled fish oil, and salt without bread daily; or drink the boiled water of [cooked] spinach or cabbage, [seasoned] with olive oil, pickled fish oil and salt.If he is an old man, he should drink honey diluted with hot water, in the morning, wait approximately four hours and then eat his meal.He should do this for one day, or three, or four, if necessary, until he has loose bowels.
They have given another principle with regard to physical well-being: As long as one exercises, exerts himself greatly, does not eat to the point of satiation and has loose bowels, he will not suffer sickness and he will grow in strength. [This applies] even if he eats harmful foods.
[Conversely,] whoever is idle and does not exercise, or does not move his bowels when he has the need, or is constipated, even if he eats the proper foods and takes care to follow the rules of medicine, will be full of pain for all his days and his strength will fade away.Overeating is like poison to anyone's body. It is the main source of all illness. Most illnesses which afflict a man are caused by harmful foods or by his filling his belly and overeating, even of healthful foods.This was implied by Solomon in his wisdom: "Whoever guards his mouth and his tongue, guards his soul from distress" (Proverbs 21:23); i.e., "guards his mouth" from eating harmful food or eating his fill and "his tongue" from speaking [about things] other than his needs.
The [proper] manner of bathing is that a person should go to the baths once every seven days. He should not enter [the bath soon after mealtime; nor when he is hungry, but when his food has begun to be digested.He should bathe the entire body in hot - but not scalding water - and his head, only, in scalding water. Then, he should bathe his body in tepid water, followed by bathings in successively cooler water, until he has bathed in cold water. [However,] he should not use tepid or cold water for his head, nor should he bathe in cold water in the winter.He should not bathe until after he is in a sweat and his whole body has been massaged. He should not linger in the bath. Rather, as soon as he is in a sweat and been massaged, he should rinse off and leave.He should examine himself to see if he needs to move his bowels before entering the bath and after leaving it. Similarly, he should always examine himself before and after eating, before and after sexual intercourse, before and after exertion and exercise, before and after sleeping, all in all, on ten [different occasions].
When one leaves the bath, he should dress and cover his head in the outer room [of the bathhouse], so that he not catch a chill. He should take this precaution even in the summer.After leaving [the baths], he should wait until he regains his composure, and the warmth [from bathing] has receded, and then eat.A nap before eating, after the bath, is very beneficial. One should not drink cold water on leaving the baths and it goes without saying, that he should not drink while bathing. If he should be thirsty upon leaving the bath and cannot refrain, he should mix the water with wine or honey, and drink.It is beneficial for one to rub himself with oil at the baths, during the winter, after he has rinsed off.
One should not accustom himself to constant bloodletting. He should not be bled unless there is an extreme necessity. He should not be bled in the summer or winter, but slightly in Nisan and slightly in Tishrei.After the age of fifty, he should not be bled at all. He should not be bled and go to the baths on the same day, or leave on a journey after being bled; nor should he be bled on the day on which he returns from a trip.He should eat less than usual on the day of a bloodletting. He should rest on that day, not exert himself, nor exercise, nor stroll.
Semen is the strength of the body, its life [force], and the light of the eyes; the greater the emission [of sperm], [the greater] the damage to the body, to its strength and the greater the loss to one's life [span]. This was implied by Solomon in his wisdom: "Do not give your strength to women" (Proverbs 31:3).Whoever is steeped in sexual relations, old age springs upon him [before its time], his strength is depleted, his eyes become dim, a foul odor emanates from his mouth and his armpits, the hair of his head, his eyebrows, and eyelashes fall out, the hair of his beard, armpits, and legs grows in abundance, his teeth fall out and he suffers many pains beyond these. The wise of the doctors have said: One of a thousand dies from other illnesses and a thousand from excessive intercourse.Therefore, a person must take care in this matter if he wishes to live in good [health]. He should not engage in intercourse except when the body is healthy and particularly strong, when he has many involuntary erections, the erection is still present even when he makes an effort to think of something else, he finds a heaviness from the loins and below, the tendons of the testicles seem to be stretched, and his flesh is warm. Such a person needs to engage in intercourse and it is medically advisable.He should not engage in intercourse on a full or empty stomach, but after the food has been digested. He should examine himself to see if he needs to move his bowels before and after intercourse. He should not engage in intercourse while standing or sitting, nor in the bathhouse, nor on a day on which he goes to the bathhouse, nor on a day on which he lets blood, nor on the day he departs on a journey or arrives from a journey, nor [on the day] before or afterwards.
Whoever conducts himself in the ways which we have drawn up, I will guarantee that he will not become ill throughout his life, until he reaches advanced age and dies. He will not need a doctor. His body will remain intact and healthy throughout his life.[One may rely on this guarantee] unless [his body] was impaired from the birth, he was accustomed to one of the harmful habits from birth, or should there be a plague or a drought in the world.
All of these beneficial habits which we have stated apply only to a healthy man. In contrast, a sick person, or one who has a single organ which is not healthy, or one who has followed a harmful way of life for many years, each of these must choose different patterns of behavior in accordance with his [particular] illness as it is explained in the medical literature.Any change from the conduct which one normally follows is the beginning of sickness.
Where there is no doctor available, neither the healthy nor the sick man should budge from all the directions given in this chapter for each of them ultimately brings to a beneficial result.
A Torah Sage is not permitted to live in a community which does not have the following: a doctor, a bloodletter, a bathhouse, a latrine, an available source of water such as a river or a spring, a synagogue, a teacher of children, a scribe, a charity supervisor, a rabbinical court empowered to impose corporal punishment and jail sentences.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
1As mentioned in the commentary to the first chapter, in Hilchot De'ot, the Rambam puts a far greater stress on a person's emulation of God's "attributes" and less to the emulation of His deeds. Therefore, the first three chapters emphasize the importance of personality development and the methods with which we can refine our character traits. This chapter concludes the treatment of the mitzvah to emulate God and focuses on the "good deeds" that reflect the process of inner refinement described above.In Chapter 3, the Rambam postulates that we must set two goals for our behavior:a) an immediate and intermediary goal, the maintenance of physical health;b) the ultimate goal, the knowledge and service of God.In Chapter 4, he outlines a regimen of behavior that allows man to reach the first goal. In this chapter, he concentrates on the second and more complete purpose.Just as the wise man2This term provides the key to this chapter. Throughout the chapter, the Rambam uses the term talmid chacham (Torah Sage). However, he begins the chapter by using the term, chacham (wise man), to refer to his statements in Chapter 1, Halachot 4-5, which describe a wise man as one who constantly evaluates his behavior and follows the desired middle path. is recognized through his wisdom and his temperaments and in these, he stands apart from the rest of the people, so, too, he should be recognized through his actions3Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 8) describes the mitzvah of resembling God as seeking "to emulate Him - His good deeds and the honorable attributes with which He was described." - in his eating,4The commentaries have suggested the Sifre, Zot HaBrachah and Derech Eretz Zuta, Chapters 5 and 7 as sources for the Rambam's statements. However, neither of those sources is quoted verbatim. Rather, they serve as models which the Rambam uses as the basis for his own composition.The Rambam elaborates on each of the particulars listed here in the following halachot. In regard to eating, see the second part of this halachah and Halachah 2. drinking,5This refers to drinking wine. See Halachah 3. intimate relations,6See Halachot 4-5. in relieving himself,7See Halachah 6. in his speech,8See Halachah 7. manner of walking9See Halachah 8. and dress,10See Halachah 9. in the management of his finances,11See Halachah 10-12. and in his business dealings. All of these actions should be exceptionally becoming and befitting.12and in his business dealings.- See Halachot 13.13All of these actions should be becoming and befitting. What is implied? A Torah Sage14Though the Rambam begins the chapter with the use of the term chacham (wise man), when he starts to speak of details, he employs the term talmid chacham (Torah Sage). Perhaps this implies that the peaks of character development epitomized by the chacham can only be achieved when one develops his wisdom in Torah study.should not be a glutton. Rather, he should eat food which will keep his body healthy, - as described in the previous chapter. Furthermore, even when eating these foods, he should not overindulge.without overeating. - In the previous chapter, Halachah 15, the Rambam warned against overeating from a health perspective. Now, he treats it as an ethical inadequacy and a departure from the desired middle path. See also Chapter 1, Halachah 4, Chapter 3, Halachah 2.He should not seek to fill his stomach, like those who stuff themselves with food and drink until their bellies burst. - The Rambam underlines the negative aspects of the tendency to overindulge and gorge oneself on food by using an extreme example. See also the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 8, where he compares people who pursue gluttony to a slave who revels in dung.They are alluded to by [the statement of] the prophet [Malachi 2:3]: "I will spread dung on your faces, the dung of your feasts." - We have translated the verse in keeping with the interpretation of our Sages quoted below. However, in its original context, the verse refers to those who bring the festival offerings without proper intent.Our Sages - Shabbat 151bexplain: These are the people who eat and drink and make all their days like feast days. - Though it is a mitzvah to celebrate the Sabbaths and festivals with feasts, here we are referring to those who feast:a) self-indulgently and without a commitment to fulfill God's will; andb) constantly and not only on select occasions.They say, "Eat and drink for tomorrow, we will die." This statement is found in Isaiah 22:13. However, the Rambam is not quoting the verse as a support, he is merely borrowing the expression to exemplify an existential search for pleasure.This is the food of the wicked. It is these tables which the verse censures, saying: "For all tables are full of vomit and excrement; there is no room" (Isaiah 28:8). - The final word of the verse, makom, can also refer to God and thus, implies that God's presence is also lacking. Eating for the sake of indulgence is the direct opposite of the approach of "Knowing God in all your ways" described previously.Avot 3:3 also quotes this verse and the Rambam alludes to that mishnah in the following halachah.In contrast, a wise man eats only one dish or two, eating only enough to sustain him. That is sufficient for him. - As a source for eating two dishes, the commentaries have suggested Derech Eretz Rabbah, Chapter 7:It happened that Rabbi Akiva served a meal to his students. [The servants] brought two dishes before them... they ate and were satisfied.As a source for eating one dish, they point to (Sanhedrin 94b):"And may the name of the righteous be blessed (Proverbs 3:33)" - this refers to Hezekiah, king of Judah, who ate [only] a litra of greens for a meal.These sources notwithstanding, it appears that the Rambam is merely stating that a Sage should confine himself to simple and modest fare; he may not have had a specific source in mind.This is alluded to by Solomon's statement: "The righteous man eats to satisfy his soul" (Proverbs 13:25). - Note the Rambam's use of this verse in Chapter 1, Halachah 4. should not be a glutton. Rather, he should eat food which will keep his body healthy, without overeating. He should not seek to fill his stomach, like those who stuff themselves with food and drink until their bellies burst. They are alluded to by [the statement of] the prophet [Malachi 2:3]: "I will spread dung on your faces, the dung of your feasts." Our Sages explain: These are the people who eat and drink and make all their days like feast days. They say, "Eat and drink, for tomorrow, we will die" (Isaiah 22:13).This is the food of the wicked. It is these tables which the verse censures, saying: "For all tables are full of vomit and excrement; there is no room" (Isaiah 28:8).In contrast, a wise man eats only one dish or two, eating only enough to sustain him. That is sufficient for him. This is alluded to by Solomon's statement: "The righteous man eats to satisfy his soul" (Proverbs 13:25).
When the wise man eats the little which is fitting for him, he should eat it only in his own home, at his table.1The previous halachah discussed the quantity of food and the attitude with which it was to be eaten. The present halachah concerns itself with the place and the company in which the wise should eat. It revolves around the principle that a person should be modest while eating and refrain from doing so in public. (See the Guide to the Perplexed, ibid.) He should not eat in a store2Kol Ya'akov notes that this store may even be one specifically designated for eating, e.g., a restaurant, coffee-shop, or the like. Indeed, we find the Hebrew, chanut, used to refer to a place of eating in Bava Metzia 83b. or in the marketplace,3Though the Jerusalem Talmud, Ma'aserot 3:2 mentions this prohibition in reference to a Torah Sage, the Babylonian Talmud, Kiddushin 40b condemns even a common person for such behavior, stating: "Whoever eats in the marketplace is like a dog." The passage in Kiddushin continues to explain that such a person is unacceptable as a witness and the Rambam quotes that law (Hilchot Edut 11:5).The commentaries have attempted to resolve this difficulty in different ways: For example Tosafot, Kiddushin (ibid.) explains that a common person is condemned only if he eats a full meal in the market place, while a wise man should not eat anything at all in public. The Kessef Mishneh (Hilchot Edut) differentiates between eating in a crowded place - which is forbidden for everyone - and eating in a quiet corner - which is deemed improper only for a Sage. The Bach (Choshen Mishpat 34) explains that a common person is censored only for eating while walking through the market place, while the wise man should not eat in public even while standing in one place.Nevertheless, it must be noted that in this halachah, the Rambam uses the expression chacham (a wise man), his ideal for a person with a developed personality, and not talmid chacham (a Torah Sage). Apparently, he does not differentiate between a Torah Sage and a common person in this matter and requires a refined, highly developed standard in meeting our physical needs from everyone. unless there is a very pressing need, lest he be viewed without respect by others.4unless there is a very pressing need, lest he be viewed without respect by others. He should not eat together with the unlearned,5Sanhedrin 52b states that, at the outset, a common person will consider a Torah Sage to be like a vessel of gold. However, if the Sage derives benefit from the common person, he will come to regard the Sage like an earthenware shard.Note Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 5:11, where the Rambam equates the dining of a learned and pious man together with the unlearned with the desecration of the Name of God. See also Hilchot Sanhedrin (25:4) where he rules that communal leaders and judges should not eat and drink with the common people. nor at those tables that are "filled with vomit and excrement."6This expression is obviously a reference to Avot 3:3:[When] three eat at one table and do not speak words of Torah there, it is as if they eat from sacrifices to the dead [i.e., idols] as [Isaiah 28:8] states: "For all tables are full of vomit and excrement; there is no room."In his commentary to this mishnah, the Rambam writes:Previously, the verse dealt with eating and drinking while forsaking the Torah and those who study it. Therefore, all of these tables are considered as if excrement and filth; i.e., the foods of idol worship, are eaten upon them.Furthermore,... He7the wise man should not eat frequently in other places,8outside his own home; i.e., the wise man, even when he eats in a private home and in the proper company, should limit the number of homes that he frequents (Pesachim 49a). even in the company of wise men, nor should he eat where there is a large gathering.9The reason for these restrictions is, as the Rambam expresses in the Guide to the Perplexed (ibid.), a basic desire for a person, particularly when he relates to others, to emphasize the refined and developed aspects of his being and not those which he shares with other animals. Therefore, even when there is no danger of subjecting himself to undesirable influences or disgracing the Torah with which he is identified, he should refrain from performing a physical activity like eating in the presence of others.It is not fitting for him to eat at another person's [table] except at a feast associated with a mitzvah,10Chullin 95b states that Rav would not partake of a meal in public unless it was associated with a mitzvah. e.g., a betrothal11This decision is not accepted by all authorities. Some do not consider such a betrothal feast as "associated with a mitzvah."Erusin translated as "betrothal," refers to the first stage of the marriage process, i.e., giving the woman the wedding ring. In Talmudic and post-Talmudic times, this ceremony was carried out before the actual wedding (nisuin). At present, we perform the two stages of the wedding, erusin and nisuin together. Thus, reference to what we term engagement as erusin is technically a misnomer. or wedding feast12and then, [only] when a scholar is marrying the daughter of a scholar. - Pesachim 49a mentions that weddings between scholars and common people are undesirable and should not be attended by a Torah Sage (Avodat HaMelech). The Rambam also deals with this subject in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapter 21. - and then, [only] when a scholar is marrying the daughter of a scholar.The righteous and the pious of old never partook of a meal that was not their own.13Chullin 7b relates that even when Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi invited Rabbi Pinchas ben Yair to a meal, the latter Sage refused. Note also the Rambam's comments at the conclusion of Hilchot Zechiah U'Matanah.
When a wise man drinks wine, he drinks only enough to soften the food in his stomach.Whoever becomes drunk is a sinner,1The commentaries cite Berachot 29b: "Do not become drunk and do not sin;" a passage which seems to say that drink leads to sins. There is room for question for it appears that the Rambam views drinking itself as sinful. is shameful,2In the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 8, the Rambam castigates drunken revelry in the harshest terms:A drinking party is more shameful than a gathering of naked people [who] defecate together in daylight in one place. Elimination is a necessary human function. However, drunkenness is the voluntary act of the wicked man. and will lose his wisdom.3See Proverbs 31:5: "Lest he drink and forget the Law and pervert the judgement of all the poor."The Torah gives examples of the degrading effects of drunkenness (Noah, Genesis, Chapter 8; Lot, Genesis, Chapter 19). There are specific prohibitions against drinking - e.g. a priest is not allowed to perform the priestly services while under the influence of alcohol (Leviticus 10:9-11). Similarly, numerous passages throughout the Prophets and Sacred Writings castigate drunkenness. These are also paralleled in the rabbinic literature, e.g. Sanhedrin 70a, VaYikra Rabbah 12. If he becomes drunk before the common people, he desecrates God's Name.4Note the Rambam's remarks in Hilchot Sanhedrin 25:4:When a person is given a position of authority over the community... most certainly [he is forbidden] to eat and drink and become drunk in public and in a gathering of the ignorant or at a repast of friends.Woe to those judges who act with such affront to the Torah of Moses, who disgrace its laws and reduce it to the earth, bring it down to the dust and cause evil to themselves and their descendants in this world and the next.Most commentaries cite Pesachim 49a as the source for the Rambam's statement, however, that passage does not mention intoxication. The Zohar, Vol. I, 110a, specifically associates drunkenness with the desecration of God's name.Since intoxication is such an undesirable state...It is forbidden to drink even a small quantity of wine5Note Hilchot Tefilah 4:17 which considers a revi'it (between 3 and 5 oz.) of wine as slightly intoxicating. Since our wines are considerably weaker than those of the Rambam's time, it is questionable whether this measure would apply today. in the afternoon hours,6Avot 3:13 mentions wine that is drunken in the afternoon as one of four things which "remove a person from the world." Avot D'Rabbi Natan, Chapter 21, explains that drinking wine in the afternoon causes a person to "negate the entire Torah." unless it is taken together with food. Drink that is taken together with food is not intoxicating.7to the same degree as wine that is drunk without food. See the Rambam's commentary to the Mishnah, Pesachim 10:6. Only wine that is taken after the meal is to be avoided.
Although a man's wife is permitted to him at all times,1i.e., outside the restrictions of the niddah it is fitting that a wise man behave with holiness.2Though a Jew's commitment to holiness must encompass every aspect of his behavior, the Torah and our Sages have always emphasized the importance of this quality in regard to sexuality. There is no more powerful expression of man's basic, instinctual nature than sex. Therefore, precisely in this area, a Jew must reveal that his nature is not only material, that he possesses a spiritual dimension that lies at the core of his being and seeks expression.For this reason, the Jewish marriage bond is referred to as Kiddushin, emphasizing how kedushah, holiness, is a fundamental element in marriage. Similarly, Leviticus 20:7, proclaims "Sanctify yourselves and be holy, for I am God, your Lord," as a preface to the laws proscribing forbidden intimate relations. Sh'vuot 18b interprets the above verse as also including a command to conduct oneself in a holy manner within permitted relationships.The quality of holiness involves not only restraint, as mentioned in the ensuing statements, but also the manner in which relations are carried out. The Rambam elaborates on this aspect in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:9 and in his commentary to the Mishnah, Sanhedrin 7:4. He should not frequent his wife like a rooster.3The rooster is a widely used symbol of lust. The phrase used by the Rambam is quoted from Berachot 22a. See also Hilchot Tefilah 4:5.In Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:11, the Rambam also elaborates on this matter, calling frequent intimate relations a severe blemish and boorish behavior which was frowned upon by the Sages. Rather, [he should limit his relations to once a week]4Ketubot 62a,b describes the frequency with which people involved in different occupations should engage in intimate relations (See also Hilchot Ishut 14:1-4.). The measure given here is the one allotted to Torah Sages. from Sabbath evening to Sabbath evening,5Ketubot (ibid.) states that Psalms 1:3: "It brings forth its fruit in its season" applies to such a person.[The commentaries note the continuation of the verse, "Its leaves will not wither", and interpret it as implying that the draining of physical energy caused by intimate relations which the Rambam described in Chapter 4, Halachah 21, will not occur when a person follows this schedule.]Iggeret HaKodesh (attributed to the Ramban) emphasizes that on the Sabbath, a person is granted a greater spiritual potential which enables him to maintain his bond with God even when involved in physical activities. if he has the physical stamina.6See Hilchot Ishut, Chapter 14, where the Rambam prescribes criteria for the frequency of intimate relations that are coordinated with a person's physical stamina.When he speaks - The Rambam quotes this euphemism for intimate relations from Nedarim 20b.When he speaks with her, he should not do so at the beginning of the night, when he is sated and his belly [is] full, nor at the end of the night, when he is hungry; rather, in the middle of the night, when his food has been digested.7Note Chapter 4, Halachah 19. Iggeret HaKodesh explains that both during the time food is being digested and when a person is hungry, his emotional balance is somewhat disturbed and it is difficult for him to develop the proper attitude and spiritual awareness necessary to make intimate relations a Godly act.Nedarim 20b emphasizes that the midnight hour also allows a person to rest from all his worldly involvement. The quiet of the hour prevents him from being disturbed by other thoughts and he is able to concentrate on his wife alone.Despite the advantages of having relations at midnight, many contemporary authorities suggest that a couple not hold to this as a binding rule. If a couple have already begun thinking of sex, they should not be forced to wait until midnight to fulfill their desires.He should not be excessively lightheaded, - Previously (Chapter 2, Halachah 7), the Rambam cited a mishnah (Avot 3:16) which links lightheadedness and immorality.He should not be excessively lightheaded, nor should he talk obscene nonsense even in intimate conversation with his wife.8Though a man should talk to his wife to prepare her for intimacy, he must be careful of what he says. Note the comments of VaYikra Rabbah 24:7."And your camp shall be holy, that He see no lewd things in you" (Deuteronomy 23:15). The latter refers to unseemly speech. Rav Shmuel bar Nachman said: Lewd speech is obscenity. Behold, the prophet has stated (Amos 4:13): "And He repeats to a man what he has spoken." [On this verse,] our Sages9Chagigah 5b commented: A person will have to account10when being judged in the afterworld... for even the light conversation that he has with his wife.11for every aspect of a man's behavior is significant.[At the time of relations,] they should not be drunk,12For intimate relations to be a meaningful act, each of the partners must have all his faculties at his command.As mentioned in the following halachah, a proper attitude toward intimate relations will cause one to father children who are refined and attractive. The converse is also true. If parents engage in intimate relations in a coarse manner or if there is friction and lack of harmony between them, the children born of their union will have undesirable character traits.In particular, Nedarim 20b describes ten situations in which relations are forbidden and states that the children born of such unions are endowed with extremely negative tendencies. One of the undesirable states at the time of relations is drunkenness. See also the following halachah and Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:12. nor lackadaisical,13People should not engage in relations except when motivated by desire (preferably a holy desire as explained in Chapter 3). For this reason, as mentioned below, a husband should spend time arousing his wife's desires. nor tense14Some manuscripts have atzubim- "depressed" - instead. Neither state of mind conforms to the attitude desired by the Torah as mentioned below. - [neither both of them,] or [even] one of them.15The act of intimacy should be a true union between man and wife. Therefore, the partners must work on developing a single state of mind. She should not be asleep, nor should the man take her by force,16These two situations are also included among the ten prohibited relations mentioned in Nedarim 20b.against her will. - The Avodat HaMelech states that this statement also implies that one should not compel his wife to agree to intimate relations. See Eiruvin 100b.Rather, [the relations should take place] amidst their mutual consent and joy. He should converse and dally with her somewhat, - Chagigah 5b describes how the Sage, Rav, would abandon all formalities and inspire an atmosphere of relaxed happiness before intimacy. (Note the description of Rav in Chapter 2, Halachah 4.)so that she be relaxed. - Iggeret HaKodesh states:You should motivate her with words that move her heart and settle her mind and make her happy so that your mind will be fused with hers, and your intent with her intent.You should say some things that arouse her desire, feelings of connection, love, will, and romance, and others which lead her to the fear of God, piety, and modesty.He should be intimate [with her] modestly and not boldly, and withdraw [from her] immediately. - The commentaries note that the Rambam's statements are based on the following passage from Nedarim 20b:They asked Ima Shalom (the wife of Rabbi Eliezer): "Why are your children so attractive?"She replied to them: "He only engages in relations with me... at midnight. During intimacy, he uncovers a handbreadth and covers a handbreadth (i.e., engages in intimacy modestly) and it appears that a demon is pressuring him" (i.e., he would withdraw after completing the act of intimacy). against her will. Rather, [the relations should take place] amidst their mutual consent and joy. He should converse and dally with her somewhat, so that she be relaxed. He should be intimate [with her] modestly and not boldly, and withdraw [from her] immediately.
Whoever conducts himself in this manner [may be assured that] not only does he sanctify his soul, purify himself, and refine his character, but, furthermore,1in addition to these spiritual and ethical benefits,... if he has children,2The Rambam does not promise that children will be conceived. However, if conception takes place,... they3the offspring will be handsome4Note the passage from Nedarim quoted in the previous halachah. and modest, worthy of wisdom and piety.5Iggeret HaKodesh states:When a person joins together with his wife while his thoughts cleave to the spiritual realms, those thoughts draw down a sublime light which rests on that drop of semen... Thus, that drop of semen is always connected to that shining light.This is the mystic secret implied in [God's words to the prophet, Jeremiah   1:5 ]: "Before I formed you in the womb, I knew you;" i.e., He had already established a connection of shining light with the sperm [from which] that Tzaddik [was conceived] at the time of [his parents'] union.[In contrast,] whoever conducts himself in the ways of the rest of the people who walk in darkness,6The latter phrase is borrowed, out of context, from Isaiah 9:1. will have children like those people.7The effect of improper intimate behavior on offspring is mentioned in Nedarim 20b and Eruvin 100b. Note our comments in the previous halachah. See, too, Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 21:12.
Torah Sages conduct themselves with exceptional modesty.1With this statement, the Rambam establishes a connection with the previous halachah and sets the motif for what follows. Modesty is not simply a matter of dress, (this is discussed in halachah 9), but rather, an awareness of God which causes a person to cover head and body out of respect for the Divine Presence. The Rambam expands upon this concept in the Guide for the Perplexed (Vol. III, Chapter 52):He is constantly with us, observing us, as [Jeremiah 23:24] proclaims: 'Can a man hide himself in the secret places and I not see him,' says God." Understand this well.Know that when perfect men comprehend this, they achieve such humility, such awe and fear of God and a sense of shame before Him... that their private behavior with their wives and in latrines is like their public conduct with other people.Know that they have forbidden a man to walk with an erect carriage, because: "the entire world is filled with His glory" (Isaiah 6:3)... We are always in His presence... Thus, the greatest among the Sages found it difficult to bare their heads because the Divine Presence constantly hovers over man. They do not demean themselves and do not bare their heads2Kiddushin 30a relates that Rabbi Chiya bar Abba once saw Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi taking his son to school while wearing a makeshift hat. When Rabbi Chiya asked him the reason he was wearing such a head-covering, he explained that he was forced to leave his home in a hurry and was not able to arrange his turban. Nevertheless, he found it preferable to wear even a makeshift head-covering, rather than go out bareheaded.Kiddushin 31a quotes Rav Huna, the son of Rav Yeshoshua, as explaining that he would not walk four cubits bareheaded out of respect for "the Divine Presence which is above my head." (See also Zohar, Vol. III, p. 245b.) Similarly, Shabbat 156b relates that an astrologer told Rav Nachman bar Yitzchak's mother that he was destined to be a thief. From his earliest childhood, she trained him to avoid this fate. She would constantly tell him to cover his head "so that the fear of God will be upon you." or their bodies.3The Mishnah Berurah (2:1) lays down the following general rule: Any portion of our bodies which is usually covered should not be revealed unless there is a specific reason for doing so.Modesty, as understood in the present context, results from the awareness of the Divine Presence. The ordinary man experiences such awareness while at prayer when "he is as if standing before the Divine Presence" (Hilchot Tefilah 4:16) and then he is required not to bare his head (ibid. 5:5) or various parts of his body; e.g., his chest (ibid. 4:7) and his feet (ibid. 5:5). As emphasized in Chapter 3, Halachah 3, a wise man should try to be conscious of the Divine Presence at all times and places. As a result, he will constantly be modest.Though in Talmudic times and in the Rambam's era, personal modesty and covering one's head were considered the signs of a Sage (Kiddushin 8a) and a unique and special merit (Shabbat 118b), at present, both practices have been accepted as ordinary behavior for all observant Jews.Even when one enters a latrine, he should be modest and not uncover himself until he is seated. - Tamid 27b quotes Rav as giving his son the following advice: "Sit and reveal yourself. Cover yourself and stand."Even when one enters a latrine, he should be modest and not uncover himself until he is seated. He should not wipe himself clean with the right hand.4Since the right hand is used to tie Tefillin (Berachot 62a) and is given priority over the left hand regarding service in the Temple (Zevachim 24a), the installation ceremony of priests (Leviticus 8:23), and other ritual manners, it is not proper that it be used for this function.Many authorities maintain that this restriction only applies when one is cleaning oneself with one's hand alone, but not when one uses toilet paper. He should stay away from all others and enter a chamber beyond a chamber, a cave within a cave, and relieve himself.5Berachot 62b derives this law from I Samuel 24:3's description of the behavior of King Saul. Though it is forbidden to delay relieving oneself (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 17:31), our Sages did not give this prohibition precedence over the dictates of modesty (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 3:11). If6no latrine is available and he [must] relieve himself7These restrictions only apply to defecation. The Sages feared that refraining from urination might be damaging (Bechorot 44b). behind a fence, he should move far enough away that no one can hear the sound if he breaks wind.8I.e., even though an observer might see that he is squatting and thus, conclude that he is defecating, since the fence covers his lower body, there is no difficulty (Berachot 62a). If he [must] relieve himself in an open area,9where such a barrier is not available he should be far enough off so that no one can see him baring himself.10i.e., though the ultimate reason for modesty is the awareness of God's presence, there also is a dimension of modesty which implies respect for one's fellow man and restraint in revealing one's body and bodily functions in his presence.One should not speak while relieving himself, even if there is great need.11Berachot 62a states that "modesty and silence are appropriate for the latrine." Sanhedrin 19a states that women are allowed to speak in the latrine to prevent men from entering. Just as he conducts himself with modesty while in the latrine by day, he should [also] do so at night.12Berachot, ibid. Since modesty is practiced out of an awareness of God's presence, there is no difference between day and night (The Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 52).One should always train himself to relieve himself in the early morning and after dark only, so that he [need] not go far off.13to avoid others seeing him (Berachot, ibid.).
A Torah Sage should not shout or shriek while speaking, like the cattle and wild beasts, nor should he raise his voice overly much. Instead, he should speak gently to all people. [In addition to] speaking gently, he should take care not to stand at a distance, lest [his speech] appear like the speech of the haughty.He should greet all men [before they greet him], so that they be pleased with him. He should judge every one in a good light, speak favorably of his fellow man, [never mentioning] anything that is shameful to him, love peace and pursue it.If he sees that his words will be effective, and will be given attention, he should speak; if not, he should keep silent. What is implied? He should not try to placate a man in the moment of his anger. He should not question a man about his vow at the time he is making his vow, [but wait] until he is tranquil of mind and calm. He should not comfort a man while his dead is lying before him because [the bereaved] is unsettled until he has buried [his dead]. The same applies in other similar cases. He should not look at his fellow man at the moment of his humiliation, but turn his attention away.He should not distort facts, exaggerate a situation, or minimize it, except in the interests of peace and the like.The guiding rule is that he should speak only words of wisdom or in connection with acts of kindness and the like. He should not speak to a woman in the marketplace, even if she be his wife, or his sister, or his daughter.
A Torah Sage should not walk erect, with his head held high, as [Isaiah 3:16] states: "And they walked with necks outstretched and flashing eyes." He should not walk with a [short-stepped,] toe-to-heel, stately [gait] like [that of] women and the proud, as [Isaiah, ibid.] states: "walking and mincing as they go, tinkling with their feet."Nor should he run in public like a madman, nor bend over like a hunchback. Rather, he should cast his eyes downward as he [does when he] stands during prayer. He should walk in the market-place like a person preoccupied with his business affairs.From a man's carriage, too, one can recognize whether he is wise and a thoughtful person or mindless and a fool. Thus, Solomon said in his wisdom (Ecclesiastes 10:3): "On the road, too, when the fool walks, his mind is empty and he proclaims to all that he is a fool" - he informs everyone about himself, that he is a fool.
A Torah Sage's clothing should be attractive and clean. It is forbidden that [a] blood or fat [stain] or the like be found on his garment.He should not wear regal garb, e.g., clothes of gold and purple, which draw everyone's attention, nor the dress of the poor which shames its wearers, but attractive garments of the middle range.His flesh should not be visible under his clothing as [is the case when one wears] the exceptionally sheer linen garments produced in Egypt. His clothes should not drag on the ground like the dress of the haughty, but [should extend] to the heel and his sleeves [should extend] to his fingers.He should not let his cloak hang down, for that creates an impression of haughtiness, except on the Sabbath if he has no change [of cloak].In the summer, he should not wear shoes that have often been mended and have many patches. He may do so in the rainy season, if he is poor.He should not go out in the marketplace perfumed, or with perfumed clothes, nor should he put perfume on his hair. However, he is permitted to rub perfume on his body if he does so in order to remove filth. Similarly, he should not go out alone at night, unless he has a set time to go out for his studies. All of these [restrictions are instituted] because of [possible] suspicion [of immorality].
A Torah Sage manages his financial affairs judiciously. He eats, drinks, and provides for his household in accordance with his funds and [degree of] success without overtaxing himself.The Sages have directed [us] regarding the ways of the world: A person should eat meat only with appetite as [Deuteronomy 12:20] states: "If your soul should crave to eat meat..." It is sufficient for the healthy to eat meat [once weekly,] from Sabbath eve to Sabbath eve. If he is wealthy enough to eat meat every day, he may.The Sages have [also] directed us, saying: One should always eat less than befits his income, dress as befits [his income], and provide for his wife and children beyond what befits [his income].
The way of sensible men is that first, one should establish an occupation by which he can support himself. Then, he should purchase a house to live in and then, marry a wife. [This order of priorities may be inferred from Deuteronomy 20:5-7], which states: "Who is the man who has planted a vineyard, but not redeemed it...;" "who is the man who has built a house, but not dedicated it...;" "who is the man who has betrothed a woman, but not taken her [to wife]..."In contrast, a fool begins by marrying a wife. Then, if he can find the means, he purchases a house. Finally, towards the end of his life, he will search about for a trade or support himself from charity.[This is also implied by the order of] the curses mentioned [in Deuteronomy 28:30]: "You shall betroth a woman..., you shall build a house..., you shall plant a vineyard;" i.e., your behavior will be disordered so that you will not succeed in your ways. However, in regard to blessing [I Samuel 18:14] states: "And David was thoughtful in all his undertakings and God was with him."
One is forbidden to renounce ownership of, or consecrate, all of his possessions and [thereby,] become a burden to society.He should not sell a field and buy a house, [sell] a house and buy chattels, or use money [acquired] by [selling] his house for trade. Conversely, he should sell chattels to buy a field. The rule is that he should aim to improve his [financial position] and to exchange the impermanent for the permanent.His intention should not be to enjoy slight momentary pleasure, or to enjoy some slight pleasure [for which he] incurs a great loss.
A Torah Sage [should conduct] his business dealings with honesty and good faith. When [his] answer is "no," he says, "no;" when [his answer] is "yes," he says, "yes."He is stringent with himself in his accounting, gives and yields to others when he buys from them, but is not demanding [about what they owe him].He pays for his purchases immediately. He does not act as a guarantor, or accept objects for deposit, or act as a debt collector for a lender.He accepts obligations in matters of buying and selling for which the Torah does not hold him liable, in order to uphold and not go back on his verbal commitments. If others have obligations to him by law, he grants them an extension and pardons them. He lends and bestows gifts.He does not encroach upon another's occupation, nor does he ever cause someone discomfort. The rule is that he should be among the pursued and not the pursuers, among those who accept humiliation but not among those who humiliate [others]. Whoever does all the above and their like, of him [Isaiah 49:3] states: "And He said to me, 'You are My servant, Israel, through whom I will be glorified.'”

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
It is natural for a man's character and actions to be influenced by his friends and associates and for him to follow the local norms of behavior. Therefore, he should associate with the righteous and be constantly in the company of the wise, so as to learn from their deeds. Conversely, he should keep away from the wicked who walk in darkness, so as not to learn from their deeds.This is [implied by] Solomon's statement (Proverbs 13:20): "He who walks with the wise will become wise, while one who associates with fools will suffer." Similarly, [Psalms 1:1] states: "Happy is the man who has not followed the advice of the wicked."A person who lives in a place where the norms of behavior are evil and the inhabitants do not follow the straight path should move to a place where the people are righteous and follow the ways of the good.If all the places with which he is familiar and of which he hears reports follow improper paths, as in our times, or if he is unable to move to a place where the patterns of behavior are proper, because of [the presence of] bands of raiding troops, or for health reasons, he should remain alone in seclusion as [Eichah 3:28] states: "Let him sit alone and be silent."If they are wicked and sinful and do not allow him to reside there unless he mingle with them and follow their evil behavior, he should go out to caves, thickets, and deserts [rather than] follow the paths of sinners as [Jeremiah 9:1] states: "Who will give me a lodging place for wayfarers, in the desert."
It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 6) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 434) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.In Halachah 1, the Rambam described the association with the wise as a moral imperative and, here, he states that it is a Torah commandment. We saw a similar pattern in Chapter 1. First, he outlined his theory of the middle path of behavior as the optimal moral position. Only afterwards, did he equate it with the commandment to "walk in His ways."This approach demonstrates that the Torah does not impose a Divine Will upon man which he cannot grasp or understand. Rather, it reflects rules and principles that can be conceived by human thought and explained in terms of human nature. Thus, the workings of the Halachah can be seen as having been instituted as an organic part of the makeup of the world at large and man in particular. (See the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 48.) to cleave unto the wise and their disciples in order to learn from their deeds2as explained in the previous halachah. as [Deuteronomy 10:20] states: "and you will cling to Him."Our Sages3Ketubot 111b, Sifri, Deuteronomy 11:22. [questioned the nature of this command for] is it possible for man to cling to the Divine Presence?4Since He transcends the reaches of our emotions and intellect, the commandment cannot be interpreted literally. They [resolved the difficulty,] explaining this commandment to mean: Cleave unto the wise and their disciples.5This interpretation does not contradict the simple meaning of the verse. Since the Sages fulfill the command "Know God in all your ways" (See Chapter 3, Halachah 3), they are in constant connection with Him. Hence, a person can also establish a bond with his Creator by "clinging" to them. See also Tanya, Chapter 2.Therefore,6i.e., implied by "cleaving" is that one should try to marry the daughter of a Torah Sage7esachim 49a states: "At all times, a man should sell all his possessions [in order to] marry a daughter of a wise man and marry off his daughter to a wise man." and marry his daughter to a Torah Sage, eat and drink with Sages,8Berachot 64a states: "Anyone who partakes of a meal at which a Torah Sage is present is considered like one who has benefited from the radiance of the Divine Presence." do business on behalf of Sages,9i.e., the Torah Sage may be a silent partner who puts up a share of the capital in a partnership and the other person takes care of the actual buying and selling.The Rambam harshly criticizes individuals who try to derive material benefit from their Torah knowledge (See Hilchot Talmud Torah 3:10-11). Therefore, though Ketubot (ibid.), the source for these statements, also mentions "granting a Sage benefit from one's possessions," the Rambam omits this clause. Nevertheless, he does allow one to do business on behalf of a Sage as described above. See also Hilchot Talmud Torah 6:10. and associate with them in all possible ways as [Deuteronomy 11:22] states: "to cling to Him."Similarly, our Sages10Avot 1:4 have directed [us], saying: "Sit in the dust of their feet and drink in their words thirstily."
Each man is commanded to love each and every one of Israel as himself1In his commentary on the Torah, the Ramban questions how one can possibly have the same degree of love for another person as one has for himself. However, since all Jews share the same Godly essence, when one relates to that essence, there is really no difference between loving another person and oneself (Tanya, ibid.). as [Leviticus 19:18] states: "Love your neighbor as yourself."Therefore,2The question often raised in connection with this mitzvah is: How can one command feeling? Therefore, certain commentaries have stated that the mitzvah merely requires us to perform deeds which would normally be motivated by feelings of love. However, in Sefer HaMitzvot (Shoresh 9), the Rambam specifically states that this mitzvah involves our emotions. Therefore, it must be interpreted to mean that we are commanded to bring ourselves to a state of mind that will inspire feelings of love.Though the mitzvah involves our feelings, it also requires a specific course of behavior as the Rambam continues:Therefore, - i.e., the following are the applications of this mitzvah in the ethical realm. However, since "'Love your neighbor as yourself' is a great general principle in the Torah" (Sifra, Leviticus 19:18), there are also applications of this principle in many other spheres.Thus, Hilchot Eivel 14:1 states:It is a positive mitzvah ordained by the Rabbis to visit the sick, comfort mourners, participate in a funeral or a wedding, accompany guests, arrange for all the needs of burial..., and to bring joy to a bride and a groom and assist them with all their needs.These are deeds of kindness performed with one's person for which there is no measure.Although these are Rabbinic commands, they are included in [the commandment, "Love your neighbor as yourself," [which implies that] all the things that you would like others to do for you, you should do for your brother in Torah and mitzvot.The Rambam also mentions this commandment in connection with choosing a bride (Hilchot Ishut 3:19), ransoming captives (Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 8:10), and even determining the proper manner of execution (Hilchot Sanhedrin 15:1). one should speak the praises of [others] and show concern for their money just as he is concerned with his own money3Avot 2:15 states: "Your friend's money should be as dear to your as your own." and seeks his own honor.4This corresponds to speaking praise of others. See Avot 2:13: "Your friend's dignity should be as dear to you as your own."Whoever gains honor through the degradation of a colleague5i.e., builds his reputation by emphasizing a colleague's faults does not have a share in the world to come.6See Hilchot Teshuvah 3:14.
Loving a convert1Here, the Rambam is referring to a גר צדק, a convert to Judaism, as distinct from a גר תושב, a gentile who accepts the seven mitzvot commanded to Noah and his descendants (See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, Chapters 13-14). who has come to nestle under the wings of the Shechinah2This phrase is borrowed from the comforting words spoken by Boaz to Ruth in praise of her dedication in confronting the challenges faced by a convert (Ruth 2:12). [fulfills] two positive commandments: one for he is [also] included among the "neighbors"3i.e., he is a full-fledged member of the Jewish people. [whom we are commanded to love]4as mentioned in the previous halachah. and one because he is a convert and the Torah (Deuteronomy 10:19) states: "and you shall love the converts."[Thus,5Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 207) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 431) include this as one of the Torah's 613 commandments. God] has commanded us concerning the love of a convert just as He has commanded us concerning loving Himself as [Deuteronomy 11:1] states: "and you shall love God, your Lord."6i.e., just as one's love of God must be unlimited, so, too, must one have boundless love for a convert (Mahari, commentary to Sefer HaMitzvot). The Holy One, blessed be He, Himself, loves converts as [Deuteronomy 10:18] states: "and He loves converts."7The Midrash Tanchumah (VaYikra 2) states:The Holy One, blessed be He, states: "It is sufficient that he left idols behind and came [to live] among you. I adjure you to love him, for I love him."In Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.) the Rambam also emphasizes that the sacrifices a convert made in coming to Judaism are the reason "God has offered him additional love and created an additional mitzvah for him."A number of the Rambam's responsa are also dedicated to strengthening the spirits of converts. He wrote to a convert named Ovadiah, that although the Jews trace their lineage to Abraham, the converts' connection to Judaism is dependent on God, Himself and is, therefore, more praiseworthy. Similarly, he praises another convert for "leaving his father and homeland...pursuing God... and reaching such heights."
Whoever hates a [fellow] Jew in his heart transgresses a Torah prohibition as [Leviticus 19:17] states: "Do not hate your brother in your heart."1Sefer HaMitzvot (negative mitzvah 302) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 238) include this prohibition as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. One is not [liable for] lashes2The minimum punishment given for violating a Torah command. for violating this prohibition because no deed is involved.3This is a principle followed throughout Torah law; a court administers punishment only for actions, not for thoughts or feelings (See Hilchot Temurah 1:1).The Torah only warns [us] against hating in [our] hearts.4Thus, here, we see a prohibition that involves only our emotions, i.e., we are forbidden to harbor such feelings in our hearts. However, a person who beats a colleague or insults him,5Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.) goes further and states that if a person makes known his hatred for his colleague, even though he transgresses the prohibitions against seeking vengeance and/or bearing a grudge, he does not violate this prohibition. Thus, this mitzvah forbids holding feelings of enmity in one's heart when they are never expressed. although he is not permitted to do so,6The Rambam mentions the prohibition against insulting a fellow Jew in Halachah 8 (and against cursing a fellow Jew in Hilchot Sanhedrin 26:1-2) and the prohibition against hitting a fellow Jew in Hilchot Sanhedrin 16:12. does not violate [the prohibition,] "you shall not hate."7In Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.), the Rambam describes this hatred "as more severe than anything else." Once hatred has been expressed, it is possible to reconcile differences. However, if it is kept hidden in one's heart, there is no possibility of improving relations and establishing unity.
When one person wrongs another, the latter should not remain silent and despise him1See Halachah 9. as [II Samuel 13:22] states concerning the wicked: "And Avshalom did not speak to Amnon neither good, nor bad for Avshalom hated Amnon."Rather,2Avshalom had just reason for hating Amnon who had raped and disgraced Tamar, Avshalom's sister. Nevertheless, Avshalom is criticized for not making his ill feelings known and failing to try to resolve his differences with Amnon peacefully.The choice of this example appears to be the Rambam's own for the commentaries have not cited any sources which he quotes. Perhaps the Rambam cites this instance to demonstrate the negative effects of such hatred. Ultimately, Avshalom slew Amnon, triggering a series of unfortunate events which culminated in a bitter civil war and his own death.Rather, he is commanded - Sefer HaMitzvot (positive mitzvah 205) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 239) include this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This commandment has two dimensions:a) to bring the complaints one has against a colleague into the open as stated in this halachah; b) to rebuke a sinner as stated in the following halachah. he is commanded to make the matter known and ask him: "Why did you do this to me?", "Why did you wrong me regarding that matter?" as [Leviticus 19:17] states: "You shall surely admonish your colleague."If,3Leviticus 19:17-18 states:(17) Do not hate your brother in your heart. You must surely admonish your neighbor and not bear a sin because of him. (18) Do not seek revenge or bear a grudge against the children of your people. Love your neighbor as yourself.Each of the clauses in these two verses is halachically significant. The first verse informs us that hatred of a fellow Jew is prohibited (Halachah 5). Then, it explains how one should respond if negative feelings towards a colleague arise (Halachah 6, here). Afterwards, it teaches that one's negative feelings must be expressed in a manner that does not embarrass one's fellow Jew (Halachah 8). Thus, the verse can be rendered: Do not bear hate in your heart, instead, inform your fellow Jew of your complaint, but do so in a manner that is not sinful. (Note the Ramban's commentary on the verse.)The second verse teaches that vengeance or bearing a grudge is forbidden (Chapter 7, Halachot 7-8) and then, concludes with a positive statement obligating us to love our fellow Jew (Halachah 3). afterwards, [the person who committed the wrong] asks [his colleague] to forgive him, he must do so.4See Yoma 87a which gives several examples of Sages who went out of their way to create circumstances that would allow a person who had wronged them to ask for forgiveness. A person should not be cruel when forgiving [as implied by Genesis 20:17]: "And Abraham prayed to God..."5The narrative in Genesis describes how after God punished Avimelech, King of the Philistines, for taking Sarah, he returned her to Abraham and Abraham prayed for Avimelech's recovery. Though Abraham had been wronged, he was willing to forgive Avimelech.Note Hilchot Teshuvah 2:10 which states:It is forbidden for a person to be cruel and refuse to be appeased. Instead, he should be easily pacified and difficult to anger. When the person who wronged him asks for forgiveness, he should forgive him with a full heart...This is the path of the seed of Israel... In contrast, the insensitive gentiles..., their wrath is preserved forever. Similarly, because the Gibeonites did not forgive... [II Samuel 21:2] describes them as follows: "The Gibeonites were not among the children of Israel."
It is a mitzvah1The mitzvah הוכיח תוכיח mentioned in the previous halachah. for a person who sees that his fellow Jew2Though the Hebrew חבירו literally means friend, we have used this translation since this term extends beyond one's immediate circle of friends. However, it is possible that the Rambam desired the term to be interpreted more narrowly. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 156:7 states that one is obligated to admonish only a close friend. There is no requirement to admonish a person with whom one does not share such ties when there is little likelihood that one's words will have any effect. has sinned or is following an improper path3The Avodat HaMelech states that the expression "improper path" refers to incorrect behavior even if no actual violation of Torah law is involved. See also Berachot 31b, Arachin 16b. [to attempt] to correct his behavior and to inform him that he is causing himself a loss4The word חטא, generally translated as "sin" can also be rendered as "lack." See I Kings 1:21. In his commentary to Avot 5:1, the Rambam elaborates on the complementary nature of these two interpretations. By sinning, a person causes real loss to himself and the entire world. by his evil deeds as [Leviticus 19:17] states: "You shall surely admonish your colleague."A5The Torah mentions the mitzvah of admonishment directly after the prohibition against hating a fellow Jew, implying that admonishing is intended as a safeguard to prevent hatred from arising between Jews.The previous halachah dealt with this concept in terms of our interpersonal relationships. Our halachah deals with this concept within the context of a person's relationship with God. Pesachim 113a teaches we must hate a sinner. As a preventive measure, the Torah offers us an alternative, admonishing him, which hopefully will cause him to correct his behavior and thus, do away with the need for such hatred (Sefer Yeraim).A person who rebukes a colleague - whether because of a [wrong committed] against him - as mentioned in the previous halachach person who rebukes a colleague - whether because of a [wrong committed] against him or because of a matter between his colleague and God6a sin or improper course of behavior as mentioned above - should rebuke him privately.7to prevent the person being rebuked from becoming embarrassed. However, note the latter portion of the following Halachah.The Magen Avraham (608:3) states that we are only required to administer a rebuke privately for a sin committed in private. If a person sees a colleague commit a sin in public, he should immediately rebuke him to prevent chillul HaShem. He should speak to him patiently and gently,8for we are all naturally defensive when our actions are being criticized. We must demonstrate more consideration for a fellow Jew's feelings if we wish our statements to be effective.The Sifri derives the need for privacy and gentleness from the manner in which God rebuked Miriam and Aharon for speaking against Moses. informing him that he is only making these statements for his colleague's own welfare,9and has no intention of causing him harm, but wishes, instead, to allow him to merit the life of the world to come.10which is the ultimate good as explained in Hilchot Teshuvah, Chapter 8.If he11the colleague who acts wrongly accepts [the rebuke], it is good; if not,12and the latter persists in his negative behavior he should rebuke him a second and third time.13In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam quotes the Sifra which mentions repeating a rebuke four or five times. Bava Metzia 31b states one must rebuke a colleague even one hundred times. Indeed, one is obligated to rebuke a colleague who does wrong until the latter strikes him14Arachin 16b mentions a second limit, when the transgressor curses the one who rebukes him. The Ramah (Orach Chayim 608:2) accepts this view as halachah. Nevertheless, in Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.), the Rambam specifically writes: "even if one is cursed or belittled, he should not slacken or cease admonishing until he hits him."The Ramah also mentions that the obligation to rebuke a colleague an unlimited number of times only applies when the rebuke is being given to a single individual. When one is admonishing many people for transgressing together, a single rebuke is sufficient. and tells him: "I will not listen."Whoever15The Rambam (Hilchot Shivitat Esor 1:7) states:Women who eat and drink until darkness [on the eve of Yom Kippur, because] they do not know we are commanded to add from the weekday to the holy [day] should not be admonished, lest they [continue] doing so consciously... It is better to allow them to remain unaware [of this transgression than risk] their willful violation of it.The same applies concerning similar cases.Commenting on this law, the Ramah (ibid.) mentions that a person should not rebuke a colleague for the inadvertent transgression of a Torah law if he knows that the transgressor will not listen. However, this only applies regarding instances like the obligation to add to the Yom Kippur fast which are not explicitly mentioned in the Torah. has the possibility of rebuking [sinners] and fails to do so is considered responsible for that sin,16This statement is quoted from Shabbat 54b which relates that, after the destruction of the first Temple, the righteous were also slain mercilessly. Why were they subjected to this punishment? Because they failed to rebuke the transgressors. See also Sanhedrin 93a.for he had the opportunity to rebuke the [sinners] - and perhaps, had he rebuked them, the sin would not have been committed.In Hilchot Teshuvah 4:1, the Rambam lists the failure to rebuke a transgressor as one of four sins that are so severe that "God will not allow a person who commits these deeds to repent." for he had the opportunity to rebuke the [sinners].
At first,1as mentioned in the previous halachah a person who admonishes a colleague should not speak to him harshly until he becomes embarrassed2Arachin 16b quotes Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah: "I wonder if there is anyone in this generation who knows how to admonish his fellow man." as [Leviticus 19:17] states: "[You should]... not bear a sin because of him."3I.e., from this verse, we can derive that embarrassing a colleague is a sin. This is what our Sages said:4Arachin (ibid.) Should you rebuke him to the point that his face changes [color]? The Torah states:5in the second half of the verse requiring us to rebuke a colleague. "[You should]... not bear a sin because of6In Hilchot Chovel U'Mazik, Chapter 3, the Rambam discusses the sin of embarrassing another person from the perspective of damages. Here, he focuses on the ethical aspect of the sin. him."From this, [we learn that] it is forbidden for a person to embarrass a [fellow] Jew.7even in privateThe Avodat HaMelech states that when a person feels that a colleague wronged him, he should admonish the latter gently. If the person admonished does not respond, he may speak to him in harsher terms and even embarrass him in private. However, under no circumstances may he embarrass him publicly for his own personal reasons. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav (156:8) and other commentaries disagree with this view and forbid embarrassing a colleague for personal reasons whether privately or publicly. How much more so [is it forbidden to embarrass him] in public.8where he will suffer greater shame. Even though a person who embarrasses a colleague is not [liable for] lashes9The minimum punishment for transgressing a Torah commandment. on account of him, it is a great sin.10as evident from what... Our Sages said:11Avot 3:14 "A person who embarrasses a colleague in public does not have a share in the world to come."Therefore,12The above-mentioned mishnah states that this applies "even if he possesses good deeds." In his commentary to this mishnah, the Rambam states that, generally, when a person dies amidst suffering, his death atones for his sins and he is granted a share in the world to come. In this case, even the person's suffering and death does not bring about atonement. See also Hilchot Teshuvah 3:14.Therefore, a person should be careful not to embarrass a colleague - whether of great or lesser stature - Alternatively, "whether an adult or a minor." Bava Kama 86b relates that even minors and fools can suffer from public embarrassment. a person should be careful not to embarrass a colleague - whether of great or lesser stature - in public, and not to call him a name which embarrasses him13Hilchot Teshuvah (ibid.) also states that one's share in the world to come is withheld because of this transgression. or to relate a matter that brings him shame in his presence.14The Rambam discusses mentioning such matters outside a person's presence in Chapter 7, Halachah 2.When does the above15prohibition against admonishing a person in public apply? In regard to matters between one man and another. However, in regard to spiritual matters, if [a transgressor] does not repent [after being admonished] in private,16Even in such a case, the person should first be rebuked in private. (However, note the statement of the Magen Avraham quoted in the previous halachah.)he may be put to shame in public and his sin may be publicized. He may be subjected to abuse, scorn, and curses until he repents, as was the practice of all the prophets of Israel. - The commentaries point to Nechemiah 13:23-25: "I saw Jews who had married wives of Ashdod and of Ammon... and I contended with them, cursed them, beat some of them, and pulled out their hair."See also Hilchot Teshuvah 4:2 which describes how the prophets would publicly rebuke the people for their sins. he may be put to shame in public and his sin may be publicized. He may be subjected to abuse, scorn, and curses until he repents, as was the practice of all the prophets of Israel.
It is pious behavior if a person who was wronged by a colleague would rather not admonish him or mention the matter at all because the person who wronged him was very boorish or because he was mentally disturbed,1The Rambam's words appear to indicate that if the person who committed the wrong was sophisticated enough to learn from the rebuke, he should be admonished so that he will develop his character. Only when the person would be incapable of benefiting from the rebuke, does the Rambam suggest withholding admonishment. [provided] he forgives him totally without bearing any feelings of hate or admonishing him.2See Megillah 28a which mentions that each night, Rabbi Nechuniah ben HaKanah and Rabbi Zeira would make a statement forgiving anyone who wronged them. The Torah is concerned only with those who carry feelings of hate.3Since the Torah mentions the mitzvah to admonish directly after the prohibition against hating a fellow Jew, there is obviously a connection between the two. The mitzvah to admonish is necessary to prevent feelings of hatred. If one is able to rise above those feelings without admonishing, there is no need to do so.
A person is obligated to show great care for orphans and widows because their spirits are very low and their feelings are depressed.1These people tend to be oversensitive and the smallest harshness or slight might cause them pain and thus, constitute a transgression of the prohibition mentioned below. This applies even if they are wealthy. We are commanded to [show this attention] even to a king's widow and his orphans2In addition to the possibility of financial difficulties which are often experienced by widows and orphans, the loss of a husband or parent is an emotional crisis which creates stress and heightens the sensitivity of the family members. Even a family whose financial status is secure may suffer strain and emotional upheaval. as [implied by Exodus 22:21]: "Do not mistreat any widow or orphan."How3Sefer HaMitzvot (neg. mitzvot 256) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 65) consider this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. should one deal with them? One should only speak to them gently and treat them only with honor. One should not cause pain to their persons with [overbearing] work or aggravate their feelings with harsh words and [one should] show more consideration for their financial interests than for one's own.4Berachot 18b relates that Shmuel's father was given money belonging to orphans to guard. He placed his own money above and below theirs so that he would suffer any possible loss and not they. Similarly, many leniencies and provisions have been instituted within Torah law to protect the interests of orphans. For example, a person who collects a debt from an estate left to orphans must take an oath that the debt had not been repaid even though, had the debtor remained alive, the oath would not have been required.See also Hilchot Nachalot, Chapter 11. Anyone who vexes or angers them, hurts their feelings, oppresses them, or causes them financial loss transgresses this prohibition.5The violation of the prohibition is thus dependent on the feelings of the widow or orphans in question. There is no objective standard of behavior. Rather, one must become sensitive to the feelings of the people who have suffered the loss and conduct himself accordingly. Surely this applies if one beats them or curses them.6Beating and cursing also involve the transgression of other prohibitions. Thus, a person who beats or curses an orphan violates two prohibitions by that act.Even though [a person who violates] this prohibition is not [liable for] lashes,7the minimum punishment given for the transgression of a Torah prohibition.The commentaries have questioned why, in fact, the minimal punishment of lashes is never given. Though punishment is not given for a transgression that does not involve a deed as mentioned in Halachah 5, it is possible that a person will commit a deed that aggravates a widow or orphan. Why does he not receive lashes in such an instance?The Sefer HaChinuch states that since the nature of the prohibition is very subjective, the Torah does not specify any punishment. The Minchat Chinuch quotes an opinion which maintains that any prohibition that can be violated by speech or thought alone (as is possible in this case) is not liable for lashes even when it is transgressed with a deed. The Avodat HaMelech states that the reason one does not receive lashes is stated by the Rambam himself, namely: the retribution one suffers for its [violation] is explicitly stated in the Torah (ibid. 22:23): "I will display My anger and slay you with the sword."8and this punishment is more severe than lashes. Hence, the lesser punishment is not administered. There is a covenant between them and He who spoke and created the world9When people lose a loved one, they often despair and feel that the world is run in a random and arbitrary manner. Perhaps the Rambam uses this term for God - "He who spoke..." - to stress how He is the One who brought the world into being and controls every facet of its existence. that whenever they cry out because they have been wronged, they will be answered as [ibid.:22] states: "When they cry out to Me, I will surely hear their10The use of a Biblical prooftext generally indicates a quote from a Talmudic or Midrashic source. However, though the concept the Rambam mentions is also alluded to in Bava Kama 93a, the exact expression he uses is not mentioned there.This instance supports an opinion frequently expressed by certain commentaries, i.e., that the Rambam had at his disposal midrashic sources which are not available to us. Alternatively, we are forced to say the Rambam takes the liberty of developing Halachic interpretations of Biblical verses on his own. Scholars of the post-Talmudic period would rarely make such interpretations.When does the above apply? When one causes them suffering for one's own purposes. However, it is permitted for a teacher to cause them suffering while teaching them Torah, or a craft, or in order to train them in proper behavior. - This point is mentioned explicitly in the Mechilta of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai. The Mechilta which is most commonly quoted is that composed by Rabbi Yishmael. Many of the Rabbis who have devoted themselves to the study of the sources used by the Rambam note his partiality for the Mechilta of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai and his frequent use of it as a source. cry."When does the above apply? When one causes them suffering for one's own purposes. However, it is permitted for a teacher to cause them suffering while teaching them Torah, or a craft, or in order to train them in proper behavior. Nevertheless,11even though he is given permission to discipline them he should not treat them in the same manner as he treats others, but rather make a distinction with regard to them and treat them with gentility, great mercy, and honor for [Proverbs 22:22] states: "For God will take up their cause."This12The Or Sameach notes that, although this verse may be understood as referring to the oppression of widows and orphans, it makes no explicit mention of such. Therefore, he suggests that the Rambam actually cited part of Proverbs 23:11 which states: "Do not enter orphans' fields for their redeemer is powerful, He will take up their cause" and a printing error caused the other verse to be substituted.Rav Kapach notes that manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah do not include the word שנאמר - "as it states." Accordingly, he maintains that the Rambam was merely borrowing the phrasing of a verse (as is his frequent custom), but not quoting it as a prooftext. applies to both those orphaned from their father and those orphaned from their mother.13This point is also mentioned explicitly in the Mechilta of Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai. The commentaries note only one other source which alludes to this concept, the description of Mar Ukva's children as orphans (Bava Metzia 70a) although other references imply that they had only lost their mother. Until when are they considered orphans in the context [of this mitzvah]? Until they no longer need a mature individual to support, instruct,14Note Hilchot Nachalot 11:10 which mentions a guardian's responsibilities to train the orphans in his charge to perform mitzvot. and care for them and are able to see to all their own needs by themselves, like other adults.15Thus, this is not a matter of objectively determined chronological age and may vary from society to society according to the different socio-economic norms.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
A person who collects gossip about a colleague violates a prohibition as [Leviticus 19:16] states: "Do not go around gossiping among your people."Even though this transgression is not punished by lashes, it is a severe sin and can cause the death of many Jews. Therefore, [the warning]: "Do not stand still over your neighbor's blood" is placed next to it in the Torah [ibid.]. See what happened [because of] Doeg, the Edomite.
Who is a gossiper? One who collects information and [then] goes from person to person, saying: "This is what so and so said;" "This is what I heard about so and so." Even if the statements are true, they bring about the destruction of the world.There is a much more serious sin than [gossip], which is also included in this prohibition: lashon horah, i.e., relating deprecating facts about a colleague, even if they are true.[Lashon horah does not refer to the invention of lies;] that is referred to as defamation of character. Rather, one who speaks lashon horah is someone who sits and relates: "This is what so and so has done;" "His parents were such and such;" "This is what I have heard about him," telling uncomplimentary things. Concerning this [transgression], the verse [Psalms 12:4] states: "May God cut off all guileful lips, the tongues which speak proud things..."
Our Sages said: "There are three sins for which retribution is exacted from a person in this world and, [for which] he is [nonetheless,] denied a portion in the world to come: idol worship, forbidden sexual relations, and murder. Lashon horah is equivalent to all of them."Our Sages also said: "Anyone who speaks lashon horah is like one who denies God as [implied by Psalms 12:5]: 'Those who said: With our tongues we will prevail; our lips are our own. Who is Lord over us?’”In addition, they said: "Lashon horah kills three [people], the one who speaks it, the one who listens to it, and the one about whom it is spoken. The one who listens to it [suffers] more than the one who speaks it.”
There are certain matters which are considered "the dust of lashon horah." What is implied? [For example, a person says:] "Who will tell so and so to continue acting as he does now," or "Do not talk about so and so; I do not want to say what happened," or the like.Similarly, it is also considered the "dust of lashon horah" when someone speaks favorably about a colleague in the presence of his enemies, for this will surely prompt them to speak disparagingly about him. In this regard, King Solomon said [Proverbs 27:14]: "One who greets his colleague early in the morning, in a loud voice, curses him," for his positive [act] will bring him negative [repercussions].Similarly, [to be condemned is] a person who relates lashon horah in frivolity and jest, as if he were not speaking with hatred. This was also mentioned by Solomon in his wisdom [Proverbs 26:18-19]: "As a madman who throws firebrands, arrows, and death and says: 'I am only joking.’”[Also, to be condemned is] someone who speaks lashon horah about a colleague slyly, pretending to be innocently telling a story without knowing that it is harmful. When he is reproved, he excuses himself by saying: "I did not know that the story was harmful or that so and so was involved."
[There is no difference] whether one speaks lashon horah about a person in his presence or behind his back. [The statements] of people who relate matters which, when passed from one person to another, will cause harm to a man's person or to his property or will even [merely] annoy him or frighten him are considered as lashon horah.If such statements were made in the presence of three people, [one may assume that the matter] has already become public knowledge. Thus, if one of the three relates the matter a second time, it is not considered lashon horah, provided his intention was not to spread the matter further and publicize it.
All the above are people who speak lashon horah in whose neighborhood, one is forbidden to dwell. How much more so [is it forbidden] to sit [together] with them and hear their conversation.The judgement against our ancestors in the desert was only sealed because of lashon horah.
A person who takes revenge against a colleague transgresses a Torah prohibition, as [Leviticus 19:18] states: "Do not take revenge."Even though [revenge] is not punished by lashes, it is a very bad trait. Instead, a person should [train himself] to rise above his feelings about all worldly things, for men of understanding consider all these things as vanity and emptiness which are not worth seeking revenge for.What is meant by taking revenge? A person's colleague asks him, "Lend me your hatchet. He responds, "I refuse to lend it to you." On the following day, the person [who refused] needs to borrow a hatchet from his colleague. He asks him: "Lend me your hatchet." The latter responds, "Just as you did not lend it to me, I will not lend it to you." This is considered as taking revenge. Instead, when he comes to ask him for it, he should give it to him with a full heart, without repaying him for what he did.The same applies in other similar instances. Thus, King David proclaimed regarding his exemplary qualities [Psalms 7:5]: "Have I repaid those who have done evil to me? Behold, I have rescued those who hated me without cause."
Similarly, anyone who holds a grudge against another Jew violates a Torah prohibition, as [Leviticus 19:18] states: "Do not bear a grudge against the children of your people."What is meant by bearing a grudge? Reuven asked Shimon, "Rent this house to me," or "lend this ox to me," and Shimon was not willing [to do so]. A few days later, Shimon came to borrow or rent something from him. Reuven told him, "Here, it is. I am lending it to you. I am not like you, nor am I paying you back for what you did."A person who acts in this manner violates the prohibition against bearing a grudge. Instead [of doing so], he should wipe the matter from his heart and never bring it to mind. As long as he brings the matter to mind and remembers it, there is the possibility that he will seek revenge. Therefore, the Torah condemned holding a grudge, [requiring] one to wipe the wrong from his heart entirely, without remembering it at all.This is a proper quality which permits a stable environment, trade, and commerce to be established among people.
