=== 1 | Start Reading ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
THE ROSETTA STONE
From
The Mummy, Chapters on Egyptian Funeral Archaeology
by E. A. Wallis Budge
Cambridge, University Press
[1893]
Scanned at sacred-texts.com, December 2006. Proofed and formatted by John Bruno Hare. This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to January 1st, 1923. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this notice of attribution is left intact in all copies.

=== 2 | The Rosetta Stone ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
Click to enlarge
THE ROSETTA STONE, inscribed with a decree of the priests of Memphis, offering divine honours on Ptolemy V., Epiphanes, King of Egypt, B.C. 193.
THE ROSETTA STONE
1
AND THE STELE OF CANOPUS.
The following remarks upon the decipherment of the Egyptian hieroglyphics may be fitly introduced by a description of the remarkable objects of antiquity whose names stand at the head of this chapter.
Finding of the Rosetta Stone.
The
Rosetta Stone
is a slab of black basalt, which is now preserved in the British Museum (Egyptian Gallery, No. 24). It was found by a French artillery officer called Boussard, among the ruins of Fort Saint Julien, near the Rosetta mouth of the Nile, in 1799, but subsequently came into the possession of the British Government at the capitulation of Alexandria. It is inscribed with fragments of 14 lines of hieroglyphics, 32 lines of demotic, and 54 lines of Greek. A portion of the stone has been broken off from the top, and the right-hand bottom corner has also suffered injury. It now measures 3 ft. 9 in. × 2 ft. 4½ in. × 11 in. We may arrive at an idea of the original size of the Rosetta Stone by comparing the number of lines upon it with the number of those upon the
Stele of Canopus and Rosetta Stone compared
Stele of Canopus
, which is inscribed in hieroglyphic, demotic and Greek, measures 7 ft. 2 in. × 2 ft. 7 in. x 1 ft. 2 in., and is inscribed with 36 lines of hieroglyphics, 73 lines of demotic, and 74 lines of Greek. The demotic inscription is on the edge of the stele. This stele was set up at Canopus in the ninth year of the reign of
Ptolemy III., Euergetes I.
(B.C. 247-222), to record the decree made at Canopus by the priesthood, assembled from all parts of Egypt, in honour of the king. It records the great benefits which he had conferred upon Egypt, and states what festivals are to be celebrated in his honour, and in that of Berenice, etc., and, like the Rosetta Stone, concludes with a resolution ordering that a copy of this inscription in hieroglyphics, Greek and demotic, shall be placed in every large temple in Egypt. Now the Rosetta Stone is inscribed with 32 lines of demotic, and the Stele of Canopus with 73; but as the lines on the Rosetta Stone are rather more than double the length of those on the Stele of Canopus, it is pretty certain that each
document is of about the same length. The Stele of Canopus has 74 lines of Greek to 54 on the Rosetta Stone, but as the letters are longer and wider, it is clear from this also that the Greek versions occupied about the same space. Allowing then for the difference in the size of the hieroglyphic characters, we should expect the hieroglyphic inscription on the Rosetta Stone to occupy 14 or 15 lines. When complete the stele must have been about twelve inches longer than it is now, and the top was probably rounded and inscribed, like that of the Stele of Canopus, with a winged disk, having pendent uræi, that on the right wearing
, the crown of Upper Egypt, and that on the left
, the crown of Lower Egypt; by the side of each uræus, laid horizontally, would be
, and above
,
ṭā ānch
, "giver of life."
Contents of Rosetta Stone.
The inscriptions on the Rosetta Stone form a version of a decree of the priesthood assembled at Memphis in honour of
Ptolemy V., Epiphanes
, King of Egypt, B.C. 195, written in hieroglyphics, demotic and Greek. A facsimile
1
of them was published by the Society of Antiquaries
2
in 1802, and copies were distributed among the scholars who were anxious to undertake the investigation of the texts.
Principal works on the Rosetta Stone.
The hieroglyphic text has been translated by Brugsch in his
Inscriptio Rosettana
, Berlin, 1851; by Chabas,
L’Inscription hiéroglyphique de Rosette
, Paris, 1867; and by Sharpe,
The Rosetta Stone in hieroglyphics and Greek
, London, 1871, etc. The Demotic text has been studied by M. de Sacy,
Lettre à M. Chaptal sur l’inscription égypt. de Rosette
, Paris, 1802; by Akerblad,
Letter à M. de Sacy sur l’inscription égypt. de Rosette
, Paris, 1802; by Young,
Hieroglyphics
(collected by the Egyptian Society, arranged by Dr. T. Young, 2 vols., fol., 100 plates, 1823-1828), pl. x ff.; by Brugsch,
Die Inschrift von Rosette nach ihrem ägyptisch-demotischen Texte sprachlich und sachlich erklärt
, Berlin, 1850; Salvolini,
Analyse Grammaticale Raisonnée de
différents textes des anciens Egyptiens
, Vol. I.,
Texte hiéroglyphique et démotique de la pierre de Rosette
, Paris, 1836. This work was never finished. The Greek text has been edited by Heyne,
Commentatio in inscriptionem græcam monumenti trinis titulis insigniti ex Aegypto Londinum apportati
, in tom. xv. of Comment. Soc. R. Sc. Gött., pp. 260-280; Ameilhon,
Eclaircissements sur l’inscription grecque du monument trouvé à Rosette
, Paris, 1803; Drumann,
Commentatio in inscriptionem prope Rosettam inventam
, Regiomont., 1822; and Drumann,
Historisch-antiquarische Untersuchungen über Aegypten, oder die Inschrift von Rosette aus dem Griechischen übersetzt und erläutert
, Königsberg, 1823; Lenormant,
Essai sur le texte grec de l’inscription de Rosette
, Paris, 1842; Letronne,
Recueil des inscriptions grecques et latines d’Egypte
, Paris, 1842; by Franz in Boeckh,
Corpus Inscriptionum Græcarum
, t. iii., 1853, p. 334 f, No. 4697, etc.
Beneficent acts of Ptolemy V. Epiphanes.
The inscriptions upon the Rosetta Stone set forth that Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, while king of Egypt, consecrated revenues of silver and corn to the temples, that he suppressed certain taxes and reduced others, that he granted certain privileges to the priests and soldiers, and that when, in the eighth year of his reign, the Nile rose to a great height and flooded all the plains, he undertook, at great expense, the task of damming it in and directing the overflow of its waters into proper channels, to the great gain and benefit of the agricultural classes. In addition to the remissions of taxes which he made to the people, he gave handsome gifts to the temples, and subscribed to the various ceremonies which were carried on in them. In return for these gracious acts the priesthood assembled at Memphis decreed that a statue of the king should be set up in a conspicuous place in every temple of Egypt, and that each should be inscribed with the name and titles of "Ptolemy, the saviour of Egypt." Royal apparel was to be placed on each statue, and ceremonies were to be performed before each three times a day. It was also decreed that a gilded wooden shrine, containing a gilded wooden statue of the king, should be placed in each temple, and that these were to be carried out with the shrines of the other kings in the great panegyrics. It was also decreed
Festivals in honour of Ptolemy Epiphanes.
that ten golden crowns of a peculiar design should be made and laid upon the royal shrine; that the birthday and coronation day of the king should be celebrated each year with great pomp and show; that the first five days of the month of Thoth should each year be set apart for the performance of a festival in honour of the king; and finally that a copy of this decree, engraved upon a tablet of hard stone in hieroglyphic, demotic and Greek characters, should be set up in each of the temples of the first, second and third orders, near the statue of the ever-living Ptolemy. The Greek portion of the inscriptions appears to be the original document, and the hieroglyphic and demotic versions merely translations of it.
Although it is nearly certain that, without the aid of the Greek inscription found on the socket of an obelisk at Philæ, and the hieroglyphic inscription found on the obelisk which belonged to that socket, the hieroglyphic alphabet could never have been recovered from the Rosetta Stone
Rosetta Stone the base of decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics.
, still it is around this wonderful document that all the interest in the decipherment of the Egyptian hieroglyphics clings. For many hundreds of years the interest of the learned of all countries has been excited by the hieroglyphic inscriptions of Egypt, and the theories propounded as to their contents were legion. Speaking broadly, the references to this subject by classical authors
1
are not very satisfactory; still there are some remarkable exceptions which will be referred to presently. Inasmuch as the names of Roman emperors, as late as the time of Decius
Late use of hieroglyphics.
, were written in hieroglyphics, it follows that the knowledge of this subject must have been possessed by some one, either Greek or Egyptian, in Egypt. "For a hundred and fifty years after the Ptolemies began to reign, the Egyptian hieroglyphics appear to have been commonly used, and the Egyptians were not prohibited from making use, so far as it seemed requisite, according to ritual or otherwise appropriate, of the native language and of its time-hallowed written signs."
2
Little by little, however, the Greek language displaced
the Egyptian, and the writing in common use among the people, called to-day "demotic" or "enchorial," and anciently "epistolographic," completely usurped the place of the "hieratic" or cursive form of hieroglyphic writing. Although the Greeks and Romans appear not to have studied hieroglyphics thoroughly, only repeating, generally, what they were told about certain signs, nevertheless writers like Herodotus, Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Hermapion, Chaeremon, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Horapollo, contribute information on this subject of considerable value.
Footnotes
108:1
A cast of the Rosetta Stone is exhibited in the Fitzwilliam Museum.
109:1
Other facsimiles are given in Lepsius,
Auswahl
, Bl. 18, and in Arundale and Bonomi,
Gallery of Antiquities
, pl. 49, p. 114.
109:2
The Greek version of the decree of the Egyptian Priests in honour of
Ptolemy the Fifth
, surnamed
Epiphanes
, from the stone inscribed in the sacred and vulgar Egyptian and the Greek characters, taken from the French at the surrender of Alexandria. London, 1802. Nichols.
111:1
See Gutschmid,
Scriptorum rerum Aegyptiacarum Series,
in
Philologus
, Bd. X., Göttingen, 1855, ss. 712 ff.
111:2
Mommsen,
Provinces of the Roman Empire
, Vol. II. p. 243.

=== 3 | Ancient writings about Hieroglyphics ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
Greek writers upon Egyptian hieroglyphics.
To
Hecataeus
of Miletus,
1
who visited Egypt between B.C. 513-501, we owe, through
Herodotus
, much knowledge of Egypt, and he must be considered the earliest Greek writer upon Egypt.
Hellanitus
of Mytilene, B.C. 478-393, shows in his Αιγυπτιακὰ that he has some accurate knowledge of the meaning of some hieroglyphic words.
2
Democritus wrote upon the hieroglyphics of Meroë,
3
but this work is lost.
Herodotus
says that the Egyptians used two quite different kinds of writing, one of which is called sacred (hieroglyphic), the other common
4
(demotic).
Diodorus
says that the Ethiopian letters are called by the Egyptians "hieroglyphics."
5
Strabo
, speaking of the obelisks at Thebes, says that there are inscriptions upon them which proclaim the riches and power of their kings, and that their rule extends even to Scythia, Bactria, and India.
6
Chaeremon
of Naucratis, who lived in the first half of the first century after Christ,
7
and who must be an entirely different person from Chaeremon the companion of Aelius Gallus (B.C. 25),
Greek writers upon Egyptian hieroglyphics.
derided by Strabo,
1
and charged with lying by Josephus,
2
wrote a work on Egyptian hieroglyphics
3
, περὶ τῶν ἱερῶν γραμμάτων, which has been lost. He appears to have been attached to the great library of Alexandria, and as he was a "sacred scribe," it may therefore be assumed that he had access to many important works on hieroglyphics, and that he understood them. He is mentioned by Eusebius
4
as Χαιρήμων ὁ ἱερογραμματεύς, and by Suidas,
5
but neither of these writers gives any information as to the contents of his work on hieroglyphics, and we should have no idea of the manner of work it was but for the extract preserved by
John Tzetzes on Egyptian hieroglyphics.
John Tzetzes
(Τζέτζης, born about AḌ. 1110, died after AḌ. 1180). Tzetzes was a man of considerable learning and literary activity, and his works
6
have value on account of the lost books which are quoted in them. In his
Chiliades
7
(Bk. V., line 395) he speaks of ὁ Αἰγύπτιος ἱερογραμματεὺς Χαιρήμων, and refers to Chaeremon's διδάγματα τῶν ἱερῶν γραμμάτων. In his Exegesis of Homer's Iliad he gives an extract from the work itself, and we are able to see at once that it was written by one who was able to give his information at first hand. This interesting extract was first brought to the notice of the world by the late Dr. Birch, who published a paper on it in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature
, Vol. III., second series, 1850, pp. 385-396. In it he quoted the Greek text of the extract, from the edition of Tzetzes'
Exegesis
, first published by Hermann,
8
and added remarks and hieroglyphic characters illustrative of it, together with the scholia of Tzetzes, the text of which he emended in places. As this extract is so important for the history of
the study of hieroglyphics, it is given here, together with the scholia on it, from the excellent edition of the Greek text, by Lud. Bachmann,
Scholia in Homeri Iliadem
, Lipsiae, 1835, pp. 823, § 97 and 838, with an English translation.
Extract from Tzetzes' work on the Iliad
Click to enlarge
Translation of the extract.
"Now, Homer says this as he was accurately instructed in all learning by means of the symbolic Ethiopian characters. For the Ethiopians do not use alphabetic characters, but depict animals of all sorts instead, and limbs and members of these animals; for the sacred scribes in former times desired
to conceal their opinion about the nature of the gods, and therefore handed all this down to their own children by allegorical methods and the aforesaid symbols and characters, as the sacred scribe Chaeremon says."
Accuracy of Tzetzes' statements proved.
1. "And for
joy
, they would depict a woman beating a tambourine."
[The drum or tambourine was used in the temples for festival services, and a woman beating a tambourine is the determinative of the words
seḳer
, "to beat a tambourine," and
ṭechennu
.]
2. "For
grief
, a man clasping his chin in his hand and bending towards the ground."
[A man, seated, with his hand to his mouth,
is the determinative of the word
chaȧnȧu
, "grief." A seated woman with head bent and hands thrown up before her face, is the determinative of
ḥath
, "to weep."]
3. "For
misfortune
, an eye weeping."
[The weeping eye
is the determinative of the common word
rem
," to weep."]
4, "For
want
, two hands stretched out empty."
[Compare
,
ȧt
, "not to have," "to be without." Coptic
.]
5. "For
rising
, a snake coming out of a hole."
[Compare
per
," to come forth, to rise" (of the sun) ]
6. "For
setting
, [the same] going in."
[Compare
āq
, "to enter, to set" (of the sun).]
7. "For
vivification
, a frog."
1
[The frog
,
ḥefennu
, means 100,000, hence fertility and abundance of life.]
Accuracy of Tzetzes' statements proved.
8. "For soul, a hawk; and also for
sun
and
god
."
[
Compare
ba
, "soul,"
neter
, "god," and
Ḥeru
, "Horus" or "the Sun-god."]
9. "For a female-bearing woman, and
mother
and
time
and
sky
, a vulture."
[
mut
, "mother," is the common meaning of a vulture, and at times the goddess Mut seems to be identified with
nut
, "the sky." Horapollo says that the vulture also meant "year" (ed. Leemans, p. 5), and this statement is borne out by the evidence of the hieroglyphics, where we find that
renpit
, "year."]
10. "For
king
, a bee."
[Compare
suten net
, "king of the North and South."]
11. "For
birth
and
natural growth
, and males, a beetle."
[The beetle
xeperȧ
was the emblem of the god
Cheperȧ
, who is supposed to have created or evolved himself, and to have given birth to gods, men, and every creature and thing in earth and sky. The word
means "to become," and in late texts
cheperu
may be fairly well rendered by "evolutions." The meaning male comes, of course, from the idea of the ancients that the beetle had no female. See
infra
, under
Scarab
.]
12. "For
earth
, an ox."
[
ȧḥet
means field, and
ȧḥ
means "ox"; can Chaeremon have confused the meanings of these two words, similar in sound?]
13. "And the fore part of a lion signifies
dominion
and
protection
of every kind."
Accuracy of Tzetzes' statements proved.
[Compare
ḥā
, "chief, that which is in front, duke, prince."]
14. "A lion's tail, necessity."
[Compare
peḥ
, "to force, to compel, to be strong."]
15, 16. "A stag,
year;
likewise the
palm
."
[Of the stag meaning "year" I can give no example. The palm branch
or
renpit
, is the common word for "year."]
17. "The boy signifies
growth
."
[Compare
which is the determinative of words meaning "youth" and juvenescence.]
18. "The old man,
decay
."
[Compare
, the determinative of
ȧan
, "old age."]
19. "The bow, the
swift
power."
[The Egyptian word for bow is
peṭ
. Compare
peṭ
, "to run, to flee away."]
"And others by the thousand. And by means of these characters Homer says this. But I will proceed in another place, if you please, to explain the pronunciation of those characters in Ethiopic fashion, as I have learnt it from Chaeremon."
1
Extract from Tzetzes.
In another place
2
Tzetzes says, "Moreover, he was not uninitiated into the symbolic Ethiopian characters, the nature of which we will expound in the proper places. All this demonstrates that Homer was instructed in Egypt," ναὶ μὴν οὐδὲ τῶν Αἰθιοπικῶν συμβολικῶν γραμμάτων ἀμύητος γέγονε, περὶ ὧν ἐν τοῖς οἰκείοις τόποις διδάξομεν ὁποῖα εἰσι. καὶ ταῦτα δὲ τὸν Ὅμηρον ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ παιδευθῆναι παραδεικνύουσι and upon this the scholia on Tzetzes say:— Περὶ τῶν Αἰθιοπικῶν γραμμάτων Διό[δωρος] μὲν ἐπεμνήσθη, καὶ μερικῶς εἶπεν, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ ἐξ ἀκοῆς ἄλλου μαθὼν καὶ οὐκ
ἀκριβῶς αὐτὸς ἐπιστάμενος [εἰ] καί τινα τούτων καέλεξεν ὥσπερ ἐν οἷς ὀ͂ιδε παῤῥησιάζεται. Χαιρήμων δὲ ὁ ἱερογραμματεὺς ὅλην βίβλον περὶ τῶν τοιούτων γραμμάτων συνέταξεν. ἅτινα, ἐν τοῖς τρο[σφόροις] τόποις τῶν Ὁμηρείων ἐπῶν ἀ[κρι]βέστερον καὶ πλατυτέρωσ ἐρῶ
1
"Diodorus made mention of the Ethiopian characters and spoke particularly, yet as though he had learnt by hearsay from another and did not understand them accurately himself, although he set down some of them, as though he were talking confidently on subjects that he knew. But Chaeremon the sacred scribe compiled a whole book about the aforesaid characters, which I will discuss more accurately and more fully in the proper places in the Homeric poems." It is much to be regretted that Chaeremon's work, if he ever fulfilled his promise, has not come down to us.
Greek translation of Egyptian text by Hermapion.
One of the most valuable extracts from the works of Greek and Roman writers on Egypt is that from a translation of an Egyptian obelisk by
Hermapion
, preserved by Ammianus Marcellinus;
2
unfortunately, however, neither the name of Hermapion's work nor the time in which he lived is known. This extract consists of the Greek translation of six lines of hieroglyphics: three lines are from the south side of the obelisk, one line from the east side, and a second and a third line from the other sides. A comparison of the Greek extract with any inscription of Rameses II. on an obelisk shows at once that Hermapion must have had a certain accurate knowledge of hieroglyphics; his translation of the lines, however does not follow consecutively. The following examples will show that the
Comparison of Greek translation with the Egyptian text.
Greek, in many cases, represents the Egyptian very closely. Λέγει Ἥλιος βασιλεῖ Ῥαμέστῃ· δεδώρημαί σοι ἀνὰ πᾶσαν οἰκουμένην μετὰ χαρᾶς βασιλεύιν, ὃν Ἥλιος φιλεῖ =
"Says Rā, I give to thee all lands and foreign countries with rest of heart, O king of the north and south, Usr-maāt-Rā-setep-en-Rā,
son of the Sun, Rameses, beloved of Ȧmen-Rā." Θεογέννητος κτιστὴς τῆς οἰκουμένης =
"born the gods, possessor of the two lands" (
i.e.
, the world). Ὁ ἑστὼς ἐπ᾽ ἀληθείας δεσπότης διαδήματος, τὴν Αἴγυπτον δοξάσας κεκτημένος, ὁ ἀγλαοποιήσας Ἡλίου πόλιν =
"[the mighty bull], resting upon Law, lord of diadems, protector of Egypt, malting splendid Heliopolis with monuments." Ἥλιος θεὸς μέγας δεσπότης οὐραννοῦ =
"Says Rā Harmachis, the great god, lord of heaven," πληρώσας τὸν νεὼν τοῦ φοίνικος ἀγαθῶν, ᾧ οἱ θεοὶ ζωῆς χρόνον ἐδωρήσαντο =
"filling the temple of the
bennu
(phœnix) with his splendours, may the gods give to him life like the Sun for ever," etc.
Flaminian obelisk.
The Flaminian obelisk, from which the Egyptian passages given above are taken, was brought from Heliopolis to Rome by Augustus, and placed in the Circus Maximus,
1
whence it was dug out; it now stands in the Piazza del Popolo at Rome, where it was set up by Pope Sixtus V. in 1589.
2
This obelisk was originally set up by Seti I., whose inscriptions occupy the middle column of the north, south, and west sides; the other columns of hieroglyphics record the names and titles of Rameses II. who, in this case, appropriated the obelisk of his father, just as he did that of Thothmes III. The obelisk was found broken into three pieces, and in order to render it capable of sustaining itself, three palms’ length was cut from the base. The texts have been published by Kircher,
Oedipus Aegyptiacus
, t. iii. p. 213; by Ungarelli,
Interpretatio Obeliscorum Urbis
, Rome, 1842, p. 65,
sqq
.,
plate 2; and by Bonomi, who drew them for a paper on this obelisk by the Rev. G. Tomlinson in Trans. Royal Soc. Lit., Vol. I. Second Series, p. 176 ff. For an account of this obelisk, see Zoëga,
De Origine et Usu Obeliscorum
, Rome, 1797, p. 92.
Champollion's estimate of Clement's statements on hieroglyphics.
The next Greek writer whose statements on Egyptian hieroglyphics are of value is Clement of Alexandria, who flourished about AḌ. 191-220. According to Champollion, "un seul auteur grec, . . . . . . . . . a démêlé et signalé, dans l’écriture égyptienne sacrée, les élémens phonétiques, lesquels en sont, pour ainsi dire, le principe vital
1
. . . . . Clément d’Alexandrie s’est, lui seul, occasionnellement attaché à en donner une idée claire; et ce philosophe chrétien était, bien plus que tout autre, en position d’en être bien instruit. Lorsque mes recherches et l’étude constante des monuments égyptiens m’eurent conduit aux résultats précédemment exposés, je dus revenir sur ce passage de Saint Clément d’Alexandrie, que j’ai souvent cité, pour savoir si, à la faveur des notions que j’avais tirées d’un examen soutenu des inscriptions hiéroglyphiques, le texte de l’auteur grec ne deviendrait pas plus intelligible qu’il ne l’avait paru jusquelà. J’avoue que ses termes me semblèrent alors si positifs et si clairs, et les idées qu’il renferme si exactement conformes à ma théorie de l’écriture hiéroglyphique, que je dus craindre aussi de me livrer à une illusion et à un entraînement dont tout me commandait de me défier."
2
From the above it will be seen what a high value Champollion placed on the statements concerning the hieroglyphics by Clement, and they have, in consequence, formed the subject of various works by eminent authorities. In his
Précis
(p. 328), Champollion gives the extract from Clement with a Latin translation and remarks by Letronne.
3
Dulaurier in his
Examen d’un passage des Stromates de Saint Clément d’Alexandrie
, Paris, 1833, again published the passage and gave many explanations of words in it, and commented learnedly upon it. (See also
[paragraph continues]
Bunsen's
Aegyptens Stelle
, Bd. I., p. 240, and Thierbach,
Erklärung auf das Aegyptische Schriftwesen
, Erfurt, 1846.) The passage is as follows
1
:—
Clement of Alexandria on hieroglyphics.
Click to enlarge
Translation of extract from Clement.
"For example, those that are educated among the Egyptians first of all learn that system of Egyptian characters which is styled EPISTOLOGRAPHIC; secondly, the HIERATIC, which the sacred scribes employ; lastly and finally the HIEROGLYPHIC. The hieroglyphic sometimes speaks plainly by means of the letters of the alphabet, and sometimes uses symbols, and when it uses symbols, it sometimes (
a
) speaks plainly by imitation, and sometimes (
b
) describes in a figurative way, and sometimes (c) simply says one thing for another in accordance with certain secret rules. Thus (
a
) if they desire to write
sun
or
moon
, they make a circle or a crescent in plain imitation of the form. And when (
b
) they describe figuratively (by transfer and transposition without violating the natural meaning of words), they completely alter some things and make manifold changes in the form of others. Thus, they hand
down the praises of their kings in myths about the gods which they write up in relief. Let this be an example of the third form (
c
) in accordance with the secret rules. While they represent the stars generally by snakes’ bodies, because their course is crooked, they represent the sun by the body of a beetle, for the beetle moulds a ball from cattle dung and rolls it before him. And they say that this animal lives under ground for six months, and above ground for the other portion of the year, and that it deposits its seed in this globe and there engenders offspring, and that no female beetle exists."
Three kinds of Egyptian writing.
From the above we see that Clement rightly stated that the Egyptians had three kinds of writing:—epistolographic, hieratic and hieroglyphic. The epistolographic is that kind which is now called "demotic," and which in the early days of hieroglyphic decipherment was called "enchorial." The hieratic is the kind commonly found on papyri. The hieroglyphic kind is described as, I.
cyriologic
, that is to say, by means of figurative phonetic characters,
e.g.
,
emsuḥ
, "crocodile," and II.
symbolic
, that is to say, by actual representations of objects,
e.g.
,
"goose,"
"bee," and so on The symbolic division is subdivided into three parts: I.
cyriologic by imitation
,
e.g.
,
, a vase with water flowing from it represented a "libation "; II.
tropical
,
e.g.
,
, a crescent moon to represent "month,"
, a reed and palette to represent "writing" or "scribe"; and III.
enigmatic
,
e.g.
,
, a beetle, to represent the "sun."
1
In modern Egyptian Grammars the matter is stated more simply, and we see that hieroglyphic signs are used in two ways: I. Ideographic, II. Phonetic.
māu
, "water," is an instance of the first method, and
m-s-u-ḥ
, is an instance of the second. Ideographic signs are used as
determinatives
, and are either
ideographic
or
generic
. Thus after
mȧu
, "cat," a cat
is placed, and is an
ideographic
determinative; but
, heaven with a star in it, written after a
ḳerḥ
, is a
generic
determinative. Phonetic signs are either
Alphabetic
as
a
,
b
,
k
, or
Syllabic
, as
men
,
chen
, etc.
Porphyry the Philosopher, who died about AḌ. 305, says of Pythagoras:
1
—
Click to enlarge
Pythagoras and hieroglyphics.
"And in Egypt he lived with the priests and learnt their wisdom and the speech of the Egyptians and three sorts of writing, epistolographic and hieroglyphic and symbolic, which sometimes speak in the common way by imitation and sometimes describe one thing by another in accordance with certain secret rules." Here it seems that Porphyry copied Clement inaccurately. Thus he omits all mention of the Egyptian writing called "hieratic," and of the subdivision of hieroglyphic called "cyriologic," and of the second sub- division of the symbolic called "tropic." The following table, based on Letronne, will make the views about hieroglyphic writing held by the Greeks plain:—
Letronne's summary.
Footnotes
112:1
See
De rerum Aegyptiacarum scriptoribus Graecis ante Alexandrum Magnum
, in
Philologus
, Bd. X. s. 525.
112:2
See the instances quoted in
Philologus
, Bd. X. s. 539.
112:3
Περὶ ἐν Μερόῃ ἱερῶν γραμμάτων. Diogenes Laertius,
Vit. Democ
., ed. Isaac Casaubon, 1593, p. 661.
112:4
Καὶ τὰ μὲν αὐτῶν ἱρὰ, τὰ δὲ δημοτικὰ καλὲεται. Herodotus, II. 36, ed. Didot, p. 84.
112:5
Diodorus, III. 4, ed. Didot, p. 129.
112:6
Strabo, XVII. I, § 46, ed. Didot, p. 693•
112:7
According to Mommsen he came to Rome, as tutor to Nero, in the reign of Claudius.
Provinces of Rom
e, Vol. II. pp. 259, 273.
113:1
Γελώμενος δὲ τὸ πλέον ὡς ἀλαζὼν καὶ ἰδιώτησ. Strabo, XVII. 1, § 29, ed. Didot, p. 685.
113:2
Contra Apion
., I. 32 ff. On the identity of Chaeremon the Stoic philosopher with Chaeremon the ἱερογραμματεὺς, see Zeller,
Hermes
, XI.
113:3
431. His other lost work, Αἰγυπτιακά, treated of the Exodus.
113:4
Praep. Evang.
, v. 10, ed. Gaisford, t. 1, p. 421.
113:5
Sub voce Ἱερογλυφικά.
113:6
For an account of them see Krumbacher,
Geschichte aer Byzantinischen Literatur
, München, 1891, pp. 235-242.
113:7
Ed. Kiessling, Leipzig, 1826, p. 191.
113:8
Draconis Stratonicensis Liber de Metris Poeticis. Joannis Tzetzae Exegesis in Homeri Iliadem. Primum edidit . . . God. Hermannus, Lipsiae, 1812.
115:1
But compare Horapollo, (ed. Leemans, p. 33), Ἄπλαστον δὲ ἄνθρωπον γράφοντες, βάτραχον ζωγραφοῦσιν.
117:1
Hermann, p. 123, ll. 2-29; Bachmann, p. 823, ll. 12-34.
117:2
Hermann, p. 17, ll. 21-25; Bachmann, p. 755, ll. 9-12.
118:1
Hermann, p. 146, ll. 12-22; Bachmann, p. 838, ll. 31-37.
118:2
Liber XVII. 4.
119:1
Qui autem notarum textus obelisco incisus est veteri, quem videmus in Circo etc. Ammianus Marcellinus, XVII. 4, § 17. It seems to be referred to in Pliny, XXXVI. 29.
119:2
For a comparative table of obelisks standing in 1840, see Bonomi,
Notes on Obelisks
, in
Trans. Royal Soc. Lit.
, Vol. I. Second Series, p. 158.
120:1
Précis du Système hiéroglyphique des anciens Egyptiens
, Paris, 1824, p. 321.
120:2
Précis
, p. 327.
120:3
See also
Œuvres Choisies
, t. I. pp. 237-254.
121:1
Clem. Alex.,
ed. Dindorf, t. III.
Strom
. lib. V. §§ 20, 21, pp. 17, 18.
122:1
Champollion, Précis, p. 278.
123:1
Porphyry,
De Vita Pythagorae
, cd. Didot, § 11, p. 89, at the foot.

=== 4 | Post-Antiquity writings on Hieroglyphics ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
Horapollo on hieroglyphics.
The next writer of importance on hieroglyphics is
Horapollo
, who towards the close of the IVth century of our era composed a work called Ἱερογλυφικά; this book was translated into Greek by one Philip, of whom nothing is known. Wiedemann thinks that it was originally written in Coptic, which, in the middle ages, was usually called
[paragraph continues]
"Egyptian," and not in ancient Egyptian.
1
In this work are given the explanations of a number of ideographs which occur, for the most part, in Ptolemaïc inscriptions; but, like the list of those given by Chaeremon, no
phonetic
values of the signs are given. Nevertheless the list is of considerable interest. The best edition of Horapollo is that of Conrad Leemans,
2
but the text was edited in a handy form, with an English translation and notes by Samuel Sharpe and Dr. Birch, by J. Cory, in 1840.
Mediaeval writers on hieroglyphics.
In more modern times the first writer at any length on hieroglyphics was Athanasius Kircher, the author of some ponderous works
3
in which he pretended to have found the key to the hieroglyphic inscriptions, and to translate them. Though a man of great learning, it must be plainly said that, judged by scholars of to-day, he would be considered an impostor. In his works on Coptic
4
there are, no doubt, many interesting facts, but mixed with them is such an amount of nonsense that
Kircher and Jablonski.
Jablonski says touching one of his statements, "Verum hic ut in aliis plurimis fucum lectoribus fecit Jesuita ille, et fumum vendidit"; from the same writer also, Kircher's arrogant assertions called forth the remark, "Kircherus, in quo semper plus inest ostentationis, quam solidae eruditionis."
5
It is impossible to understand what grounds Kircher had for his statements and how he arrived at his results; as for his translations, they have
nothing
correct in them. Here is one taken at random from
Oedipus
[paragraph continues]
Aegyptiacus
, t. III, p. 431, where he gives a translation of an inscription (A) printed on the plate between pp. 428 and 429. The hieroglyphics are written on a Ptaḥ-Seker-Osiris figure and read:—
and his translation runs:—"Vitale providi Numinis dominium, quadruplicem Mundani liquoris substantiam dominio confert Osiridis, cujus unà cum Mendesio foecundi Numinis dominio, benefica virtute influente, omnia quae in Mundo sunt, vegetantur, animantur, conservantur." Other writers on hieroglyphics whose works Kircher consulted were John Peter Bolzanius Valerianus,
1
and Mercati,
2
but no good results followed their investigations. In the year 1770 Joseph de Guignes
De Guignes and Zoëga.
determined the existence of groups of characters having determinatives,
3
and four years later he published his
Mémoire
,
4
in which he tried to prove that the epistolographic and symbolic characters of the Egyptians were to be found in the Chinese characters, and that the Chinese nation was nothing but an Egyptian colony. In 1797 Zoëga made a step in the right direction, and came to the conclusion
5
that the hieroglyphics were letters and that the cartouches contained royal names. A few years later
Silvestre de Sacy and Akerblad.
Silvestre de Sacy published a
letter on the inscriptions on the Rosetta Stone,
1
and the work of this learned man was soon after followed by that of Akerblad who, in a letter to M. de Sacy
2
discussed the demotic inscription on the recently discovered Rosetta Stone, and published an alphabet of the demotic characters, from which a large number were adopted in after times by Young and Champollion. It would seem that Akerblad never gained the credit which was due to him for his really clever work, and it will be seen from the facts quoted in the following pages, how largely the success of Young's labours on the Demotic inscription on the Rosetta Stone depended on those of Akerblad. But side by side with the letters of de Sacy and Akerblad and the learned works of Young and Champollion, there sprang into existence a mass of literature full of absurd statements and theories written by men having no qualifications for expressing opinions on hieroglyphic matters.
Absurd theories of the contents of Egyptian texts.
Thus the Comte de Pahlin in his
De l’étude des Hiéroglyphes
,
3
hesitated not to say that the inscription on one of the porticoes of the Temple at Denderah contained a translation of the hundredth Psalm, composed to invite all people to enter into the house of the Lord. The same author said that to produce the books of the Bible, which were written on papyri, it was only necessary to translate the Psalms of David into Chinese and to write them in the ancient characters of that language.
4
Lenoir considered the Egyptian inscriptions to contain Hebrew compositions,
5
and Lacour thought that they contained Biblical phrases.
6
Worse than all these wild theories was the belief in the works of the Kircher school of investigators, and in the accuracy of the statements made by
Warburton's views on an Egyptian alphabet.
Warburton,
7
who, it must be confessed,
seems to have recognized the existence of alphabetic characters, but who in no way deserves the praise of Bailey, the Cambridge prize essayist, "Vir singulari quodam ingenii acumine praeditus, Warburtonus; qui primus certe recentiorum ad rectam harum rerum cognitionem patefecit viam."
1
Footnotes
124:1
Aegyptische Geschichte
, p. 151. The sepulchre of Gordian was inscribed in
Egyptian
. "Gordiano sepulchrum milites apud Circeium castrum fecerunt in finibus Persidis, titulum hujus modi addentes et Graecis, et Latinis, et Persicis, et Judaicis, et Aegyptiacis literis, ut ab omnibus legeretur." Erasmus,
Hist. Rom. Scriptorum
, Basle, 1533, p. 312, at the top.
124:2
Horapollinis Niloi Hieroglyphica. edidit, diversorum codicum recenter collatorum, priorumque editionum varias lectiones et versionem latinam subjunxit, adnotationem, item hieroglyphicorum imagines et indices adjecit CḶ. Amstelod, 1835.
124:3
Obeliscus Pamphilius, . . . . . . . Hieroglyphicis involuta Symbolis, detecta e tenebris in lucem asseritur
, Rome, 1650, fol.
Oedipus Aegyptiacus
, hoc est, universalis hieroglyphicae veterum doctrinae, temporum injuria obolitae instauratio. Rome, 1652-54. Tomi I–IV, fol.
124:4
Prodromus Coptus
, Rome, 1636.
Lingua Aegyptiaca restituta
. Rome, 1643.
124:5
Jablonski,
Opuscula
, t. I. ed. Water, 1804, pp. 157, 211.
125:1
Hieroglyphica, seu de sacris Aegptiorum aliarumque gentium litteris Commentatorium libri VII., duobus aliis ab eruditissimo viro annexis
, etc., Basil., 1556.
125:2
Degli Obelischi di Roma
, Rome, 1589.
125:3
Essai sur le moyen de parvenir à la lecture et à l’intelligence des Hiéroglyphes égyptiens. (In
Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions
, t. XXXIV. pp. 1-56.)
125:4
Ibid
., t. XXXIX. p. 1 ff.
125:5
De Usu et Origine Obeliscorum
, Rome, 1797, fol., p. 465.
126:1
Lettre au Citoyen Chaptal, au sujet de l’Inscription égyptienne du Monument trouvé à Rosette
, Paris, 1802.
126:2
Lettre sur l’inscription égyptienne de Rosette
, Paris, 1802.
126:3
Published at Paris in 5 vols., 18i2.
126:4
Lettres sur les Hiéroglyphes
, Weimar, 1802.
126:5
In Nouvelle explication des Hiéroglyphes
, Paris, 1809-10, 4 vols.; and
Nouveaux Essais sur les Hiéroglyphes
, Paris, 1826, 4 vols.
126:6
See his
Essai sur les Hiéroglyphes égyptiens
, Bordeaux, 1821.
126:7
In his
The Divine Legation of Moses demonstrated, to which is adjoint an Essay on Egyptian Hieroglyphics
, London, 1738, 2 vols.
127:1
Hieroglyphicorum Origo et natura
, Cambridge, 1816, p. 9.

=== 5 | Young and Champollion ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
Young and Champollion.
Here naturally comes an account of the labours of Young and Champollion, two men who stand out pre-eminently as the true discoverers of the right method of decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics. As much has been written on the works of these savants, and as some have tried to show that the whole merit of the discovery belongs to Young, and others that it belongs to Champollion, it will not be out of place here to make a plain statement of facts, drawn from the best sources, and to give the opinions of the most eminent Egyptologists on this point; a few details concerning the lives of these remarkable men must, however, be first given.
Dr. Thomas Young
was born at Milverton, in Somersetshire, on the 13th of June, 1773. His parents were both members of the Society of Friends. He lived during the first seven years of his life with his maternal grandfather, Mr. Robert Davis, at Minehead, in Somersetshire. At the age of two he could read fluently, and before he was four he had read the Bible through twice.
Early life and studies of Young.
At the age of six, he learnt by heart in six weeks Goldsmith's
Deserted Village
. When not quite seven years of age he went to a school, kept by a man called King, at Stapleton near Bristol, where he stayed for a year and a half. In March 1782, when nearly nine years of age, he went to the school of Mr. T. Thompson, at Compton, in Dorsetshire, where he remained four years. Here he read Phaedrus's Fables, Cornelius Nepos, Virgil, Horace expurgated by Knox, the whole of Beza's Greek and Latin Testament, the First Seven Books of the Iliad, Martin's Natural Philosophy, etc., etc. Before leaving this school he had got through six chapters of the Hebrew Bible. About this time he learnt to use the lathe, and he made a telescope and a microscope, and the Italian, Persian, Syriac, and Chaldee languages all occupied his attention.
Young's oriental studies.
From 1787 to 1792 he was private tutor to Hudson Gurney, at Youngsbury, in Hertfordshire,
where he seems to have devoted himself to the study of English, French, Italian, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, Samaritan, Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and Ethiopic, as well as to that of natural Philosophy, Botany, and Entomology.
1
Young's medical studies.
In 1792 Young began to study Medicine and Anatomy in London, and in 1793 he entered St. Bartholomew's Hospital as a pupil. In 1803 he read a paper before the Royal Society, and was elected a Fellow the following year (balloted for and elected, June 19). Shortly after he attended medical lectures in Edinburgh and Göttingen, and he subsequently went to Cambridge, where he took the degree of Bachelor of Medicine (1803), and afterwards that of Doctor of Physic (1808). In 1798 Young received a splendid bequest from his uncle Dr. Brocklesby, consisting of his house in Norfolk Street, Park Lane, his library, his prints, his pictures, and about £10,000 in money; hence he was free to form his own scheme of life.
Discovers undulatory theory of light.
In May, 1801, he discovered the undulatory theory of light, and his paper on this subject was read before the Royal Society in the November following; in the same year he accepted the office of Professor of Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution. In 1802 he was appointed Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society, and on the 14th of June, 1804, he married Eliza, the daughter of J. P. Maxwell, Esq., of Cavendish Square, and of Trippendence, near Farnborough, Kent. The attention of Young was called to Egyptian inscriptions by Sir W. Rouse Boughton, who had found in a mummy case at Thebes a papyrus written in cursive Egyptian characters, and to a notice of this which Young prepared for his friend, he appended a translation of the demotic text of the Rosetta Stone.
Young's study of hieroglyphs.
As the details of his studies on the Rosetta Stone belong to the history of the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics, they are given further on (p. 141 ff.), but the reader will understand Young's position better by reading Dean Peacock's chapter on "hieroglyphical researches" printed in his life of Young, pp. 258-344, and Mr. Leitch's notes in the third volume of the collected
Works of Dr. Young
. In 1816 Young was appointed
[paragraph continues]
Secretary to a Commission for ascertaining the length of the seconds pendulum, for comparing French and English standards, etc., and in 1818 he was appointed Secretary of the Board of Longitude and Superintendent of the Nautical Almanac. In 1825 he became Medical Referee and Inspector of Calculations to the Palladium Insurance Company. In 1826 he was elected one of the eight foreign Associates of the Academy of Sciences at Paris. In February, 1829, he began to suffer from repeated attacks of asthma, and by the April following he was in a state of great weakness;
Young's death.
he died on the 10th of May, not having completed his fifty-sixth year. An excellent steel engraving of Young, by R. Ward, from a picture by Sir Thomas Lawrence, PṚȦ., forms the frontispiece to his life by Dean Peacock, which, according to J. J. Champollion-Figeac, "exprime fidèlement la douceur, la grâce, les traits d’une figure toute rayonnante d’intelligence."
1
Jean François Champollion
, surnamed
le Jeune
, the immortal discoverer of a correct system of decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics, was born at Figeac on December 24, 1790.
Champollion's physical and classical studies.
His family came originally from Champoléon in the High Alps, where a branch of it still holds property. As a boy he made rapid progress in classical studies, and he devoted himself at the same time to botany and mineralogy; at a very early date however he showed a natural taste for oriental languages, and like Young was, at the age of thirteen, master of a fair knowledge of Hebrew, Syriac and Chaldee.
2
In 1805 his brother J. J. Champollion-Figeac brought him to Paris, and caused him to be admitted to the Cours de l’Ecole des Langues Orientales, and introduced him to Silvestre de Sacy. Soon after his arrival in Paris Champollion turned his attention to the study of the hieroglyphic inscription on the Rosetta Stone, but his powerful friend de Sacy advised the elder brother to warn the younger off a study which
ne pouvait donner aucun résultat
. In 1812 he was nominated Professor of Ancient History to the faculty of Letters at Grenoble,
where he still carried on his oriental studies.
Champollion's hieroglyphic and Coptic studies.
When he arrived in Paris he found that the old Egyptologists maintained that hieroglyphics were a symbolic language, and seeking to verify this theory, he wasted a year. He made up his mind, however, to work out this question without having regard to the theories of others, and he sketched out a plan for a large work on Egypt in several volumes. The first part of this appeared at Grenoble in 1811, entitled Introduction; it was never sold, for only about thirty copies were printed, but it appeared, without the analytical table of Coptic geographical names, under the title
L’Egypte sous les Pharaons
, 8vo., 2 vols., 1814. About this time Young, in England, was studying the texts on the Rosetta Stone, and had actually begun to make a translation of the demotic section, making use of the results obtained by de Sacy and Akerblad, to the latter of whom great credit is due for his acuteness and insight. Whatever may be said as to Champollion's ignorance of Young's results, it is quite certain that he must have known of those of Akerblad, and we know (see p. 135) that a printed copy of Young's paper on the Rosetta Stone had been put into Champollion's hands by de Sacy.
Champollion acquainted with Young's labours.
In a very short time Champollion discovered where his predecessors had broken down, and having already written
De l’écriture Hiératique des Anciens Egyptiens
, Grenoble, 1821, on September 17, in the following year, he read his
Mémoire
on the hieroglyphics and exhibited his hieroglyphic Alphabet, with its Greek and Demotic equivalents, before the Académie des Inscriptions. Champollion's paper created a great sensation, and Louis XVIII. wished a statement concerning it laid before him, and M. le Duc de Doudeauville determined that an Egyptian Museum should be formed in the Palace of the Louvre. In the same year Champollion published his
Lettre à M. Dacier, relative à l’Alphabet des Hiéroglyphes phonétiques
, in which he showed beyond a doubt that his system was the correct one. In a series of
Mémoires
read at the Institut in April, May and June, 1823, he explained his system more fully, and these he afterwards published together entitled
Précis du Système Hiéroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens
, Paris, 2 vols., 1824. A second edition, revised and corrected, appeared in 1828. In
[paragraph continues]
June, 1824, Champollion arrived in Turin,
Champollion's travels.
where he devoted himself to the study of papyri. Early in 1825 he arrived in Rome, and thence he went to Naples, where all the museums were opened for him. In 1826 he returned to Paris. In July, 1828, he set out on his long planned voyage to Egypt
Visits Egypt.
, and returned in March, 1830, bringing with him a fine collection of antiquities, and a number of copies of inscriptions which filled about two thousand pages. As soon as he returned to France he set to work to publish the rich results of his travels, but while occupied with this undertaking, death overtook him on the 4th of March, 1832. Louis-Philippe ordered that busts of him, executed at the expense of the civil list, should be placed in the galleries of the palace at Versailles, and in the rooms of the Egyptian Museum of the Louvre; he also ordered that marble for another bust should be given to Champollion-Figeac, and that the carving thereof should be entrusted to the famous sculptor Etex. An etched portrait of Champollion le Jeune will be found in
Les Deux Champollion, leur Vie et leurs Œuvres
, par Aimé Champollion-Figeac: Grenoble, 1887, p. 52.
In addition to the works of Champollion mentioned above, the following are the most important:—
Champollion's works.
Rapport à son Excellence M. le Duc de Doudeauville, sur la Collection Egyptienne à Livourne
, Paris, 1826.
Lettres d M. le Duc de Blacas d’Aulps relatives au Musée royal Egyptien de Turin
. . . . . (avec Notices chronologiques par Champollion-Figeac): Paris, 1824-26.
Notice sur les papyrus hiératiques et les peintures du cercueil de Pétaménoph
(
Extr. de Voyage à Meroë
par Cailliaud de Nantes), Paris, 1827.
Notice descriptive des Monuments Egyptiens du Musée Charles X
, Paris, 1827.
Catalogue de la Collection Egyptienne du Louvre
, Paris, 1827.
Catalogue des Papyrus Egyptiens du Musée du Vatican
, Rome, 1826.
Monuments de l’Egypte et de la Nubie
, iv vols., fol., 440 planches. Publié par ordre du Gouvernement, pour faire suite à l’ouvrage de l’Expédition d’Egypte, Paris, 1829-1847.
Lettres écrites pendant son voyage en Egypte, en
1828, 1829, Paris, 1829; 2me édition, Paris, 1833; collection complète. A German translation by E. F. von Gutschmid was published at Quedlinburg, in 1835.
Grammaire Egyptienne, aux Principes généraux de l’écriture sacrée Egyptienne appliqués à la représentation de la langue parlée; . . . Avec des prolégomènes et un portrait de l’éditeur
, M. Champollion-Figeac, Paris, 1836-1841.
Dictionnaire Egyptien, en écriture hiéroglyphique, publié d’après les manuscrits autographes . . . par Champollion-Figeac
, Paris, 1841.
The results of Dr. Young's studies of the Rosetta Stone were first communicated to the Royal Society of Antiquaries in a letter from Sir W. E. Rouse Boughton, Bart.; the letter was read on the 19th of May, 1814, and was published the following year in
Archæologia
, Vol. XVIII. pp. 59-72.
1
Young's labours on the Rosetta Stone in 1814.
The letter was accompanied by a translation of the demotic text on the Rosetta Stone, which was subsequently reprinted anonymously in the
Museum Criticum
of Cambridge, Pt. VI., 1815, together with the correspondence which took place between Dr. Young and MM. Silvestre de Sacy and Akerblad. In 1802 M. Akerblad, the Swedish President at Rome, published his
Lettre sur l’inscription Egyptienne de Rosette, adressée au citoyen Silvestre de Sacy
, in which he gave the results of his study of the demotic text of the Rosetta Stone; M. Silvestre de Sacy also had occupied himself in the same way (see his
Lettre au citoyen Chaptal, au sujet de l’inscription Egyptienne du monument trouvé d Rosette:
Paris, 1802), but neither scholar had made any progress in the decipherment of the hieroglyphic text. In August, 1814, Dr. Young wrote to Silvestre de Sacy, asking him what Mr. Akerblad had been doing, and saying
Correspondence between Young and de Sacy.
, "I doubt whether the alphabet which Mr. Akerblad has given us can be of much further utility than in enabling us to decipher the proper names; and sometimes I have
even suspected that the letters which he has identified resemble the syllabic sort of characters by which the Chinese express the sounds of foreign languages, and that in their usual acceptation they had different significations: but of this conjecture I cannot at present speak with any great confidence." . . . . .
1
To this M. de Sacy replied: "Je ne vous dissimule pas, Monsieur, que malgré l’espèce
De Sacy's opinions of Akerblad’s works.
d’approbation que j’ai donnée au système de M. Akerblad, dans la réponse que je lui ai adressée, il m’est toujours resté des doutes très forts sur la validité de l’alphabet qu’il s’est fait. . . . . Je dois vous ajouter que M. Akerblad n’est pas le seul qui se flatte d’avoir lu le texte Egyptien de l’inscription de Rosette. M. Champollion, qui vient de publier deux volumes sur l’ancienne géographie de l’Egypte,
2
et qui s’est beaucoup occupé de la langue Copte, prétend avoir aussi lu cette inscription. Je mets assurément plus de confiance dans les lumières et la critique de M. Akerblad que dans celles de
De Sacy distrusts Champollion's results.
M. Champollion, mais tant qu’ils n’auront publié quelque résultat de leur travail, il est juste de suspendre son jugement." (Leitch, Vol. III. p. 17.) Writing to M. de Sacy in October of the same year, Young says: "I had read Mr. Akerblad’s essay but hastily in the course of the last winter, and I was not disposed to place much confidence in the little that I recollected of it; so that I was able to enter anew upon the investigation, without being materially influenced by what he had published; and though I do not profess to lay claim to perfect originality, or to deny the importance of Mr. Akerblad’s labours, I think myself authorised to consider my own translation as completely independent of his ingenious researches: a circumstance which adds much to the probability of our conjectures where they happen to agree. It is only since I received your obliging letter, that I have
Young on Akerblad’s labours.
again read Mr. Akerblad’s work; and I have found that it agrees almost in every instance with the results of my own
investigation respecting the sense attributed to the words which the author has examined. This conformity must be allowed to be more satisfactory than if I had followed, with perfect confidence, the path which Akerblad has traced: I must however, confess that it relates only to a few of the first steps of the investigation; and that the greatest and the most difficult part of the translation still remains unsupported by the authority of any external evidence of this kind." (Leitch, p. 18.) Nearly three weeks after writing the above, Young sent another letter to M. de Sacy, together with a Coptic and demotic alphabet derived partly from Akerblad, and partly from his own researches, and a list of eighty-six demotic words with the words corresponding to them in the Greek version. Of these words, he says: "Three were observed by de Sacy, sixteen by Akerblad, and the remainder by himself." In January, 1815, Akerblad addressed a long letter to Young, together with which he sent a translation of some lines of the Rosetta Stone inscription, and some notes upon it. Regarding his own work he says: "During the ten years which have
Akerblad's doubts about his own labours.
elapsed since my departure from Paris, I have devoted but a few moments, and those at long intervals, to the monument of Rosetta . . . . . For, in fact, I have always felt that the results of my researches on this monument are deficient in that sort of evidence which carries with it full conviction, and you, Sir, as well as M. de Sacy, appear to be of my opinion in this respect . . . . . I must however give you notice beforehand, that in most cases you will only receive a statement of my doubts and uncertainties, together with a few more plausible conjectures; and I shall be fully satisfied if these last shall appear to deserve your attention and approbation . . . . . If again the inscriptions were engraved in a clear and distinct character like the Greek and Latin inscriptions of a certain antiquity, it would be easy, by the assistance of the proper names of several Greek words which occur in it, some of which I have discovered since the publication of my letter to M. de Sacy, and of many Egyptian words, the sense of which is determined; it would be easy, I say, to form a perfectly correct alphabet of these letters; but here another difficulty occurs; the alphabetical characters which, without doubt, are
of very high antiquity in Egypt, must have been in common use for many centuries before the date of the decree; in the course of this time, these letters, as has happened in all other countries, have acquired a very irregular and fanciful form, so as to constitute a kind of running hand." (Leitch, p. 33.) In August, 1815, Young replied to Akerblad’s letter, and discussed the passages where his own translation differed from that of Akerblad.
De Sacy warns Young against Champollion.
In July, 1815, de Sacy sent a letter to Young, which contains the following remarkable passages: "
Monsieur, outre la traduction Latine de l’inscription Egyptienne que vous m’avez communiquée, j’ai refit postérieurement une autre traduction Anglaise, imprimée, que je n’ai pas en ce moment sous les yeux, l’ayant prêtée d M. Champollion sur la demande que son frère m’en a faite d’après une lettre qu’il m’a dit avoir reçue de vous. . . . . Je pense, Monsieur, que vous êtes plus avancé aujourd’hui et que vous lisez une grande partie, du moins, du texte Egyptien. Si jai un conseil à vous donner, c’est de ne pas trop communiquer vos découvertes d M. Champollion. Il se pourrait faire qu’il prétendît ensuite d la priorité. Il cherche en plusieurs endroits de son ouvrage à faire croire qu’il a découvert beaucoup des mots de l’inscription Egyptienne de Rosette. J’ai bien peur que ce ne soit là que du charlatanisme; j’ajoute même que j’ai de fortes raisons de le penser. . . . . Au surplus, je ne saurais me persuader que si M. Akerblad, Et. Quatremère, ou Champollion avait fait des progrès réels dans la lecture du texte Egyptien, ils ne se fussent pas plus empressés de faire part au public de leur découverte. Ce serait une modestie bien rare, et dont aucun d’eux ne me paraît capable
." (Leitch, p. 51.)
In a letter to de Sacy, dated 3rd August, 1815, Young says: "You may, perhaps, think me too sanguine in my expectations of obtaining a knowledge of the hieroglyphical language in general from the inscription of Rosetta only; and I will confess to you that the difficulties are greater than a superficial view of the subject would induce us to suppose. The
Young on hieroglyphics.
number of the radical characters is indeed limited, like that of the keys of the Chinese; but it appears that these characters are by no means universally independent of each
other, a combination of two or three of them being often employed to form a single word, and perhaps even to represent a simple idea; and, indeed, this must necessarily happen where we have only about a thousand characters for the expression of a whole language. For the same reason it is impossible that all the characters can be pictures of the things which they represent: some, however, of the symbols on the stone of Rosetta have a manifest relation to the objects denoted by them. For instance, a Priest, a Shrine, a Statue, an Asp, a Mouth, and the Numerals, and a King is denoted by a sort of plant with an insect, which is said to have been a bee; while a much greater number of the characters have no perceptible connexion with the ideas attached to them; although it is probable that a resemblance, either real or metaphorical, may have existed or have been imagined when they were first employed; thus a Libation was originally denoted by a hand holding a jar, with two streams of a liquid issuing from it, but in this inscription the representation has degenerated into a bird's foot. With respect to the epistolographic or enchorial character, it does not seem quite certain that it could be explained even if the hieroglyphics were perfectly understood, for many of the characters neither resemble the corresponding hieroglyphics, nor are capable of being satisfactorily resolved into an alphabet of any kind: in short, the two characters might be supposed to belong to different languages; for they do not seem to agree even in their manner of forming compound from simple terms." (Leitch, pp. 55, 56.) Writing to de Sacy in the following year (5th May, 1816) touching the question of the alphabetic nature of the inscription on the Rosetta Stone, he says: "Si vous lisez la lettre de M. Akerblad, vous conviendrez, je crois, qu’au moins il n’a pas été plus heureux que moi dans ses leçons Coptes del’inscription. Mais le vrai est que la chose est impossible dans l’étendue que vous paraissez encore vouloir lui donner, car assurément l’inscription
enchoriale
n’est
alphabétique
que dans un sens très borné . . . . . Je me suis borné dernièrement à l’étude des hiéroglyphes, ou plutôt à la collection d’inscriptions hiéroglyphiques. . . . . . Les caractères que j’ai découverts jettent déjà quelques lumières sur les antiquités de l’Egypte. J’ai
Young deciphers the name of Ptolemy.
reconnu, par exemple, le nom de Ptolémée dans diverses inscriptions à Philæ, à Esné et à Ombos, ce qui fixe à peu près la date des édifices où ce nom se trouve, et c’est même quelque chose que de pouvoir distinguer dans une inscription quelconque les caractères qui expriment les noms des personnages auxquels elle a rapport." (Leitch, p. 60.)
On 10th November, 1814, Champollion sent to the President of the Royal Society a copy of his
L’Egypte sous les Pharaons
, and in the letter which accompanied it said, "La base de mon travail est la lecture de l’inscription en caractères Egyptiens, qui est l’un des plus beaux ornemens du riche Musée Britannique; je veux parler du monument trouvé à Rosette. Les efforts que j’ai faits pour y réussir n’ont point été, s’il m’est permis de le dire, sans quelques succès; et les résultats que je crois avoir obtenus après une
Young and Champollion correspond.
étude constante et suivie, m’en font espérer de plus grands encore." (Leitch, p. 63.) He asked also that a collation of the Rosetta Stone with the copy of it which he possessed might be made, and suggested that a cast of it should be presented to each of the principal libraries, and to the most celebrated Academies of Europe. As Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society, Young replied saying that the needful collation should be made, and adding, "Je ne sais si par hasard M. de Sacy, avec qui vous êtes sans doute en correspondance, vous aura parlé d’un exemplaire que je lui ai adressé de ma traduction conjecturale avec l’explication des dernières lignes des caractères hiéroglyphiques. Je lui avais déjà envoyé la traduction de l’inscription Egyptienne au commencement du mois d’Octobre passé; l’interprétation des hiéroglyphiques ne m’est réussie qu’à la fin du même mois." (Leitch, p. 64.) In reply to this Champollion wrote, "M. Silvestre de Sacy, mon ancien professeur, ne m’a point donné connaissance de votre mémoire sur la partie Egyptienne et le texte hiéroglyphique de l’inscription de Rosette: c’est vous dire, Monsieur, avec quel empressement je recevrai
Champollion acquainted with Young's work in 1815.
l’exemplaire que vous avez la bonté de m’offrir." We have seen above from the extract from a letter of de Sacy that a copy of Young's work was lent to Champollion between May 9 and July 20, 1815.
On August 2, 1816, Young addressed a letter
1
to the Archduke John of Austria, in which he reported further progress in his hieroglyphic studies, thus: "I have already ascertained, as I have mentioned in one of my letters to M. de Sacy, that the enchorial inscription of Rosetta contained a number of individual characters resembling the corresponding hieroglyphics, and I was not disposed to place any great reliance on the alphabetical interpretation of any considerable part of the inscription. I have now fully demonstrated the hieroglyphical origin of the running hand,
2
in which the manuscripts on papyrus, found with the mummies . . . . . ." (Leitch, p. 74) The principal contents of Young's letters, however, incorporated with other matter, were made into a more extensive article, which was contributed to the Supplement of the
Encyclopædia Britannica
,
Young's work published.
Supplement, Vol. IV. He made drawings of the plates, which were engraved by Mr. Turrell, and having procured separate copies, he sent them to some of his friends in the summer of 1818, with a cover on which was printed the title, "Hieroglyphical Vocabulary." These plates, however, were precisely the same that were afterwards contained in the fourth volume of the Supplement, as belonging to the article EGYPT. The characters explained in this vocabulary amounted to about two hundred; the number which had been immediately obtained from the stone of Rosetta having been somewhat more than doubled by means of a careful examination of other monuments. . . . . . The higher numerals were readily obtained by a comparison of some inscriptions in which they stood combined with units and with tens.
3
Young's article in the
Encyclopædia Britannica
obtained great celebrity in Europe; and was reprinted by
[paragraph continues]
Leitch in the third volume of the
Works of Dr. Young
, pp. 86-197; it contains eight sections:—
I.
Introductory view   of the latest publications relating to Egypt.
II.
Pantheon.
III.
Historiography.
IV.
Calendar.
V.
Customs and   Ceremonies.
VI.
Analysis of the   Triple Inscription.
VII.
Rudiments of a   Hieroglyphical Vocabulary.
VIII.
Various   Monuments of the Egyptians.
[paragraph continues]
This article is of very great importance in the history of
Value of Young's article in
Encyclopædia Britannica
.
the decipherment of the hieroglyphics, and had Young taken the trouble of having it printed as a separate publication, there would have been less doubt in the minds of scholars as to the good work which he did, and results borrowed from it by Champollion would have been more easily identified.
1
It has already been said (
) that Champollion published at Paris in 1814 the two first parts of a work entitled
Champollion on them geography of Egypt.
L’Egypte sous les Pharaons, ou recherches sur la Géographie, la Religion, la Langue, les Ecritures et l’Histoire de l’Egypte avant l’Invasion de Cambyse;
these parts treated simply of the geography of Egypt. In a note to the Preface he tells us that the general plan of the work, together with the introduction of the geographical section and the general map of Egypt under the Pharaohs, was laid before the
Société des Sciences et des Arts de Grenoble
, 1st September, 1807, and that the printing began on the 1st September, 1810. On p. 22 of his Introduction, referring to the Rosetta Stone, he says: "Ce monument intéressant est un décret des prêtres de l’Egypte, qui décerne de grands honneurs au jeune roi
[paragraph continues]
Ptolémée Epiphane. Ce décret est écrit en hiéroglyphes, en langue et en écriture alphabétique Egyptiennes, et en Grec." Now by the words "en langue et en écriture alphabétique Egyptiennes" we are clearly to understand that part of the Rosetta inscription which is written in demotic. Having referred to the studies of de Sacy and Akerblad, and spoken of the words in demotic which the latter scholar had rightly compared with their equivalents in Coptic, "que nous y avons lus ensuite," Champollion adds in a foot-note, "Ce n’est pas ici le lieu de rendre compte du résultat de l’étude suivie que nous avons faite du texte Egyptien de l’Inscription de Rosette, et de l’alphabet que nous avons adopté.
Champollion's hieroglyphical studies in 1810.
Nous nous occuperons de cet important sujet dans la suite de cet ouvrage. En attendant, nous prions le lecteur de regarder comme exacts les résultats que nous lui présentons ici." From this it is clear that as early as 1810 Champollion claimed to have made progress in the decipherment of the demotic text (texte Egyptien) of the Rosetta Stone, and it is now time to ask how much he was indebted to Akerblad’s letter for ideas and results. A comparison of Plate II. at the end of Akerblad’s
Lettre sur l’Inscription Egyptienne de Rosette
, with Plate IV. in Champollion's
Lettre à M. Dacier relative à l’Alphabet des Hiéroglyphes Phonétiques
, will show that sixteen of the characters of the alphabet printed by Akerblad in 1802 were retained by Champollion in 1822; also, if Akerblad’s alphabet be compared with the "Supposed Enchorial Alphabet" printed at the foot of Plate IV.
Akerblad attributes correct values to fourteen Demotic characters.
accompanying Young's article EGYPT, printed in 1818 and published in 1819, it will be found that
fourteen
of the characters are identical in both alphabets. Thus it seems that a greater degree of credit is due to Akerblad than has usually been awarded to him either by Young
1
or Champollion,
1
or, indeed, by writers on Egyptology generally.
2
Having seen what foundations Young and Champollion had for their own works on the demotic text to rest on, we may return to the consideration of Young's hieroglyphical studies. On the four plates which appeared with his article EGYPT, he correctly identified the names of a few of the gods, Rd, Nut, Thoth, Osiris, Isis, and Nephthys, and he made out the meanings of several Egyptian ideographs. His identifications of kings' names were, however, most unfortunate. Thus of Amenḥetep, he made Tithons; of Thi (a queen), Eoa; of Usertsen, Heron; of Psammetichus, Sesostris; of Nectanebus, Proteus; of Seti, Psammis; of Rameses II., Amasis; of Autocrator, Arsinoe, etc., etc. He correctly identified the names of Ptolemy and Berenice, although in each case he attributed wrong values to some of the hieroglyphic characters which formed these names. The hieroglyphic alphabet given by Young was as follows
3
:—
Young's hieroglyphic alphabet.
In 1822 Champollion published his famous
Lettre à M. Dacier relative d l’alphabet des Hiéroglyphes Phonétiques
, in which he stated his discovery of the Egyptian hieroglyphic alphabet in the following words: "Vous avez sans doute remarqué, Monsieur, dans mon Mémoire sur l’écriture démotique Egyptienne, que ces noms étrangers étaient exprimés phonétiquement au moyen de signes plutôt
syllabiques
qu’
alphabétiques
. La valeur de chaque caractère est reconnue et invariablement fixée par la comparaison de ces divers noms; et de tous ces rapprochements est résulté l’alphabet, ou plutôt
Champollion's system.
le syllabaire
démotique
figuré sur ma planche I., colonne deuxième. L’emploi de ces caractères phonétiques une fois constaté dans l’écriture démotique, je devais naturellement en conclure que puisque les signes de cette écriture populaire étaient, ainsi que je l’ai exposé, empruntés de l’écriture
hiératique
ou sacerdotale, et puisque encore les signes de cette écriture hiératique ne sont, comme on l’a reconnu par mes divers mémoires, qu’une représentation abrégée, une véritable
tachygraphie
des
hiérographes
, cette troisième espèce d’écriture,
l’hiéroglyphique
pure, devait avoir aussi un certain nombre de ses signes doués de la faculté d’exprimer les sons; en un mot, qu’il existait également une série d’
hiéroglyphes phonétiques
. Pour s’assurer de la vérité de cet aperçu, pour reconnaître l’existence et discerner même la valeur de quelques-uns des signes de cette espèce, il aurait suffi d’avoir sous les yeux, écrits en
hiéroglyphes
purs, deux noms de rois grecs préalablement connus, et contenant plusieurs lettres employées à la fois dans l’un et dans l’autre, tels que
Ptolémée
et
Cléopâtre
,
Alexandre
et
Bérénice
, etc." (p. 5). Throughout this work there
appears to be no mention whatever of Young's identification of
any
letters of the hieroglyphic alphabet, although on p. 2 Champollion says: "A l’égard de l’écriture
démotique
en particulier, il a suffi de la précieuse inscription de Rosette pour en reconnaître l’ensemble; la critique est redevable d’abord
Champollion admits value of Akerblad’s and Young's labours.
aux lumières de votre illustre confrère, M. Silvestre de Sacy, et successivement à celles de feu Akerblad et de M. le docteur Young, des premières notions exactes qu’on a tirées de ce monument, et c’est de cette même inscription que j’ai déduit la série des signes démotiques qui, prenant une valeur syllabico-alphabétique, exprimaient dans les textes
idéographiques
les noms propres des personnages étrangers à l’Egypte." That Champollion should not have known of Young's article EGYPT is a thing not to be understood, especially as advance copies were sent to Paris and elsewhere as early as 1818.
From the facts given above we are enabled to draw up the following statement as to the amount of work done in the decipherment of the Egyptian language by the early workers in this field.
Statement of results of labours of Zoëga, Akerblad, Young and Champollion.
Barthélemy
1
and Zoëga
2
had come to the conclusion long before the labours of Akerblad, Young, and Champollion, that the cartouches contained proper names. Akerblad drew up an alphabet of the demotic character, in which fourteen signs appear to have had correct values attributed to them. Young published a demotic alphabet in which the greater number of Akerblad’s results were absorbed; he fixed the correct values to six hieroglyphic characters, and to three others partly correct values; he identified the names of Ptolemy and Alexander, the numerals and several gods' names. Champollion published a demotic alphabet, the greater part of which he owed, without question, to Akerblad, and a hieroglyphic alphabet of which six characters had had correct values assigned to them by Young, and the
values of three others had been correctly stated as far as the consonants were concerned. There is no doubt whatever that Champollion's plan of work was eminently scientific, and his great knowledge of Coptic enabled him to complete the admirable work of decipherment, which his natural talent had induced him to undertake. The value of his contributions to the science of Egyptology it would be difficult to overestimate, and the amount of work which he did in his comparatively short life is little less than marvellous. It is, however, to be regretted that Champollion did not state more clearly what Young had done, for a full acknowledgment of this would have in no way injured or lessened his own immortal fame.
1
Footnotes
128:1
For the list of books read by him at this time, see the
Life of Thomas Young
, by G. Peacock, London, 1855 pp. 14-17.
129:1
Lettre au Directeur de la Revue Britannique au sujet des Recherches du Docteur Young
, Paris, 1857, p. II.
129:2
On the subject of Champollion's studies, at Grenoble,
see Chroniques Dauphinoises
, par A. Champollion-Figeac, t. III. pp. 553,156,157-238.
132:1
Letter to the Rev. S. Weston respecting some Egyptian Antiquities
. With 4 copper plates. London, 1814.
133:1
For these letters I am indebted to the third volume of the
Miscellaneous Works of the late Thomas Young
, MḌ., FṚṢ., &c., ed. John Leitch, London, 1855.
133:2
L’Egypte sous les Pharaons, ou recherches sur la Géographie, la Religion, la Langue, les Ecritures, et l’Histoire de l’Egypte
, Paris, 1814.
138:1
This letter was printed in 1816, and circulated in London, Paris, and elsewhere; it did not appear in the
Museum Criticum
until 1821.
138:2
"Que ce second système (l’Hiératique) n’est qu’une simple modification du système Hiéroglyphique, et n’en diffère uniquement que par la forme des signes." Champollion,
De l’Ecriture Hiératique des Anciens Egyptiens:
Grenoble, 1821. We should have expected some reference by Champollion to Young's discovery quoted above.
138:3
Young.
An Account of some recent discoveries in Hieroglyphical Literature
, p. 17.
139:1
Ich halte mich daher verpflichtet, alles auf unsern Gegenstand bezügliche dem Leser nachträglich genau mitzutheilen und zwar mit einer um so grössem Gewissenhaftigkeit, je höher durch dessen Kenntniss die Achtung gegen den trefflichen Forscher steigen wird, der besonders in der Erklärung der symbolischen Hieroglyphen so Manches zuerst aussprach, was man ohne den Artikel der Encyclopaedie gelesen zu haben, meistens als das Eigenthum Champollion's zu betrachten gewohnt ist. Schwartze,
Das Alte Aegypten
, p. 446.
140:1
Mr. Akerblad was far from having completed his examination of the whole enchorial inscription, apparently from the want of some collateral encouragement or co-operation to induce him to continue so laborious an inquiry; and he had made little or no effort to understand the first inscription of the pillar which is professedly engraved in the sacred character, except the detached observation respecting the numerals at the end; he was even disposed to acquiesce in the correctness of Mr. Palin's interpretation, which proceeds on the supposition that parts of the first lines of the hieroglyphics are still remaining on the stone, Young,
An Account
, p. 10.
141:1
"Feu Akerblad essaya d’étendre ses lectures hors des noms propres grecs, et il échoua complètement." Champollion,
Précis
, 1 éd., p. 14.
141:2
See Schwartze,
Das Alte Aegypten
, pp. 160, 162.
141:3
No. 205, which is omitted here, is really two demotic characters the values of which are BA and R: to these Young gave the value BERE, and so far he was right, but he failed to see that what he considered to be one sign was, in reality, two. In Nos. 253 and 214 his consonants were right but his vowels were wrong. We are thus able to see that out of a total of fourteen signs, he assigned correct values to six, partly correct values to three, and wholly wrong values to five. Champollion-Figeac in his
Lettre au Directeur de la Revue Britannique au sujet des Recherches du Docteur Young sur les Hiéroglyphes Egyptiens
, p. 5, gives Young no credit whatever for the three partly correct values assigned to hieroglyphic characters by him.
143:1
Caylus,
Recueil d’Antiquités Egyptiennes, Etrusques
, etc., Tom. V. p. 79.
143:2
In
De Origine et Usu Obeliscorum
, p. 465. Conspiciuntur autem passim in Aegyptiis monumentis schemata quaedam ovata sive elliptica planae basi insidentia, quae emphatica ratione includunt certa notarum syntagmata, sive ad propria personarum nomina exprimenda, sive ad sacratiores formulas designandas.
144:1
We have seen above that Champollion did know of Young's work, yet in his
Précis du Système Hiéroglyphique
, p. 18, he says that he had arrived at results similar to those obtained by Dr. Young, without having any knowledge of his opinion.

=== 6 | How Champollion deciphered the Egyptian Alphabet ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
Champollion's alphabet.
Briefly, the way in which Champollion recovered the greater part of the Egyptian alphabet is as follows. It will be remembered that, on account of breakages, the only name found on the Rosetta Stone is that of Ptolemy. Shortly before Champollion published his letter to M. Dacier, he had published an account of an obelisk,
2
recently brought to London, which was inscribed with the name of a Ptolemy, written with the same characters as that on the Rosetta Stone, and also contained within a cartouche. It was followed by a second cartouche, which should contain the name of a queen. The obelisk was said to have been fixed in a socket, bearing a Greek inscription containing a petition of the priests of Isis at Philae, addressed to Ptolemy, to Cleopatra his sister, and to Cleopatra his wife. Now, he argued, if this obelisk and the hieroglyphic inscription which it bears are really the result of the petition of the priests, who in the Greek speak
The names Ptolemy and Cleopatra.
of the dedication of a similar monument, it follows of necessity that the cartouche must contain the name of a Cleopatra. The names of Ptolemy and Cleopatra having, in the Greek, some letters which are similar, may be used for comparing
the hieroglyphics which are used in each; and if the characters which are similar in these two names express the same sound in each cartouche, their purely phonetic character is at once made clear. A previous comparison of these two names written in the demotic character shows that when they are written phonetically several characters, exactly alike, are used in each. The analogy of the demotic, hieratic, and hieroglyphic methods of writing in a general way, leads us to expect the same coincidence and the same conformity in these same names, written hieroglyphically. The names Ptolemaios and Cleopatra written in hieroglyphics are as follows:—
No. 1, PTOLEMY.
No. 2, CLEOPATRA.
Recovery of the Egyptian alphabet.
Now in No. 2 cartouche, sign No. 1, which must represent K, is not found in cartouche No. 1. Sign No. 2, a lion lying down, is identical with sign No. 4 in cartouche No. 1. This clearly is L. Sign No. 3, a pen, represents the short vowel E; two of them are to be seen in character No. 6 in No. 1 cartouche, and considering their position their value must be ΑΙ of αιος. Sign No. 4 is identical with No. 3 in No. 1 cartouche, and must have the value O in each name. Sign No. 5 is identical with sign No. 1 of No. 1 cartouche, which being the first letter of the name of Ptolemy must be P. Sign No. 6 is not found in No. I cartouche, but it must be A, because it is the same sign as sign No. 9, which ends the name
ΚΛΕΟΠΑΤΡΑ
; we know that signs 10 and 11 always accompany feminine proper names, because we see them following the names of goddesses like
Isis, and
Nephthys. Sign No. 7, an open stretched out hand, must be T. It does not occur in No. 1 cartouche, but we find from other cartouches that
takes the place of
, and the reverse. Sign No. 8 must be R; it is not in No. 1 cartouche,
The name Berenice.
and ought not to be there. In No. 1 cartouche sign No. 7 must be S, because it ends the name which in Greek ends with S. Thus from these two cartouches we may collect twelve characters of the Egyptian alphabet, viz., A, AI, E, K, K, L, M, O, P, R, S, T. Now let us take another cartouche from the
Description de l’Egypte
, t. III. pl. 38, No. 13, and try to make it out; it
The name Alexander.
reads:—
No. 3.
Now signs Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, and 8, we know from cartouches Nos. 1 and 2, and we may write down their values thus:
ΑΛ..ΣΕ..ΤΡ
.
The only Greek name which contains these letters in this order is Alexander, therefore let us assign to the signs
,
, and
the value of K, N and S respectively. We find on examination that the whole group corresponds, letter for letter, with the group which stands in the demotic text of a papyrus in the place of the Greek name
ΑΛΕΧΑΝΔΡΟΣ
. We have, then, gained three new phonetic signs K, N, and S, and have determined the value of fifteen in all.
Again, let us take the cartouche of another lady:—
Now signs Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7 we know, and we may write them down thus:—
. ΡΝΑΙ . .
The only female name which contains these letters in this order is that of Berenice, and to
and
we may therefore assign the values B and K respectively. Thus we have gained two more signs.
If we take two other cartouches, viz.:—
and
we find that we are able to read the first at once KAISRS, which is clearly Καισαρος or Caesar; in the second the only sign we do not know is
. Writing down the values we know we have AṬAKRTR, which is clearly Αυτοκρατορ; thus the value of the second character must be U. In this manner Champollion worked through the names of all the Ptolemies and the Roman Emperors, and eventually succeeded in making out the value of one hundred and eleven signs. At the foot of Plate I., in his
Lettre à Monsieur Dacier
, he writes his own name in hieroglyphics thus:—
The following are the letters of the Egyptian alphabet with their values as now accepted by Egyptologists:—
Footnotes
144:2
Observations sur l’Obélisque Egyptien de l’île de Philæ
, in
Revue encyclopédique
, Mars, 1822.

=== 7 | Opinions of Egyptologists on Young and Champollion ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
OPINIONS OF EGYPTOLOGISTS ON THE LABOURS OF YOUNG AND CHAMPOLLION.
In favour of Young
.
In favour of   Champollion
.
The first idea   of certain hieroglyphics being intended to represent sounds was suggested by Dr.   Young, who, from the names of Ptolemy and Berenice, had pointed out nine,   which have since proved to be correct; the former taken from the Rosetta   inscription, and the latter deduced with singular ingenuity from the   enchorial of the same monument. [M. Champollion fils seems to be unwilling to   allow this: but the fact is evident; and surely he has accomplished too much   to stand in need of assuming to himself the merits of another. Note I, p. I.]   Working upon this basis, M. Champollion, with happy success, made out four or   five others, as also about thirty synonymes; and by the ingenious application   of these, the merit of which is all his own, he has been able to turn to   effect the discovery, and to decipher therewith a great number of the names   of the Ptolemies and of the Roman emperors . . . . . –SALT, H.,
Essay on Dr. Young's and M. Champollion's   Phonetic System of Hieroglyphics;
London, 1825.
Amidst this   mass of error and contradiction, the application of the phonetic principle by   Young, in 1818, had all the merit of an original discovery . . . . and it was   only by a comparison of the three kinds of writing that he traced the name of   Ptolemy up in his own way,
His [Young's]   translations, however, are below criticism, being as unfounded as those of Kircher.   How far even, in the decipherment, he proceeded correctly, may be doubted. .   . . But even here [in interpretation] there is much too incorrect in   principle to be of real use; much of it is beneath criticism.–BIRCH,
Hieroglyphs
, p. 196.
It is even to   this day a common habit of Englishmen to couple the name of their countryman,   Dr. Thomas Young, with that of Champollion, as sharing with him the glory of   this discovery. No person who knows anything of Egyptian philology can   countenance so gross an error. . . . . . . But it is not true that he   discovered the key to the decipherment of hieroglyphics, or even that his   labours assisted Champollion in the discovery. When the key was once   discovered and recognized as the true one, it was found that one or two of   Young's results were correct. But there was nothing in his method or theory   by which he or anyone else could distinguish between his right and his wrong   results, or which could lead him or anyone else a single step in advance ., .   . . . If anyone has a right to be named in conjunction with Champollion, it   is not Young, but Akerblad, to whom he does full justice (as he does indeed   to Young himself) at the very beginning of his letter to M. Dacier.   –RENOUF,
Hibbert Lectures;
London, 1880, pp. 12-16.
In favour of Young
.
In favour of   Champollion
.
from the   demotic into hieratic, into hieroglyphs.—BIRCH,
Hieroglyphs
, in WILKINSON,
The   Egyptians
, pp. 195, 196.
Fast   gleichzeitig mit dem alten Jomard . . . ; hatte Dr. Young das Glück aus   den hieroglyphischen Texten die Bezeichnungen für die Einer, Zehner,   Hunderte, und Tausende richtig herauszuerkennen und überdies den   hieroglyphischen Königsnamen—
ihre   entsprechende griechische Form Ptolemaios und Berenike   gegenüberzustellen, eine Entdeckung, die ihm allein gebührt und die   den Ausgangspunkt der späteren Entzifferungen bilden sollte . . . . .   Dr. Young's glückliche Zusammenstellungen der oben aufgeführten   ägyptisch-hieroglyphischen Eigennamen mit ihren entsprechenden   griechischen Vorbildern sollten ihm plötzlich die Augen öffnen und   ihn [i.e., Champollion] auf den rechten Pfad führen.—BRUGSCH,
Die Aegyptologie
, pp. 9, 11.
Ein solcher   Ring mit Hieroglyphen
fand sich nun   auch an den betreffenden Stellen der Inschrift von Rosette und er musste den   Namen des Ptolemäus bilden. Es war der bekannte englische Naturforscher   Thomas Young, der im Jahre 1819
Sæculi   enim hujus et initium usque quum cognitio hieroglyphorum, quibus veteres   Aegyptii in sacra dialecto scribenda utebantur, densissimis tenebris   scateret, ita quidem ut fere omnia, quæ antea vel eruditissimi hommes   summo ingenii acumine explorasse sibi visi sunt, si hodie forte legimus risum   vix tenere possimus: hoc lapide detecto postquam omnium animi ad spem enucleandi   tandem istud monstruosum et perplexum per tot sæcula quasi involucris   involutorum genus signorum arrecti sunt, unus vir Champollio Francogallus   exstitit, qui mira sagacitate incredibilique studio adjutus totam   hieroglyphorum rationem nulla fere parte relicta luce clarius explanavit et   exposuit.—BRUGSCH,
Inscriptio   Rosettana;
Berlin, 1851, pp. 1, 2.
Unabhängig   von Young kam gleichzeitig ein junger französischer Gelehrter,   François Champollion, zu der gleichen Vermutung und ihm war es   beschieden, sogleich ein völlig richtiges Resultat zu erhalten.   –ERMAN,
Aegypten
, p. 14.
. . . . .Young,   qui, le premier, fit l’application du principe phonétique   à la lecture des hiéroglyphes. Cette idée fut, dans la   réalité, le
fiat lux
de la science . . . Toutefois, malgré quelques succès   remarquables, Young ne sut pas la féconder; il avait bien reconnu dans   les hiéroglyphes les noms de Ptolémée et de   Bérénice, mais sans réussir à assigner à   chacun des signes qui les composent leur véritable valeur; ses autres   lectures sont fausses, quoiqu’il ait rencontré juste dans la   détermination de la valeur
In favour of Young
.
In favour of   Champollion
.
diesen   scharfsinnigen und völlig richtigen Schluss machte und wenigstens   für einige Zeichen des Namens den Lautwert feststellte.—ERMAN,
Aegypten
, p. 14.
Der erste, der   es that und von dem richtigen Grundsatze ausging, dass die Königsnamen   alphabetisch geschrieben sein müssten war der berühmte englische Physiker   Thomas Young (geboren 1773). Er erkannte in der häufigsten in dem Dekret   von Rosette vorkommenden Gruppe den Namen Ptolemäus, er vermochte ein   später zum grossen Teile bestätigtes hieroglyphisches Alphabet   aufzustellen und sie über das System der ägyptischen Schrift   vollkommen richtige Ansichten zu bilden. So haben wir denn in Young den   eigentlichen Entzifferer der ägyptischen Schrift zu sehen, wenn es ihm   auch nicht gelang, der Sprache selbst Herr zu werden.—WIEDEMANN,
Aegyptische Geschichte
, p. 29.
In the first   work of Champollion, his essay
De   l’Ecriture hiératique des Anciens Egyptiens
, published in   1821, he recognized the existence of only the first of these three ways of   representing words, supposing that all the Egyptian characters represented   ideas. When he discovered the erroneousness of this opinion, he used all   possible efforts to suppress the work in which he had stated it. That work,   however, contained a valuable discovery. . .
alphabétique   de plusieurs caractères. Quelques minces qu’ils soient, ces   premiers résultats constitueraient en faveur du docteur Young un titre   considérable, s’il ne les avait pas compromis lui-même en   s’engageant dans une fausse voie, et en publiant des traductions tout   aussi imaginaires que celles de ses devanciers. La solution du   problème était réservée au génie de   Champollion le jeune; c’est un honneur que personne ne peut lui   disputer.—CHABAS,
L’Inscription   de Rosette
, p. 5.
Wenn wir die   Frage so stellen: Wer hat zuerst einige hieroglyphische Zeichen in ihrem   Lautwerthe richtig bestimmt? oder besser gesagt, zufällig errathen, so   müssen wir antworten: das war Th. Young; den Schlüssel zur   Entzifferung der Hieroglyphenschrift jedoch hat er nicht gefunden.   François Champollion, geb. den 23. December 1790, gest. den 4.   März 1832, er ist es, den die Wissenschaft der Aegyptologie in dankbarer   Verehrung als ihren eigentlichen Begründer nennt . . . . . .   —DÜMICHEN,
Geschichte des   alten Aegyptens
, Berlin, 1878, s. 304.
Zwei grosse   Männer, in England der auf vielen Gebieten des Wissens ausgezeichnete   Thomas Young, in Frankreich François Champollion, begaben sich zu   gleicher Zeit, aber unabhängig von einander, an die Arbeit. Beider   Bemühungen lohnte schöner Erfolg. Champollion aber wird mit Recht vor   seinem britischen Rivalen als Entzifferer der
In favour of Young
.
In favour of   Champollion
.
. . . . . . In   the year after this publication, Champollion published his
Lettre à M. Dacier
, in which he   announced the phonetic powers of certain hieroglyphics and applied them to   the reading of Greek and Roman proper names. Had he been candid enough to   admit that he was indebted to Dr. Young for the commencement of his   discovery, and only to claim the merit of extending and improving the   alphabet, he would probably have had his claims to the preceding and   subsequent discoveries, which were certainly his own, more readily admitted   by Englishmen than they have been. In 1819 Dr. Young had published his   article "Egypt" in the Supplement to the Encyclopædia   Britannica; and it cannot be doubted that the analysis of the names   "Ptolemæus" and "Berenice," which it contained,   reached Champollion in the interval between his publication in 1821 and 1822,   and led him to alter his views. . . . . . . The
Grammaire Egyptienne
ought to have been given to the public as   his
sole
bequest in the department   of Egyptian philology. It was published from a manuscript written in 1831,   immediately before his last illness. Shortly before his decease, having   carefully collected the sheets, he delivered them to his brother, with the   remark, "Be careful of this; I trust that it will be my visiting card to   posterity." Even the warmest admirers of Champollion must admit that he   left his system in a very imperfect state. Few, probably, will deny that he   held many errors to the close of his life, both in what respects the
[paragraph continues]
Hieroglyphen   genannt werden müssen.—EBERS,
Aegypten   in Bild und Wort;
Leipzig, 1879, Bd. ii., s. 49.
Un savant   anglais du plus grand mérite, Th. Young, essaya de reconstituer   l’alphabet des cartouches. De 1814 à 1818, il   s’exerça sur les divers systèmes d’écriture   égyptienne, et sépara mécaniquement les groupes   différents dont se composaient le texte hiéroglyphique et le texte   démotique de l’inscription de Rosette. Après avoir   déterminé, d’une manière plus ou moins exacte, le   sens de chacun d’eux, il en essaya la lecture. . . . . Ses idées   étaient justes en partie, mais sa méthode imparfaite; il   entrevit la terre promise, mais sans pouvoir y entrer. Le véritable   initiateur fut François Champollion. . . . . . . —MASPERO,
Histoire Ancienne;
Paris, 1886, pp.   729, 730.
Ce fut en 1819,   que le Dr. Young déclara le premier que les cartouches, ou   encadrements elliptiques, dans le texte hiéroglyphique de   l’inscription de Rosette, correspondaient aux noms propres grecs et   particulièrement à celui de Ptolémée du texte   grec, et aux groupes, du même nom, dans le texte intermédiaire   en écriture égyptienne démotique ou vulgaire, groupes qui   avaient été déjà reconnus et   décomposés par MM. Silvestre de Sacy et Akerblad. Il allait   encore plus loin en supposant que chaque signe du cartouche   représentait un son du nom de Ptolémée et en cherchant   à les définir réellement un à un par une analyse très   ingénieuse . . . . Plusieurs signes
In favour of Young
.
In favour of   Champollion
.
reading of the   characters, and in what respects the interpretation of the   texts.—HINCKS,
On the Number,   Names, and Powers of the Letters of the Hieroglyphic Alphabet
, in Trans.   Royal Irish Acad., Vol. XXI., Section
Polite   Literature
, pp. 133, 134, Dublin, 1848.
avaient   été faussement interprétés et la preuve la plus   évidente en était qu’il ne réussissait pas   à lire d’autres noms que ceux de Ptolémée et de   Bérénice. Il faut donc avouer que, malgré cette   découverte, les opinions du Dr. Young, sur la nature du système   hiéroglyphique, étaient encore essentiellement fausses et que   cette découverte elle-même serait probablement restée   infructueuse et à peine signalée comme découverte dans   la science, si on avait suivi le chemin que son auteur lui-même avait   proposé.—LEPSIUS,
Lettre   à M. le Professeur F. Rosellini sur l’Alphabet   Hiéroglyphique;
Rome, 1839, p. 11.
Seyffarth and others reject Champollion's system.
It could hardly be expected that the system of decipherment proposed by Champollion would be accepted by those who had rival systems to put forth, hence we find old theories revived and new ideas brought to light side by side with Champollion's method of decipherment. Among those who attacked the new system were, Spolm, the misguided Seyffarth, Goulianoff and Klaproth. Spolm and Seyffarth divided hieroglyphics into emphonics, symphonics and aphonics, by which terms they seem to imply phonetics, enclitics and ideographics. Their hopelessly wrong theory was put forth with a great show of learning in
De Lingua et Literis veterum Ægyptiorum
at Leipzig, 1825-31. Goulianoff
1
did not accept Champollion's system entirely, and he wished to consider the phonetic hieroglyphics acrologic; this also was the view taken by Klaproth, who bitterly attacked Champollion in his
Lettre sur la découverte des hiéroglyphes acrologiques, adressée à M. de Goulianoff
, Paris, 1827, and also in his
Examen critique des travaux de feu M. Champollion sur les Hiéroglyphes
, Paris, 1832. To the first of these two works Champollion published a reply entitled
Analyse critique de la
lettre sur la découverte des hiéroglyphes acrologiques par. Klaproth
(Extr. du Bulletin de Férussac), Paris, 1827, in which he showed the utter worthlessness of the theory. In 1830, when the correctness of Champollion's system was fully
Persistence of false systems of interpretation.
demonstrated, Janelli published at Naples his
Fundamenta Hermeneutica Hieroglyphicae
, in three volumes, in which the old symbolic theory of the hieroglyphics was re-asserted! and there were many who hesitated not to follow the views of François Ricardi, feu Charles d’Oneil, the soundness of which may be estimated by the title of one of his works, "
Découverte des Hiéroglyphes domestiques phonétiques par lesquels, sans sortir de chez soi, on peut deviner l’histoire, la chronologie (!!), le culte de tous les peuples anciens et modernes, de la même manière, qu’on le fait en lisant les hiéroglyphes égyptiens selon la nouvelle méthode;
" Turin, 1824.
1
Little by little, however, Champollion's system was accepted. In 1835 Leemans published his edition of Horapollo, in which the results of the decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics were ably applied, and two years later Richard Lepsius published his famous
Lettre d M. F. Rosellini sur l’alphabet hiéroglyphique
, wherein he 'discussed the whole question of the decipherment, and showed that Champollion's method was, without any question, correct. About this time students, who worked on Champollion's plan, sprang up in Holland, Italy, France and England, and the misguided Seyffarth alone continued down to 1855 to write and protest against the new system.
Footnotes
152:1
See his
Essai sur les Hiéroglyphes d’Horapollon
, Paris, 1827.
153:1
Another of his works was entitled, Triomphe sur les impies obtenu par les adorateurs de la très-sainte Trinité et du Verbe éternel, sous le gouvernement des sixième et septième rois d’Egypte au VIe siècle après le déluge. Sculpté en signes hiéroglyphiques sur l’ Obélisque Barberinus et maintenant expliqué
; Geneva, 1821.

=== 8 | Translation of the Rosetta Stone ===
The Rosetta Stone
, by E.A.W. Budge, [1893], at sacred-texts.com
TRANSLATION OF THE ROSETTA STONE
from
The Nile, Notes for Travellers in Egypt,
by E. A. Wallis Budge, 9th Edition, London, Thos. Cook and Son, [1905], pp. 199-211.
NOTE: Portions in the body of this text in bold font were surrounded by a cartouche in the original text--JBH.
TRANSLATION OF THE HIEROGLYPHIC TEXT OF THE DECREE OF THE PRIESTS OF MEMPHIS, AS FOUND ON THE ROSETTA STONE
1
AND ON THE STELE OF DAMANHÛR. THE DECREE WAS PROMULGATED IN THE 9TH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF PTOLEMY V. EPIPHANES.
1. On the twenty-fourth day of the month GORPIAIOS
2
, which correspondeth to the twenty-fourth day of the fourth month of the season PERT
3
of the inhabitants of TA-MERT (EGYPT), in the twenty-third year of the reign of HORUS-RA the CHILD, who hath risen as King upon the throne of his father, the lord of the shrines of NEKHEBET
4
and UATCHET,
5
the mighty one of two-fold strength, the stablisher of the Two Lands, the beautifier of
2. Egypt, whose heart is perfect (or benevolent) towards the gods, the HORUS of Gold, who maketh perfect the life of the
hamentet
beings, the lord of the thirty-year festivals like PTAḤ, the sovereign prince like RĀ, the King of the South and North,
Neterui-merui-ȧtui-ȧuā-setep-en-Ptaḥ-usr-ka-Rā-ānkh-sekhem-Ȧmen
6
, the Son of the Sun
Ptolemy, the ever-living,
the beloved of Ptaḥ
, the god who maketh himself manifest.
3. the son of
PTOLEMY
and
ARSINOË
, the Father-loving gods; when PTOLEMY, the son of PYRRHIDES, was priest of ALEXANDER, and of the Saviour-Gods, and of the Brother-loving Gods, and of the Beneficent Gods,
4. and of the Father-loving Gods, and of the God who maketh himself manifest; when DEMETRIA, the daughter of Telemachus, was bearer of the
5. prize of victory of BERENICE, the Beneficent Goddess; and when ARSINOË, the daughter of CADMUS, was the Basket Bearer of ARSINOË, the Brother-loving Goddess;
6. when IRENE, the daughter of PTOLEMY, was the Priestess of ARSINOË, the Father-loving Goddess; on this day the superintendents of the temples, and the servants of the god, and those who are over the secret things of the god, and the libationers [who] go into the most holy place to array the gods in then apparel,
7. and the scribes of the holy writings, and the sages of the Double House of Life, and the other libationers [who] had come from the sanctuaries of the South and the North to MEMPHIS, on the day of the festival, whereon
S. His Majesty, the King of the South and North
PTOLEMY, the ever-living, the beloved of Ptaḥ
, the god who maketh himself manifest, the lord of beauties, received the sovereignty from his father,
entered into the SEḤETCH-CHAMBER, wherein they were wont to assemble, in MAKHA-TAUI
1
, and behold they declared thus:—
9. “Inasmuch as the King who is beloved by the gods, the King of the South and North
Neterui-merui-ȧtui-ȧua-en-Ptaḥ-setep-en-usr-ka
Rā ānkh-sekhem-Ȧmen,
the Son of the Sun
Ptolemy, the ever-living, beloved of Ptaḥ
, the Gods who have made themselves manifest, the lord of beauties, hath given things of all kinds in very large quantities unto the lands of Horus and unto all
10. “those who dwell in them, and unto each and every one who holdeth any dignity whatsoever in them, now behold, he is like unto a God, being the son of a God [and] he was given by a Goddess, for he is the counterpart of Horus, the son of Isis [and] the son of Osiris, the avenger of his father Osiris—and behold, His Majesty.
11. “possessed a divine heart which was beneficent towards the gods; and he hath given gold in large quantities, and grain in large quantities to the temples and he hath given very many lavish gifts in order to make Ta-Mert [Egypt] prosperous, and to make stable [her] advancement;
12. “and he hath given unto the soldiers who are in his august service . . . . . . according to their rank
[paragraph continues]
[and of the taxes] some of them he hath cut off, and some of them [he hath lightened], thus causing the soldiers and those who live in the country to be prosperous
13. “under his reign [and as regards the sums which were due to the royal house] from the people of Egypt, and likewise those [which were due] from every one who was in his august service, His Majesty remitted them altogether, howsoever great they were;
14. “and he hath forgiven the prisoners who were in prison, and ordered that every one among them should be released from [the punishment] which he had to undergo. And His Majesty made an order saying:—In respect of the things [which are to be given to] the gods, and the money and the
15. “grain which are to be given to the temples each year, and all the things [which are to be given to] the gods from the vineyards and from the corn-lands of the nome, all the things which were then due under the Majesty of his holy father
16. “shall he allowed to remain [in their amounts] to them as they were then; and he hath ordered:—Behold, the treasury (?) shall not he made more full of contributions by the hands of the priests than it was up to the first year of the reign of His Majesty, his holy father; and His Majesty hath remitted
17. “To the priests who minister in the temples in courses the journey which they had been accustomed to make by river in boats to the city of ALEXANDRIA at the beginning of each years and His Majesty commanded:—Behold, those who are boatmen [by trade] shall not be seized [and
made to serve in the Navy]; and in respect of the cloths of byssus [which are] made in the temples for the royal house,
18. “he hath commanded that two-thirds of them shall be returned [to the priests]; similarly, His Majesty hath [re]-established all the things, the performance of which had been set aside, and hath restored them to their former condition, and he hath taken the greatest care to cause everything which ought to be done in the service of the gods to be done in the sane way in which it was done
19. “in former [days]; similarly, he hath donc [all things] in a right and proper manner; and he hath taken care to administer justice
1
to the people, even like Thoth, the great, great [God]; and he hath, more over, ordered in respect of those of the troops who come back, and the other people also, who during the
20. “
strife of the revolution which took place had been ill disposed [towards the Government], that when they return to their homes and lands they shall have the power to remain in possession of their property, and he hath taken great care to send
infantry, and cavalry, and ships to repulse those who were coming against
21. “Egypt by land as well as by sea; and he hath in consequence expended a very large amount of money and of grain on them in order to make prosperous the lands of Horus and Egypt.
22. “And His Majesty marched against the
town of Shekam
, which is in front of (?) the town of UISET,
which was in the possession of the enemy, and was provided with catapults, and was made ready for war with weapons of every kind by
23. “the rebels who were in it—now they had committed great acts of sacrilege in the land of Horus, and had done injury to those who dwelt in Egypt—His Majesty attacked them by making a road [to their town],
24. “and he raised mounds (or walls) against them, and he dug trenches, and whatsoever would lead [him] against them that he made;
and he caused the canals which supplied the town with water to be blocked up, a thing which none of the kings who preceded him had ever been able to do before, and he expended a large amount of money on carrying out the work;
25. “and His Majesty stationed infantry at the mouths of the canals
in order to watch and to guard them against the extraordinary rise of the waters
[
of the Nile
],
which took place in the eighth year
[
of his reign
],
in the aforesaid canals which watered the fields, and were unusually deep
26. “in this spot; and His Majesty captured the town by assault in a very short time, and he cut to pieces the rebels who were therein, and he made an exceedingly great slaughter among them, even like unto that which THOTH
1
and HORUS, the son of Isis and [the son of Osiris], made among those who rebelled against them
27. “when they rebelled in this very place; and behold, those who had led on the soldiers and were at their head, and who had disturbed the borders [in the time of his father, and who had committed sacrilege in the temples, when His Majesty came to MEMPHIS to avenge his father
28. “and his own sovereignty he punished, according to their deserts, when he came there to celebrate] the festival of the receiving of the sovereignty from his father; and [besides this], he hath set aside [his claim to
29. “the things which were due to His Majesty, and which were [then] in the temples, up to the eighth year [of his reign, which amounted to no small sum of] money and grain; and His Majesty hath also set aside [his claim] to the cloths of byssus which ought to have been given to the royal house and were [then] in the temples,
30. “and also the tax which they (
i.e.
the priests) ought to have contributed for dividing the cloths into pieces, which was due up to this day; and he hath also remitted to the temples the grain which was usually levied as a tax on the corn-lands of the gods, and likewise the measure of wine which was clue as a tax on vineyards [of the gods];
31. “and he hath done great things for APIS, and MNEVIS, and for every shrine which contained a sacred animal, and he expended upon them more than did his ancestors; and his heart hath entered into [the consideration of everything] which was right and proper for them
32. “at every moment; and he hath given everything which was necessary for the embalming of their bodies, lavishly, and in magnificent abundance; and he hath undertaken the cost of their maintenance in their temples, and the cost of their great festivals, and of their burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and libations;
33. “[and he hath respected the privileges of the temples, and of Egypt, and hath maintained them in a suitable
manner according to what is customary and right; and he hath spent] both money and grain to no small amount;
34. “and [hath provided] everything in great abundance for the house wherein dwelleth the LIVING APIS; and His Majesty hath decorated it with perfect and new ornamentations of the most beautiful character always; and he hath made the LIVING APIS to rise [like the sun], and hath founded temples, and shrines, and chapels [in his honour]; [and he hath repaired the shrines, which needed repairs, and in all matters appertaining to the service of the gods
35. “he hath manifested the spirit of a beneficent god; and during his reign, having made careful inquiry, he hath restored the temples which were held in the greatest honour, as was right] and in return for these things the gods and goddesses have given him victory, and power, and life, and strength, and health, and every beautiful thing of every kind whatsoever, and
36. “in respect of his exalted rank, it shall be established to him and to his children for ever and ever, with happy results (or life).”
And it has entered into the heart(s) of the priests of the temples of the South and of the North, and of each and every temple [that all the honours which
37. are paid] to the King of the South and North
Ptolemy, the ever-living, the beloved of Ptaḥ
, the [God who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful, and those which are paid to the Father-loving Gods who begot him, and to the Beneficent Gods who begot those who begot him, and to the Brother-Gods who begot the begetters of his begetters,]
38. and to the Saviour-Gods, shall be [greatly increased]; and a statue of the King of the South and North,
Ptolemy, ever-living, beloved of Ptaḥ
, the God who maketh himself manifest, the Lord of beauties, shall be set up [in every temple, in the most prominent place], and it shall be
39, called by his name "
PTOLEMY
, the SAVIOUR of EGYPT," the interpretation (?) of which is "
PTOLEMY
, THE VICTORIOUS ONE." [And it shall stand side by side with a statue of the Lord of the gods (?), who giveth him the weapon of victory, and it shall be fashioned after the manner of the Egyptians, and a statue of this kind shall be set up in]
40. all the temples which are called by his name. And adoration shall he paid unto these statues three times each day, and every rite and ceremony which it is proper to perform before them shall be performed, and whatsoever is prescribed, and is fitting for their DOUBLES, shall be performed, even as it is performed for the gods of the Nomes during the festivals and on every sacred day (?), on the day of [his] coronation, and on his name-day. And there shall likewise [be set up] a
41. magnificent (?) statue of the King of the South and North
Ptolemy, ever-living beloved of Ptaḥ
, the God who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful, the son of
Ptolemy
, and
Arsinoë
, the Father-loving gods, and with the statue there shall be a magnificent shrine [made] of the finest copper and inlaid with real stones of every kind,
42. in every temple which is called by his name; and this statue shall rest in the most holy place [in the temples] side by side with the shrines of the gods of the Nomes. And on the days of the great festivals, when the god [of the temple] cometh forth from his holy habitation, according to his day, the holy shrine of the God who maketh himself manifest, the lord of beauties, shall likewise be made to rise [like the Sun]
43. with them. And in order to make this new shrine to be easily distinguishable [both at the present day, and in future times, they shall set] upon this shrine [ten royal double crowns, made of gold and upon [each of the double crowns there shall be placed the [serpent which it is right and proper to make for the [double crown of gold], instead of the two Uraei
44. which are [placed] upon the tops of the shrines, and the SEKHENT CROWN shall be in the middle of them, because it was in the SEKHENT CROWN in which His Majesty shone in the house of the KA of PTAḤ (
i.e.
, Memphis)
45. at the time when the king entered into the temple, and performed the ceremonies which it was meet and right for him to perform on receiving the exalted rank [of King]. And on the upper surface of the square pedestal which is round these crowns, and in the middle part thereof [which is immediately] beneath] the double Crown [
they shall engrave a papyrus plant and a plant of the south; and they shall set them in such a way that a vulture
,
upon neb
,
,
beneath which a plant of the south shall be found, shall be affixed to the right-hand upper corner of the golden shrine, and a serpent
,
,
under
which is
,
placed upon
] a papyrus plant, [shall be affixed] to the left hand side [at the upper corner]; and
46. the interpretation [of these signs is]:—"Lord of the shrine of NEKHEBET, and Lord of the shrine of UATCHET, who illumineth the land of the White Crown, and the land of the Red Crown." And inasmuch as the last day of the fourth month of the season SHEMU
1
(
i.e.
, MESORE), which is the birthday of the beautiful ever-living god, is already established as a feast day, and it hath been observed as a day of festival in the lands of HORUS (
i.e.
, the temple lands) from the olden time; and moreover, the seventeenth day of the second month of the season SHAT
2
(i.e., PAOPI),
47. whereon [His Majesty] performed the ceremonies of royal accession, when he received the sovereignty from his father, [is also observed as a day of festival], and behold [these days] have been the source of all [good] things wherein all men have participated; these days, that is to say, the seventeenth and the last day of each month, shall be kept as festivals in the temples
48. of Egypt, in each and every one of them; and on these days burnt offerings shall be offered up, and meat offerings, and everything which it is right and customary to perform at the celebration of festivals shall be performed on these days every month, and on these festivals every man shall do (
i.e.
, offer up) what he is accustomed to do on [other] fes-
49. tivals in the temples. [And the priests also decreed]
that the things which
[
are brought to the temples
] as
offerings shall be given unto the persons who
[
minister in the temples; and festivals and processions shall be established in the temples, and in all Egypt, in honour of
] the King of the South and North,
Ptolemy, ever-living, beloved of Ptaḥ,
the god who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful, each year,
50. beginning with the first day of the first month of the season Shat (
i.e
., Thoth) up to the fifth day thereof [and on these days the people shall wear] garlands on their heads, and they shall make festal the altars, and shall offer up meat and drink offerings, and shall perform everything which it is right and proper to perform. And the priests of all the temples which are called after his name
51. shall have, in addition to all the other priestly titles which they may possess, the title of "Servant of the god who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful"; [
and this title shall be endorsed on all deeds and documents which are laid up in the temples
]; and they shall cause to be engraved on the rings which they wear on their hands, the title of "Libationer of the god who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful."
52. And behold, it shall he in the hands of those who live in the country, and those who desire [it], to establish a copy of the shrine of the god who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful, and set it up in their houses, and they shall be at liberty to keep festivals and make rejoicings [before it] each month
53. and each year; and in order to make those who are in Egypt to know [
why it is that the Egyptians pay honour—as it is most right and proper to do—to the
god who maketh himself beautiful, whose deeds are beautiful, the priests have decreed
] that this DECREE shall [
be inscribed
] upon a stele of hard stone in the writing of the words of the gods, and the writing of the books, and in the writing of HAUI-NEBUI (i.e., Greeks), and it shall be set up in the sanctuaries in the temples which [are called] by his name, of the first, second, and third [class], near the statue of the HORUS, the King of the South and North
Ptolemy, ever-living, beloved of Ptaḥ
, the god who maketh himself manifest, whose deeds are beautiful.
Footnotes
199:1
The words in brackets are added either from the Stele of Damanhûr or for the purpose of making sense.
199:2
A part of March and April.
199:3
Part of our Spring.
199:4
The shrine of the vulture goddess Nekhebet was in Upper Egypt.
199:5
More fully, Per-Uatchet; the shrine of the snake goddess was in the Delta.
199:6
A name meaning "The two Father-loving Gods, the heir, chosen of Ptaḥ, strength of the double of Rā, living power of Ȧmen."
201:1
Makha-taui
,
i.e.
, "the balance or the two lands," was the name of the place where Lower Egypt ended, and Upper Egypt began, when travelling to the South.
203:1
The lines in italics are taken from the Demotic version.
204:1
The Demotic Version has Rā.
209:1
The season of the Inundation, or, our summer.
209:2
Our autumn and early winter.
