=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Two are holding a tallis, this one says I found it and this one says etc..
This is the law when each one of them are holding the fringes at the edge of the tallis, however if each one of them is holding a portion of it for himself, there is for each one of them what they are holding and have a claim in it.  And the remainder of the tallis will be divided equally after they both swear as was mentioned before.  And what was said (next in the mishneh) that this one says 'all of it is mine' this is discussing when a seller sells the tallis to one of two people that was found in front of him for a known price and each one of them gave to him the specified amount, and he (the seller) took from one of them willingly and from the second unwillingly- and he took it from him with intent that he would return it.  And the seller was unsure, that he did not know which one of them he sold to, and each one of the buyers claim to me it was sold willingly.  They will both swear according to how the rabbis have established so that it will not be that everyone will grab his friends tallis. And they will split the tallis and one of the payments, which the seller had returned to them.  *And if the seller knows who was the buyer, and he says to this one I sold it, he (the seller) will be believed in his testimony and even though the tallis is being held by both of them and they both claim 'I bought it', and his testimony will be like the law of a single witness in general.  And then the oath will be from the torah because of the witness (the seller) and not because of the institution of the rabbis as we have said.   And he won't be entitled to the tallis one more than the other, unless another witness joins together with the seller.  And from our general rules that the one who swears who is taking something with his oath, he should not swear about more than he will be allowed to take with that oath, therefore he swears he doesn't he have less than half, he does not swear that all of it belongs to him, since he is only taking half of it. And on all of these laws you can ask and you can judge.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
These are the found items that belong to him, and these he must announce, etc.
Rabbi Yehudah says, anything that has a distinguishing mark, he must announce, because it is possible for the owner to state that distinguishing mark and have his item returned to him.
And "new vessels" (kelei anforiah) are new vessels that the owners have not used in a manner that would allow them to recognize them; if they had used them until they could recognize them, they must show them to the one who claims to have lost them. If he recognizes them, they should be returned to him if the person is trustworthy, as they said that for a respectable scholar, they would return his lost item based on visual recognition.
And since these have not been used enough for the owner to recognize them visually, he is not required to announce them.
And if he finds two or more of them, like two needles or two skewers, or similar items, their number is a distinguishing mark, and he must announce them.
And all of this applies when he finds them in a private domain where few people pass. But someone who finds an item in a street or a large plaza, even if the item has a distinguishing mark, it belongs to him, provided the place is mostly populated by Canaanites. But if it is mostly populated by Israelites, he must announce it.
And the law follows Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar.
