=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive Torah commandment to pray every day, as [Exodus 23:25] states: "You shall serve God, your Lord." Tradition teaches us that this service is prayer, as [Deuteronomy 11:13] states: "And serve Him with all your heart" and our Sages said: Which is the service of the heart? This is prayer.The number of prayers is not prescribed in the Torah, nor does it prescribe a specific formula for prayer. Also, according to Torah law, there are no fixed times for prayers.
Therefore, women and slaves are obligated to pray, since it is not a time-oriented commandment.Rather, this commandment obligates each person to offer supplication and prayer every day and utter praises of the Holy One, blessed be He; then petition for all his needs with requests and supplications; and finally, give praise and thanks to God for the goodness that He has bestowed upon him; each one according to his own ability.
A person who was eloquent would offer many prayers and requests. [Conversely,] a person who was inarticulate would speak as well as he could and whenever he desired.Similarly, the number of prayers was dependent on each person's ability. Some would pray once daily; others, several times.Everyone would pray facing the Holy Temple, wherever he might be. This was the ongoing practice from [the time of] Moshe Rabbenu until Ezra.
When Israel was exiled in the time of the wicked Nebuchadnezzar, they became interspersed in Persia and Greece and other nations. Children were born to them in these foreign countries and those children's language was confused.The speech of each and every one was a concoction of many tongues. No one was able to express himself coherently in any one language, but rather in a mixture [of languages], as [Nehemiah 13:24] states: "And their children spoke half in Ashdodit and did not know how to speak the Jewish language. Rather, [they would speak] according to the language of various other peoples."Consequently, when someone would pray, he would be limited in his ability to request his needs or to praise the Holy One, blessed be He, in Hebrew, unless other languages were mixed in with it. When Ezra and his court saw this, they established eighteen blessings in sequence.The first three [blessings] are praises of God and the last three are thanksgiving. The intermediate [blessings] contain requests for all those things that serve as general categories for the desires of each and every person and the needs of the whole community.Thus, the prayers could be set in the mouths of everyone. They could learn them quickly and the prayers of those unable to express themselves would be as complete as the prayers of the most eloquent. It was because of this matter that they established all the blessings and prayers so that they would be ordered in the mouths of all Israel, so that each blessing would be set in the mouth of each person unable to express himself.
They also decreed that the number of prayers correspond to the number of sacrifices - i.e., two prayers every day, corresponding to the two daily sacrifices. On any day that an additional sacrifice [was offered], they instituted a third prayer, corresponding to the additional offering.The prayer that corresponds to the daily morning sacrifice is called the Shacharit Prayer. The prayer that corresponds to the daily sacrifice offered in the afternoon is called the Minchah Prayer and the prayer corresponding to the additional offerings is called the Musaf Prayer.
They also instituted a prayer to be recited at night, since the limbs of the daily afternoon offering could be burnt the whole night, as [Leviticus 6:2] states: "The burnt offering [shall remain on the altar hearth all night until morning]." In this vein, [Psalms 55:18] states: "In the evening, morning and afternoon I will speak and cry aloud, and He will hear my voice."The Evening Prayer is not obligatory, as are the Morning and Minchah Prayers. Nevertheless, the Jewish people, in all the places that they have settled, are accustomed to recite the Evening Prayer and have accepted it upon themselves as an obligatory prayer.
Similarly, they instituted a prayer after the Minchah Prayer [to be recited] close to sunset on fast days only, its purpose being to increase supplication and pleading because of the fast.This is called the Ne'ilah prayer, as if to say that the gates of Heaven are closed behind the sun, which becomes hidden, since it is recited only close to [the time of] sunset.
Thus, three prayers are recited daily: the Evening Prayer, the Morning Prayer, and the Minchah Prayer. There are four on Sabbaths, festivals and Rosh Chodesh: the three that are recited daily and the Musaf Prayer. On Yom Kippur, there are five: these four and the Ne'ilah prayer.
The number of these prayers may not be diminished, but may be increased. If a person wants to pray all day long, he may.Any prayer that one adds is considered as a freewill offering. Therefore, one must add a new idea consistent with that blessing in each of the middle blessings. [However], making an addition of a new concept even in only one blessing is sufficient in order to make known that this is a voluntary prayer and not obligatory.In the first three [blessings] and the last three [blessings], one must never add, detract or change anything at all.
The community should not recite a voluntary prayer, since the community does not bring a freewill offering. Even an individual should not recite the Musaf Prayer twice, once as the obligation of the day and the other as a voluntary prayer, because the additional offering is never a freewill offering.One of the Geonim taught that it is forbidden to recite a voluntary prayer on Sabbaths or holidays, since freewill offerings were not sacrificed on these days, but only the obligatory offerings of the day.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
In the days of Rabban Gamliel,1The commentaries question which Rabban Gamliel the Rambam refers to. Seder Hadorot points to Rabban Gamliel, the elder, grandson of Hillel the Elder, who lived in the first half of the first century of the Common Era. Dorot Harishonim, however, believes this to refer to the latter's grandson, who headed the Rabbinical court in Yavneh from 80 CE, after it was established there by Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai following the destruction of the Second Temple. the numbers of heretics among the Jews increased.2In Hilchot Teshuvah 3:8, the Rambam describes a heretic (apikoros) as one who denies the notion of prophecy or the idea that knowledge could be transmitted from the Creator to human beings, one who refutes the prophecy of Moshe Rabbenu, or one who denies God's omniscience regarding the actions of human beings.Some manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah use the word min (non-believer) instead of apikoros. In Hilchot Teshuvah 3:7, the Rambam describes the min as one who does not believe in God, whereas the heretic denies not God, but Torah.Historically, this could refer to the Saducees and other Jews with assimilationist tendencies that began to multiply at this time. Though they were definitely a minority among the people, their number was signficant enough to warrant concern. Others interpret this as a reference to the early Christians who launched many missionary campaigns to attract the Jews. They would oppress the Jews3by slandering them to the Roman conquerors. and entice them to turn away from God.4and adopt other lifestyles as above.Since he saw this as the greatest need of the people, - for the devotion to Torah is the backbone of our people's continuitySince he saw this as the greatest need of the people,5for the devotion to Torah is the backbone of our people's continuity. he and his court established one blessing that contains a request to God to destroy the heretics. He inserted it into the Shemoneh Esreh so that it would be arranged in the mouths of all.6Berachot 28b relates: Rabban Gamliel said to the Sages: "Is there no one who knows how to establish the blessing of the nonbelievers?" Shmuel Hakatan rose and composed it. Olat Re'iah explains why this Sage was chosen: All of our great and wise Sages were able to compose the other blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh which are full of love and giving. The blessing of the heretics differs for it appears full of hate and destruction. The composition of this blessing required great care, since the content must not imply the hatred of people per se, but a righteous indignation, born out of love for God and the pain felt when His Majesty is not honored. Shmuel HaKatan authored the famous statement: "Refrain from joy at the fall of your enemies" (Pirkei Avot 4:19). Thus, he was most worthy to author this blessing. His zealousness bore no trace whatsoever of hate, but was a true reflection of his unbounded love for God and His Torah. Consequently, there are nineteen blessings in the Shemoneh Esreh.7We do, however, still call the prayer the Shemoneh Esreh, based on its original eighteen blessings.
In each Shemoneh Esreh,1i.e., in all three prayer services every day, a person should recite these nineteen blessings in the proper order.When does the above apply? When his concentration is not disturbed and he is able to read fluently.2i.e., when he is able to pray with the proper intention and recite the words properly and clearly. However, if he is distracted and bothered, or unable to pray fluently, he should recite the first three [blessings],3The Mishnah, Berachot 28b, states:Rabban Gamliel says that one should recite eighteen blessings each and every day (i.e., that each time he prays he should recite all eighteen blessings).Rabbi Yehoshua says that one should recite the abbreviated version of the eighteen.Rabbi Akiva says that if the Shemoneh Esreh is fluent in his mouth he should recite all eighteen blessings; and if not, the abbreviated version of the eighteen blessings.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 110:1 states that in unusual circumstances, e.g., when travelling or when in a place where he would be distracted or interrupted, one may recite the shortened version of the Shemoneh Esreh. The Mishnah Berurah adds that in normal circumstances, one is forbidden to recite this prayer. It is questionable if this is also the Rambam's intent or if he was more lenient and allowed such a prayer to be recited by a person who had difficulty concentrating even under ordinary conditions. one blessing that summarizes all the intermediate ones,4as stated in the following Halachah. and the last three [blessings], and [thereby] fulfill his obligation.5The first and last three blessings may not be shortened or changed in any way, as we learned in Chapter 1, Halachah 9.
This is the blessing that they established as the abbreviated summary of the intermediate [blessings]:Give1This follows the opinion of Shmuel (Berachot 29a). Rav differs and maintains that one utters an abbreviated summary of each and every blessing. us knowledge, O God, our Lord, to know Your ways,2This phrase relates to the first intermediate blessing, חונן הדעת ("The One who bestows knowledge..."). and circumcise our hearts to fear You.3This corresponds to the blessing of "Return us, our Father, to Your Torah." The beginning of wisdom is the fear of God (Psalms 111:10 - i.e., our involvement in Torah is ultimately that which leads us to true fear of Heaven and Teshuvah (repentance). Forgive us4This corresponds to the blessing סלח לנו (Forgive us...), the third of the intermediate blessings. so that we will be redeemed.5This relates to the fourth blessing, גואל ישראל (the Redeemer of Israel). Distance us from pain.6This corresponds to the blessing of רפואה (healing), the fifth intermediate blessing. Cause us to prosper and to dwell in the pastures of Your land.7This relates to ברכת השנים, the blessing for material wealth. It is interesting that this blessing also mentions specifically the idea of dwelling in Eretz Yisrael as the ultimate prosperity and blessing.The Zohar explains that all blessing and bounty enters the world through Eretz Yisrael and from there it is apportioned to the rest of the world. Jerusalem and the Holy Temple serve as the repositories for Divine grace and act as the meeting point between Heaven - the source of the bounty - and earth, the recipient of this blessing. Therefore, true prosperity, in both a material and spiritual sense, can only be achieved in Eretz Yisrael.Gather the scattered from the four [corners of the earth].8This corresponds to the blessing of the gathering of the exiles, the seventh intermediate blessing. Judge those led astray in accordance with Your knowledge.9This relates to the eighth intermediate blessing, "Return our judges..." Raise Your hand over the wicked,10This corresponds to the blessing of the nonbelievers (Halachah 1). Even though this was not part of the original eighteen blessings, it was also incorporated into the abbreviated version of the Shemoneh Esreh. and let the righteous rejoice11This relates to the tenth intermediate blessing, על הצדיקים (upon the righteous). In that blessing we ask God to grant a just reward to the righteous and pious. The text of this blessing also clarifies the Sages' appreciation of this reward - the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the Temple - as expressed in the continuation of this section of the blessing. in the building of Your city and the reestablishment of Your sanctuary,12this corresponds to the blessing of the rebuilding of Jerusalem, the eleventh intermediate blessing. in the flourishing of the might of David, Your servant, and in the clear shining light of the son of Yishai, Your anointed one.13This relates to the twelfth blessing, called the blessing of the Messiah, the descendant of David.Before we call, You answer, as [Isaiah 65:24] states: "And before they call I will answer; while they are still speaking I heed,"14Berachot 29a does not quote this verse or any other verse. No mention of a verse appears in the texts of Rav Yitzchak Alfasi or Rabbenu Asher's version of Shmuel's blessing. The Rambam's source for its inclusion is unclear. for You are the One who answers at all times, the Redeemer and Savior from all distress. Blessed are You, O God, the One Who hears prayer.15concluding the blessing which is based on שומע תפילה ("who hears prayer"), the last of the intermediate blessings.
When does the above apply? In the summer.1Only then, may one recite the abbreviated version of the Shemoneh Esreh mentioned in the above two halachot. However, in the winter, one should not recite "Give us knowledge...,"2Havineinu, the first word of the abbreviated version of the Shemoneh Esreh, is used to refer to the entire prayer. since he must mention "the petition"3for dew and rain that is included... in the blessing for material wealth.4This petition is recited only in the winter as explained in Halachot 16 and 17. The omission of this petition would render the abbreviated Shemoneh Esreh incomplete.Berachot 29a suggests that perhaps the petition for dew and rain could be added to the abbreviated version of the Shemoneh Esreh at the appropriate time of year, but rejects this idea. Because of the infrequency with which one would normally recite this blessing, any change in the text would confuse people and result in errors.Similarly, on Saturday nights and the nights after a holiday, one should not recite "Give us knowledge...," since one must say Havdalah in [the blessing of] the One who bestows knowledge.5to differentiate between the previous holy day and the upcoming day. This prayer is added in the first intermediate blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh: חונן הדעת ("the One who bestows knowledge") as explained in Halachah 12.Berachot 29a also suggests adding the Havdalah prayer in the abbreviated summary of the Shemoneh Esreh, distinguishing between the inclusion of Havdalah and the petition for rain, which could not be mentioned in the abbreviated version of the Shemoneh Esreh as explained above.They explain that Havdalah is recited in the first of the intermediate blessings and would therefore be easy to remember and not cause errors, whereas the petition for rain is in the middle, when concentration is more difficult.The question is left unresolved in the Talmud and therefore, some authorities allow it to be included in the abbreviated version. However, most do not. Rabbenu Yonah explains that it is omitted because its mention would create the impression that Havdalah was a blessing in its own right, just as all the other statements in this version of the Shemoneh Esreh are shortened versions of individual blessings.
On Sabbaths and holidays,1These are days of joy and thanksgiving when pleading and supplication are not appropriate. We are content with the world as it is and focus on its completeness. one recites seven blessings in each of the four [Amidah] prayers2See Chapter 1, Halachah 8. of that particular day: the first three, the last three,3i.e., These six blessings are recited without change in all of the Amidah prayers as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 9. and one in the middle, appropriate to that particular day.4in place of the requests mentioned during the week.On Sabbaths, one concludes the intermediate blessing with "who sanctifies the Sabbath."5since after the creation of the world, God "blessed the seventh day and made it holy" (Genesis 2:3 . On the festivals,6i.e., Pesach, Shavuot and Sukkot he concludes with "who sanctifies Israel and the appointed times."7As opposed to the conclusion of the blessing on Sabbath, the blessing of the holidays first mentions the sanctification of Israel and then of the specific time. The sanctification of the holidays is determined by the Jewish people since the exact date of each festival is based on the establishment of Rosh Chodesh (the first day of the month) of that particular month.In Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 2:10, the Rambam explains that we are obligated to rely on the day established Rosh Chodesh by the Jewish court. This matter was handed over to them completely. God, who commanded the observance of the holiday, commanded us to rely on them.This concept is based on the verse in Leviticus 23:4: "These are the appointed days of God, sacred days, that you shall designate them in their appointed time." The word אתם, otam, translated as “them,” may, with a different pronunciation mark be read as otam, “you,” indicating that “you,” the court on the earthly plane, is responsible for the establishment of the times of the festivals based on their designation of the day of Rosh Chodesh.Therefore, we first mention God's sanctification of Israel and then Israel's subsequent sanctification of the holidays. When the Sabbath and a festival [coincide], he concludes with "who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the appointed8Beitzah 17a discusses this particular situation:A holiday that falls on Sabbath: Beit Shammai says that one recites eight [blessings], reciting the blessing for Sabbath independently and the blessing for the holiday independently.Beit Hillel says that one recites seven [blessings], beginning with Sabbath and concluding with Sabbath, reciting the blessing particular to the sanctity of the holiday in the middle.Rebbe [Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi] says that one should conclude with "who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the appointed times."A student was reviewing [this matter] in the presence of Ravina and said "who sanctifies Israel, Sabbath and the appointed times." Ravina said to him: "And is Sabbath sanctified by Israel? Sabbath is eternally sanctified. Rather, one should say: 'who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the appointed times.'”Rav Yosef says: "The halachah follows Rebbe and Ravina's answer." times."On Rosh Hashanah, he concludes with "the King over all the Earth, who sanctifies Israel and the Day of Remembrance." If it is [also] the Sabbath, he concludes with "the King over all the Earth, who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the Day of Remembrance."9We mention God's sovereignty for the essence of the service of Rosh HaShanah is the acceptance of God as our King (See Rosh HaShanah 16a).Rosh Hashanah is called the Day of Remembrance, since on this day, we ask God to remember us for good and to bless us. This will be discussed in the context of the blessings of the Rosh Hashanah Musaf Prayer in the next halachah.
When does this1i.e., the previously stated halachah that one recites seven blessings on Rosh Hashanah apply? In the Evening Prayers, the Morning Prayers and the Minchah Prayers.2These services resemble those of other holidays. However, in the Musaf Prayer on Rosh Hashanah, one recites nine blessings: the first three and the last three [recited] every day,3for these are constants in all prayer services. and three intermediate blessings.4Rosh HaShanah 16a mentions the source for these blessings, quoting God as saying: "On Rosh Hashanah, recite in My presence Malchuyot, Zichronot and Shofarot. Malchuyot, in order that you shall make Me King over you. Zichronot, in order that your remembrance will be good in front of Me, and with what? The shofar."As explained in detail in Hilchot Shofar 3:7-9, each of these blessings is based on ten verses from the Bible that center on the blessings's theme.The first of the intermediate blessings5Rosh HaShanah 32a explains that the blessing which mentions the sanctity of the Rosh HaShanah holiday and its sacrifices is also included in Malchuyot. is concerned with Malchuyot - [acceptance of God's sovereignty];the6Similarly, this blessing emphasizes the unity of God which permeates creation for this is the ultimate expression of God's sovereignty. second with Zichronot - [acknowledgement of God's remembrance of the Jewish people];7Hilchot Shofar 3:9 emphasizes how one should mention only those remembrances which are of a positive nature. andthe third with Shofarot - [describing the blowing of the shofar.]One8Rosh HaShanah 16a relates:Rabbi Abahu asks: "Why do we blow with the shofar of a ram? As the Holy One blessed be He said: Blow a ram's horn before Me so that I shall remember the binding of Yitzchak the son of Avraham, and I will consider it as if you bound (and sacrificed) yourselves to Me." concludes each one of them with an appropriate chatimah.9The conclusions are as follows:Malchuyot - "... The King over all the Earth who sanctifies Israel and the Day of Remembrance" (This conclusion is also used for the intermediate blessing in all the prayers of Rosh Hashanah.)Zichronot - "...The One who remembers the Covenant.”Shofarot - "...The One who hears the Teru'ah” - based on Leviticus 23:24.See also the Rambam's Order of Prayer for the Whole Year at the end of the Book of the Love of God.
On Yom Kippur, one recites seven blessings1See Yoma 87b and Niddah 8b. in each of the five prayers of the day;2I.e., Maariv, Shacharit, Musaf, Minchah and the Ne'ilah Prayer discussed in Chapter 1:7. the first three and the last three blessings,3recited in every Amidah prayer. and the intermediate blessing appropriate to the day.4mentioning the unique character of Yom Kippur.One concludes the latter blessing in each of the services with: "the King over all the Earth, who sanctifies Israel and the Day of Atonement."5Soferim 19:6 mentions the chatimah of this prayer as:who pardons and forgives our transgressions and the transgressions of His people Israel with mercy, and atones for their wrongdoing, the King over all the Earth, who sanctifies Israel and the Fast Day of Atonement.A similar text is quoted in the Tur, Orach Chayim 613 and in most Yom Kippur Machzorim (prayer books).One cannot presume that the Rambam is mentioning only the end of a longer chatimah in our halachah, since in his Order of Prayer for the Whole Year, the conclusion of the intermediate blessing for Yom Kippur is as it appears in this halachah. The Rambam's text appears to be based on the Siddur of Rav Sa'adiah Gaon.If [Yom Kippur] falls on the Sabbath, one concludes [this blessing in] each service with: "the King over all the Earth, who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the Day of Atonement." - I.e., as for the rest of the holidays, the word Sabbath is simply inserted into the chatimah of the blessing after מקדש (who sanctifies). This is also the case according to the more widely accepted longer version of the chatimah of this intermediate blessing. If [Yom Kippur] falls on the Sabbath, one concludes [this blessing in] each service with: "the King over all the Earth, who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the Day of Atonement."
When does the above apply? On the Fast Day1i.e., Yom Kippur, the only day when the Torah requires fasting of each and every year. However, on the Fast Day of the Jubilee Year,2the final year of a 50-year cycle. Every seventh year is called the Sabbatical year. There is a cycle of seven Sabbatical years, the end of which is the fiftieth year - the Jubilee Year. See Leviticus 25:8-13 and Hilchot Shemitah V'yovel, Chapters 10-13. one recites a Musaf Prayer of nine blessings like the Musaf Prayer of Rosh Hashanah.3See Halachah 6. They are exactly the same blessings, no less and no more.4The Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 26b) states that the Jubilee Year is equivalent to Rosh Hashanah regarding the blowing of the shofar and the blessings. Rashi explains that the shofar is blown in the same fashion as on Rosh Hashanah, albeit for a different reason, and that nine blessings are recited in the Musaf Prayer of Yom Kippur of the Jubilee Year.These blessings are only recited when the Jubilee Year is in effect.5The Jubilee Year is observed only when all the tribes of Israel dwell in Israel. The dispersion of even a part of the people put an end to the celebration of the Jubilee Year (Erichin 32b). Thus, the exile of the tribes of Reuven, Gad and half the tribe of Menasheh described in I Chronicles 5:26 caused the end of the celebration of the Jubilee Year. (See Hilchot Shemitah V'Yovel 10:8.)In Hilchot Melachim 12:1, the Rambam writes that with the Mashiach's coming, the celebration of the Jubilee year will be renewed.
Before the first blessing of each and every Amidah-prayer, one states: "God, open my lips, and my mouth will utter Your praise" [Psalms1See Berachot 4b which quotes Rabbi Yochanan as requiring this verse to be recited before every prayer.Rabbenu Yonah explains that this verse must be understood in conjunction with the verse that follows it: "You do not desire that I offer sacrifices; a burnt offering, You do not want:" (Psalms 51:18 . After his relations with Bathsheva, King David realized that he could not attain forgiveness by offering a sacrifice, since a sacrifice is accepted only after an act done unwittingly. Therefore, he asked that God assist him in finding the proper means of expression through prayer to achieve atonement.We, too, are in a similar situation for we have no Temple and our prayers were instituted in the place of our sacrifices. (See Chapter 1, Halachah 5.) Accordingly, we ask God to assist us in our desire to utter His praises, and request our needs in such a way that it will be desirable to Him.Berachot 4b raises a question regarding the recitation of this verse before Shemoneh Esreh. Rabbi Yochanan himself states that one who starts the Shemoneh Esreh immediately after the blessing after Kri'at Shema, גאל ישראל (Who redeemed Israel) is called a person of the World to Come. (See Chapter 7, Halachah 18, where the Rambam mentions this halachah.)Why is the recitation of this verse not considered an interruption between the blessing and the Shemoneh Esreh? The Talmud answers that this verse is considered as an integral part of the Shemoneh Esreh, and thus, is viewed as a "long prayer." 51:17]. Upon concluding the prayer, he says:2Berachot 9b mentions that just as King David wrote this verse after eighteen chapters of praise (it appears in Psalm 19), we recite it after eighteen blessings of prayer. "May the utterances of my mouth and the meditations of my heart be in accordance with Your will, O God, my Rock and Redeemer" [Psalms3This verse is particularly apt for recitation after the Shemoneh Esreh. Proper intention during the Shemoneh Esreh is a very difficult matter (See Chapter 4, Halachah 15). Therefore, at the end of the Shemoneh Esreh we ask God to heed our words in any case:"May the utterances of my mouth..." - meaning to say: May the words which I uttered in the midst of the Shemoneh Esreh be accepted by You even if my intention was not complete and my mouth acted independently of my heart and mind. "... and the meditations of my heart..."; i.e., those lofty thoughts and desires which burn in my heart, but I cannot express, may they also be heard by You and received favorably. 19:15], and then steps backwards.4after completing the Shemoneh Esreh, one takes three steps backwards. See Yoma 53b and Chapter 5, Halachah 10.
On Rosh Chodesh and the intermediate days of a festival,1i.e., those days between the first Yom Tov (two days in the diaspora) and last Yom Tov on Pesach and Sukkot. They are called Chol Hamo'ed, the "mundane" days of the festivals - i.e., those days which are simultaneously part of the festival, but also days on which most work is allowed. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 530-548 for the laws of Chol Hamo'ed.) one recites 19 blessings in the Evening Prayer, Morning Prayer, and Minchah Prayer as on other days.2One's prayers resemble those of an average weekday, and not those of a festival. However,... In the Avodah,3This is the first of the last three blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh, which expresses our desire for the return of the service (avodah) of the Temple. one adds:4a passage expressing the uniqueness of the day. "Our God and God of our fathers, let our remembrance rise and come,..."In5This is added in the Avodah blessing before the statement "And let our eyes see Your return to Zion in mercy. Blessed are You..."The source for this addition is Shabbat 24a which states that on Chol HaMo'ed and Rosh Chodesh we should ask God to remember us favorably and to bless us with mercy and lovingkindness on this special day of sanctity. Rashi (Shabbat 24a) explains that we should request mercy for Israel and Jerusalem in order to restore the daily sacrifices to the Temple.The laws pertaining to a person who omitted this addition in his prayers are mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachot 10-11.In the Musaf Prayer of the intermediate day of a festival, one recites the Musaf Prayer of the holiday itself. - I.e., the service is essentially the same with only minor changes in the text of the blessings. the Musaf Prayer of the intermediate day of a festival, one recites the Musaf Prayer of the holiday itself. On Rosh Chodesh,6in the Musaf prayers one recites seven blessings; the first three and last three,7blessings that are recited in every Amidah and one in the middle that refers to the special Rosh Chodesh sacrifice.8which included several burnt offerings and a special sin offering (Numbers 28:11-15). One concludes with: "... who sanctifies Israel and Roshei Chodashim.9See Berachot 49a."
On a Sabbath that occurs during the intermediate days of a festival, and Rosh Chodesh that falls on the Sabbath, in the Evening, Morning, and Minchah Prayers, one recites the seven blessings as on every Sabbath and adds: "Our God and God of our fathers, let our remembrance rise and come..." in the Avodah.1as is done in the weekly service.In the Musaf Prayer,2which is recited on Sabbath regardless one3recites seven blessings, the first and last three which are always recited and the middle blessing appropriate to the unique nature of the day. One... begins and concludes the intermediate blessing with a reference to the Sabbath, and mentions the sanctified nature of the day in the middle.4This halachah is based on a beraita quoted in Beitzah 17a and Eruvin 40b. However, the Rambam's interpretation of this passage differs from that of other commentaries.Both Rashi and Rabbenu Nissim interpret "concluding with Sabbath" to mean that the chatimah of the middle blessing should be "... who sanctifies the Sabbath," with no mention of Rosh Chodesh or the relevant festival. In contrast, the Rambam maintains that this refers to the text of the blessing itself and not the chatimah.[It is interesting to note that the position which states that in the chatimah of the blessing one need mention only Sabbath does have halachic importance. The Bi'ur Halachah, Orach Chayim 487, rules that a person who forgets to insert the end of the chatimah "...Israel and the appointed times" on the Sabbath of Chol HaMoed and only mentions the Sabbath fulfills his obligation בדיעבד - i.e., after the fact, the mention of Sabbath alone is enough. Rabbi Moshe Feinstein discusses this issue in the fourth volume of Orach Chayim in Iggerot Moshe, siman 21:3. He concludes [the blessing] on Rosh Chodesh with: "who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and Roshei Chodashim."5following the logic mentioned in halachah 5 that the sanctity of the Sabbath is mentioned first for it is not dependent on the Jews' consecration of the months. On the intermediate days of a festival, he concludes in the same fashion as on the holiday itself that occurs on Sabbath.6i.e., "...who sanctifies the Sabbath, Israel and the appointed times," as mentioned in Halachah 5.
On a holiday that occurs on the first day of the week,1i.e., it occurs immediately after the the Sabbath. at night,2The Jewish day starts after sunset. Thus, the prayer of the holiday will be recited Saturday night. Therefore,... one inserts into the fourth blessing3i.e., the middle blessing of the seven recited on a holiday. [the following]:4This extra Havdalah prayer is added between the first and second paragraphs of the middle blessing.And You have made known to us Your righteous statutes and have taught us to perform the decrees of Your will. And You have given us, God, our Lord, the sanctity of the Sabbath,5Berachot 33b. The Talmud discusses the exact placement of the Havdalah paragraph in the context of a three-sided disagreement on the issue in the Mishnah (Berachot 33a).There are slight differences between the text quoted by the Rambam and the text found in most contemporary siddurim. In his Order of Prayers for the entire year found at the conclusion of Sefer Ahavah, the Rambam also mentions a slightly different text. See also Hilchot Shabbat 29:28. the glory of the festival6this is manifested in the prohibition of "work" on a holiday, as on the Sabbath, and the obligation to eat our finest foods and dress in our best clothes. and the rejoicing of the pilgrim feast.7This refers to the special sacrifices brought on the holidays. You have distinguished between the sanctity of the Sabbath and that of the holiday, and You have sanctified the seventh day above the six workdays.8i.e., on a holiday one is allowed to do certain types of work which are forbidden on the Sabbath. These are called מלאכות אוכל נפש, those activities necessary for cooking and preparing food. (See Hilchot Shivitat Yom Tov 1:1.) The punishment for transgressing the Sabbath prohibitions is also more severe than that for transgressing the prohibitions of a holiday. And You have set apart and sanctified Your people Israel with Your holiness. You have given us, O God, our Lord, festivals for joy, holidays and appointed times for gladness...9Joy and gladness are especially relevant to the holidays, as it is written: "And you shall rejoice in your holidays...and you shall be only joyous" (Deuteronomy 16:14-15). The Rambam discusses the halachot based on these verses in Hilchot Shivitat Yom Tom 6:17-18.On the night after the Sabbath and after a holiday all year long, one recites the Havdalah prayer10This is the addition to the Evening Prayer that mentions the distinction between the Sabbath and the rest of the week. (See also the commentary on Halachah 4.) in "You bestow knowledge..."11i.e., the first of the intermediate blessings in the weekday Shemoneh Esreh.14Berachot 33a states that without knowledge and understanding a person cannot comprehend these distinctions in time. Accordingly, the Havdalah prayer is recited in the blessing recognizing God as the source of our gift of thought. even though he [also] recites the Havdalah prayer over a cup.12I.e., he is obligated to recite Havdalah in the fourth blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh even though he must also recite the full Havdalah service over a cup of wine afterwards.Berachot 33a,b explains that originally Havdalah was established to be recited in the Shemoneh Esreh. When the Jewish people began to prosper, the Sages then required that it be said over a cup of wine. (Rashi explains that the original decree that it be mentioned in prayer was forgotten.) Then the fortunes of the Jewish people declined again, and the Sages reinstituted the obligation to recite Havdalah in prayer. They also ruled that after Havdalah in the Shemoneh Esreh, one must also recite the Havdalah service over a cup of wine. A parallel is drawn to Friday night when we mention Kiddush in prayer and then make Kiddush over a cup of wine afterwards.The Rambam begins his discussion of Havdalah within the context of the halachot of the specific prayers recited on various holidays. Therefore, he first mentions the halachot of Havdalah recited on a holiday and only, afterwards, mentions the halachot of Havdalah recited in the Shemoneh Esreh every Saturday night though seemingly, the latter would be given priority.
On Chanukah and Purim, one adds "For the miracles,..."1Both Chanukah and Purim are commemorated with the same basic prayer, על הניסים. This prayer begins with a statement of thanks for the miracles and redemption relevant to these days, and then a paragraph describing the events of the holiday is recited.Shabbat 24a, which discusses the laws of Chanukah, is the source for this prayer. However, this Talmudic passage mentions only Chanukah, and not Purim. However, Rav Yitzchak Alfasi quotes a Tosefta from Berachot which equates Chanukah and Purim.Hagahot Maimoniot quotes Rav Amram Gaon that על הניסים is not recited at night on Purim because we have not yet read Megillat Esther. This position is not accepted. It is, however, interesting that a difference was made, according to Rav Amram, between the על הנסים of Chanukah and that of Purim. in the blessing of thanks.2I.e., in the blessing which begins: "we acknowledge with thanks that You are God, our Lord...," the second of the last three blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh. Tosafot (Shabbat 24a) explains that since על הנסים is a prayer of thanks and not supplication, it is included in the blessing of thanks in the Shemoneh Esreh.On the Sabbath that occurs during Chanukah, one mentions "For the miracles,..." in the Musaf Prayer, just as he does in all the other prayers.3Shabbat 24a asks whether v’al hanisim is mentioned in the Musaf Prayer or not. Rav Huna and Rav Yehudah are of the opinion that it should not be mentioned, since Musaf is not usually recited on Chanukah, and, therefore, there is no need to refer to Chanukah during the Musaf prayer of the Sabbath. Rav Nachman and Rabbi Yochanan hold that since Musaf is simply one of the prayers of the day, and על הנסים is recited on this day, its inclusion in Musaf is in place.The Talmud ultimately decides in favor of the position of Rav Nachman and Rabbi Yochanan. This is supported by the fact that on Yom Kippur which falls on the Sabbath, reference is made to the Sabbath in the Ne'ilah prayer, even though Ne'ilah is not normally recited on the Sabbath.The Rambam does not mention this halachah with regard to Purim, since it is only in rare cases that Purim occurs on the Sabbath. Purim is generally celebrated on the fourteenth of Adar, which never occurs on the Sabbath according to our fixed calendar. However, cities which were walled at the time of Joshua's conquest of Israel celebrate Purim on the fifteenth of Adar (Shushan Purim). Nevertheless, there are very few such cities.Jerusalem is, however, one of them, and there, Purim can fall on the Sabbath. In such a case, על הנסים is said on the Sabbath, even though most of the other commandments of Purim are fulfilled either on the Friday before or the Sunday afterwards. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 688:6 and the Mishnah Berurah there.)
On Fast Days,1This includes the communal fast days (the third of Tishre, the tenth of Tevet, the thirteenth of Adar, the seventeenth of Tammuz, and the ninth of Av) and those fast days proclaimed in response to a specific time of trouble, such as a lack of rain. (See Chapter 1 of Ta'anit.) even an individual who fasts [by his own volition]2i.e., even one who accepts upon himself a fast in response to a bad dream or for purposes of spiritual growth, although it is not a public fast day. adds "Answer us..."3Ta'anit 13b refers to the prayer of fast days. Rashi explains that this is aneinu (Answer us...), a prayer of supplication asking God to look down upon us with favor and not hide His countenance from us because of our wrongdoing. in "the One who hears prayer."The4I.e., the last of the intermediate blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh. Ta'anit 13b states:Rav Yehudah taught his son Rav Yitzchak, who said: "An individual who accepts a fast upon himself recites the prayer of fast days. And where does he say it? Between גואל לרופא - i.e., the blessing of redemption and that of healing!"Rav Yitzchak asked upon this position: "Can an individual establish an extra blessing for himself?" Rather, Rav Yitzchak is of the opinion that it should be inserted into the blessing of "the One who hears prayer." Rav Sheshet is also of this opinion.Although the Talmud refers specifically to one who accepted a fast upon himself, it is clear from the continuation of the discussion there that the same halachah applies to the silent Shemoneh Esreh recited by everyone on a public fast day also.It is interesting to note that the Rambam obligates one to add עננו in all the prayers recited on a Fast Day. This is in line with Shabbat 24a which states: "On fast days...in the Evening, Morning, and Minchah Prayers, one adds a mention of the particular day in 'the One who hears prayer.' However, the Tur quotes the Geonim that one should recite עננו only in the Minchah Prayer. Since one could be overcome by terrible hunger and break the fast, if one recited עננו earlier he would have spoken falsely when he mentioned the fast day. Therefore, according to this position, this prayer should be mentioned only in the Minchah service at the end of the fast days.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 565:3) quotes the Tur's position, but distinguishes between the four public fast days that occur every year (i.e., those mentioned above in our commentary) and other public fast days. On the four main public fasts, he obligates the individual to mention עננו in all his prayers. Since the Sages declared it a public fast, even were he to eat later on, he would not have spoken falsely in his prayer.The Ramah (ibid.), however, mentions that it is customary to recite עננו in Minchah only. The Magen Avraham explains that even one reciting Minchah in the early afternoon should add עננו, because even if he eats later on, at least he fasted until midday. (See Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 562:1.) Sephardim follow the custom of the Shulchan Aruch, and Ashkenazim follow the ruling of the Ramah and therefore recite עננו only in Minchah. leader of the congregation recites it as an independent blessing between "the One who redeems Israel" and "the One who heals...," and concludes with "the One who answers in times of trouble." Thus, he recites 20 blessings.5This is based on the passage from Ta'anit 13b quoted above. A clear distinction is made between the silent Shemoneh Esreh uttered by all the congregants and the repetition recited aloud by the שליח ציבור (leader of the congregation). The שליח ציבור does establish for himself, as representative of the community as a whole, an independent blessing relevant to the fast day. Therefore, he recites 20 blessings, as explained by the Rambam: 19 blessings as on any day, and one extra that is particular to the fast day.There is no disagreement regarding the obligation of the שליח ציבור to recite עננו in the Morning Prayer. He is praying on behalf of the entire community. Therefore, we need not worry about the possibility of the fast being broken, since it is not possible that a number from among the congregants will not fast the whole day (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 565:3). (See the Bi'ur Halacha who holds that at least ten people must intend to fast in order for the שליח ציבור to recite עננו.)On the ninth of Av,6The fast day commemorating the destruction of the First and Second Temple, both destroyed on this date, approximately 500 years apart. This fast is different from the other public fasts mentioned above in that it starts at sundown and lasts until sundown, a full day later. one adds [the following] to the blessing of "the One who rebuilds Jerusalem":7i.e., the eleventh intermediate blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh. It is appropriate that the addition regarding the ninth of Av be placed in this blessing, which speaks of rebuilding Jerusalem.Despite this logic, there is some question regarding the inclusion of this prayer in this blessing. The source for this addition is the Jerusalem Talmud (Ta'anit 2:2). That passage questions whether the addition should be made in the עבודה (the first of the last three blessings in the Shemoneh Esreh) or the הודאה (the second of the last three blessings). It explains that as a general rule commemorative prayers are mentioned in הודאה, while prayers regarding the future are placed in עבודה.Rabbenu Yitzchak Alfasi quotes this passage, but adds that the custom is to recite the addition in בונה ירושלים (the blessing of Jerusalem). He explains that this decision is based on Avodah Zarah 8a which states that even though normally, we add special requests in the blessing of שומע תפילה (the One who hears prayer), one is able to make a request relevant to one of the blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh, in that blessing itself. Therefore, our prayers and supplications regarding the rebuilding of Jerusalem may rightfully be placed in the blessing of בונה ירושלים. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 557:1.) "Have mercy on us, God, our Lord, and on Your people, Israel, and Jerusalem, Your city, the mourning city,..."8The Hebrew term is רחם עלינו. This version appears in the Jerusalem Talmud. However, in both Rabbenu Asher's and Rabbenu Yitzhak Alfasi's quotes of that passage, the terms used is נחם (Console us...). This version is found in most siddurim, although the version of Yemenite Jewry is רחם, as in the Rambam.There is also a question regarding when this prayer is recited. The Rambam seems to indicate that רחם (or נחם) is to be recited in every prayer on the ninth of Av. However, the Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 557:1) states that it should only be recited in Minchah, just like עננו on fast days.The Tur (Orach Chayim 557) quotes the custom of saying רחם in the Evening and Morning Prayers, and נחם during Minchah. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 557:1) rules that נחם should be recited in all three prayers of the day. This is the custom of Sephardim, though Ashkenazim follow the ruling of the Ramah mentioned above. (See the Mishnah Berurah 557:1.)The Ramah explains that the rationale behind his decision is that the fire which destroyed the Temple broke out on the afternoon of the ninth of Av. Hence, we ask for comfort at that time specifically. Alternatively, the Ritba explains that only in the afternoon are we able to be comforted. Until then the pain of our loss is too real.
During the rainy season, [the phrase] "the One who causes the rain to fall"1This is not the full text of the addition. We praise G‑d as "the One who causes the wind to blow and the rain to fall" (משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 114:1). is recited in the second blessing.2Berachot 33a states: "One mentions the strength of the rains in (the blessing of) the resurrection of the dead." The second blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh mentions the resurrection of the dead five times and is therefore often referred to as the blessing of 18 תחיית המתים (resurrection of the dead). The Talmud continues to explain a parallel between the resurrection of the dead and the winter rains which renew life in the dry ground. In the summer, [one adds] "the One who causes the dew to descend."When3This represents one of the differences between Sephardic and Ashkenazic practice. Sephardic tradition, following the Rambam and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 114), obligates the utterance of מוריד הטל in the summer. In contrast, the Ramah, (ibid., 114:3) explains that the custom of the Ashkenazim is not to utter 18לטהáדירומ.The 14Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 114:3) explains the latter position based on Ta'anit 3a, which states that the Sages did not obligate one to mention the winds or dew for they are never lacking. Nevertheless, if one desires to mention them, he may. Ashkenazim do include משיב הרוח in the winter, because of the mention of the rains which are necessary. Sephardim and the Nusach Sephard recited by Chassidim do mention טל in the summertime. does one recite "the One who causes the rain to fall"? From the Musaf Prayer on the last holiday of Sukkot4The Mishnah (Ta'anit 2a) states:From when does one mention the strength of the rains? Rabbi Eliezer says: "From the first holiday of Sukkot (i.e., the first Yom Tov, the fifteenth of Tishre). Rabbi Yehoshua says: "From the last holiday of Sukkot (i.e., Shemini Atzeret)."Rabbi Yehudah says: "[When] one leads the congregation on the last holiday of Sukkot: the last one (i.e., the one who leads the congregation in Musaf) mentions it; the first one (the one who leads the Morning Prayer) does not mention it. On the first holiday of Pesach (the fifteenth of Nisan), the first one mentions it, the last one does not mention it."The halachah follows Rabbi Yehudah's position. Even though the beginning of Sukkot is also the beginning of the rainy season, we do not mention rain until the end of Sukkot, since rain on Sukkot is a bad omen. Sukkah 28b-29a draws a comparison to a servant who brings his master wine only to have the wine spilled in his face - i.e., we build our sukkot in order to serve our Master, but He causes the rain to fall, as if to say that He does not desire our service and requests that we leave His presence. until the Morning Prayer of the first holiday5i.e., the first day, in contrast to the seventh day, which is also a holiday. of Pesach.6The Mishnah (Ta'anit 12b) explains that rain after this time is also an unfavorable omen.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 114:2) adds that one may not begin to mention the rain until the שליח ציבור has mentioned it. Therefore, before Musaf on Shemini Atzeret, there is a custom to remind the congregation to mention the rains in order to allow everyone to say משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם in their silent prayer.The Ra'avad, quoted in Tur, Orach Chayim 114, explains that the שליח ציבור must announce משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם (or מוריד הטל in the summertime), and then the congregation may utter it in their silent prayer. The Beit Yosef points out, however, that a simple reminder is enough, so that everyone will remember and recite the same words. Therefore, one may recite 18בישמ חורה in his silent prayer even though the שליח ציבור does not make the "official" announcement until his repetition of Musaf.The laws regarding the omission of משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם or the mention of מוריד הטל in its place are mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachah 8. [Conversely,] from the Musaf Prayer of the first holiday of Pesach, one utters "the One who causes the dew to descend."7This is based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ta'anit 1:2) which states that one should mention the dew during all three festivals. We of course stop mentioning the dew when we begin to mention the rain on Shemini Atzeret, the last of the holidays.The laws regarding the omission of מוריד הטל or the mention of משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם in its place are also mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachah 8.
[Beginning] from the seventh of Marcheshvan,1The Mishnah (Ta'anit 10a) states:On the third of Marcheshvan, one petitions for rain. Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel says: "On its seventh day, 15 days after the festival, in order that the last one in Israel can reach the Euphrates River." one petitions for rain2Even though we mention the rains in the second blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh from the end of Sukkot (see the previous halachah), we do not actually beseech God to cause the rain to fall until later. The formula used to petition for rain is ותן טל ומטר ("And give dew and rain"). in the blessing of prosperity,3i.e., the sixth of the intermediate blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh, which is the petition for material prosperity. This decision is based on the Mishnah (Berachot 33a), which is also our source for the rules regarding משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם in the previous halachah. [and continues to do so] as long as one mentions the rain.4i.e., as long as one utters משיב הרוח ומוריד הגשם, which is until the first day of Pesach, as mentioned above. The Mishnah (Ta'anit 5a) states:Until when does one request rain? Rabbi Yehudah says: "Until Pesach has passed." Rabbi Meir says: "Until Nisan has passed..."Ta'anit 4b interprets Rabbi Yehudah's statements to mean that one requests rain until the conclusion of Musaf on the first day of Pesach (i.e., the fifteenth of Nisan).Where does the above apply? To Eretz Yisrael.5In his commentary on the above Mishnah, the Rambam explains that all the laws in Ta'anit regarding the proper time for rain and the fasts resulting from a lack thereof are relevant to Eretz Yisrael and areas with a similar climate. However, in Shin'ar,6Babylonia. See Targum Onkelos, Genesis 11:2. Syria, Egypt and areas adjacent to or similar to these, one petitions for rain 60 days after the autumnal equinox.7This is based on Ta'anit 10a, which states that in the Diaspora the petition for rain should be made 60 days after the equinox because the rains would not begin to fall until then.As the diaspora of the Jewish people spread beyond the Mediterranean region, questions regarding this law were raised. Rabbenu Asher (See Tur and Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 117) raised the question of praying for rain in the summer in Spain or Germany when the climate of the land requires it. Similarly, since the crops in his area would be seriously damaged if rains were not to fall until late November, he lauds the practise (followed in Provence) which begins petitioning for rain in Marcheshvan. At present, the question has become more sensitive when many Jews live in the Southern hemisphere whose rainy season coincides with our summer.Nevertheless, Rav Yosef Karo rules that all places outside of Eretz Yisrael should follow the practice observed in Babylonia. This position is accepted halachically. (See Shulchan Aruch Orach Chayim 117:1 and Shulchan Aruch HaRav which discusses this issue at length.)One begins the petition for rain in the Evening Prayer of the sixtieth day (Shulchan Aruch, ibid.). Both the day of the Equinox and the sixtieth day are included in the counting of sixty days. Thus, one actually starts to petition in the first week of December (Beit Yosef ibid.).The laws regarding the omission of ותן טל ומטר are mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachah 9.
In places1that are too small to be considered as "lands" and thus, should be considered as individuals (Rabbenu Asher).Alternatively, lands whose climate is diametrically opposed to that of Eretz Yisrael such as the countries of the Southern hemisphere (Kessef Mishneh). that require rain in the summer months, such as the distant islands,2or any other place whose climate is such that rain is required in the summer months (Rambam, Commentary to the Mishnah, Ta'anit 1:3). they petition for rains when they need them,3regardless of what time of year that may be. in [the blessing of] "the One who hears prayer.4Ta'anit 14b relates that the residents of Nineveh asked Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi: "We require rain even in Tammuz [August], how are we to act? Are we considered as individuals and [add our petitions] in 'the One who hears prayer' or as a community and [add our petitions] in the blessing for prosperity?"He (Rabbi Yehudah Hanasi) sent to them: "As individuals and in `the One who hears prayer.'Rabbenu Nissim states that even though we learn in Avodah Zarah 8a that a special request for success should be added in the blessing for material prosperity (18םינשהáתכרב), a petition for rain is different, since rain in Tammuz is destructive to most of the world. Therefore, a community who needs rain at this times is considered as an individual who requests a personal boon. Accordingly, their petition for rain is mentioned in the blessing of 18עמוש הליפת (the One who hears prayer)."[Even]5i.e., surely this is the case in Eretz Yisrael. However, even... where the holidays are observed for two days,6i.e., in most places in the diaspora and in certain places in Eretz Yisrael (See Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh, Chapter 9), where originally, there was a doubt whether this was, in fact, the eighth day of the holiday or not, nevertheless, the prayer... "the One who causes the rain to fall" is recited in the Musaf Prayer of the first day of Shemini Atzeret. Its recitation is continued7Ta'anit 4b entertains the possibility of mentioning 18םשגהáדירומ in Musaf on the first day and then refraining from its mention until Musaf on the second day. However, it concludes that after it is mentioned once its recitation should be continued without interruption. throughout the rainy season.8The placement of this halachah seems questionable. Why didn't the Rambam discuss this law in Halachah 15 where the rest of the laws of מוריד הגשם appear?The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam desired to discuss all the laws of rain, both מוריד הגשם and the petition for rain in ברכת השנים with reference to Eretz Yisrael. Within the context of that subject, he mentioned the differences that apply in the diaspora. Afterwards, he continued to mentioned the laws of מוריד הגשם as they apply to outside the Holy Land.
Throughout the entire year, one concludes the third blessing with "the Holy God" and the eleventh blessing with "the King who loves righteousness and justice."1In his responsum (97), the Rambam teaches that one need mention "the King" only during the Ten Days of Repentance, but that during the rest of the year, "the One who loves righteousness and justice" is sufficient. [However,] on the ten days from Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur, one concludes the third one with "the Holy King"2Rashi (Berachot 12b) mentions that God's sovereignty is more evident during these ten days when He judges the world. Therefore, we emphasize this concept in our prayers. and the eleventh one with "the King of Justice."3Our translation follows the interpretation of Rashi (ibid.). Literally, the Hebrew המלך המשפט means: "the just King."Rabbenu Manoach points out the difference between the regular chatimah - מלך אוהב צדקה ומשפט - and that recited during the 10 Days of Repentance - המלך המשפט. The regular chatimah indicates God's desire that his creations act in a just and righteous manner. The special one, however, relates to God's judgement of the world.The laws regarding a person who forgets these changes while praying are mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachah 13.
There are places that are accustomed during these ten days to add in the first blessing:1i.e., the ten days from Rosh Hashanah to Yom Kippur, inclusive. The source for this halachah is Soferim 19:8. There it states the following:Just as the chatimot [of the blessings] of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur are different from those of other holidays, so too, the prayers [of these days] themselves differ.One does not make any special mention of remembrances in the first three or last three [blessings], except on the holidays of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur themselves alone. And even on these days, they allowed it only with difficulty.The ""remembrances" referred to in the Mishnah are the very additions mentioned by the Rambam in this halachah. It is clear from the Mishnah that they are to be mentioned only on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, and not on any of the intermediate days. However, the general practice is to add these special prayers on all ten days. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 602.)The difficulty regarding these additions stems from Berachot 34a which states that one may not add any special requests in the first three or last three blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh. (See Chapter 6, Halachah 3.) However, Rabbi Yitzchak ibn Gayut explains that since these remembrances are relevant to the needs of the entire community, they may be recited in the first three and last three blessings. Berachot (ibid.) prohibits only requests made by an individual for his personal needs. "Remember us for life,..."2"Remember us for life, O King, who desires life, and inscribe us in the Book of Life for our sake, O living God." This is placed near the end of the first blessing, between למען שמו באהבה and מלך עוזר ומושיע ומגן. and in the second one: "Who is like You, Merciful Father,..."3Who is like You, Merciful Father, who remembers His creations for life with mercy." This is placed before the end of this blessing ונאמן אתה להחיות מתים. In the blessing of thanksgiving, [they add]: "Remember Your mercy,..."4This particular version can be found in Otzar HaGeonim on Rosh Hashanah. However, the version found in Ashkenazi, Sephardi and Nusach Sephard siddurim is: "And inscribe for good life, all the children of Your Covenant." In the last blessing, they add: "In the Book of5"In the book of life, blessing and peace, and good provision, may we be remembered and inscribed before You, we and Your people of the House of Israel, for life and peace." This is placed immediately before the chatimah of the last blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh. life,..."During these ten days, there are also those accustomed to add [the following prayers] in the third blessing: "And so put Your fear... And so..." On Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, it is the commonly accepted practice to add [these prayers] in the third blessing.6These are the additional paragraphs of supplication inserted in the third blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh. The first one starts with "And so put Your fear, O God, our Lord, on all Your nations,..." The second paragraph begins with "And so give honor, O God, to Your people,...;" the third with "And so may the righteous see and be joyous,..." It is our custom to add these special prayers on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur only, and not during the intermediate days.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
The mitzvah of reciting the Morning Prayer entails that one begin praying at sunrise. The time [for prayer, however,] extends until the fourth hour, i.e., a third of the day.If one transgresses or errs and prays after the fourth hour, he has fulfilled the obligation of prayer, but not the obligation of prayer in its time. Just as prayer is a positive Scriptural commandment, so too, its recitation at the proper time is a Rabbinic commandment, as established for us by Sages and Prophets.
We have already stated that the time of the Minchah Prayer was established in correspondence to the daily afternoon sacrifice. Since the daily [afternoon] sacrifice was offered every day at nine and a half hours, [the Sages] established its time as nine and a half hours. This is referred to as "the lesser Minchah."When the eve of Pesach fell on Friday, they would slaughter the daily [afternoon] sacrifice at six and a half hours. Accordingly, [the Sages] ordained that one who prays [Minchah] after six and a half hours has fulfilled his obligation. When this time arrives, the time of its obligation begins. This is referred to as "the greater Minchah."
Many people are accustomed to recite [the afternoon service at both Minchah] Gedolah and K'tanah, and [to consider] one of them as an optional prayer.Some of the Geonim taught that it is proper to recite the optional prayer only [at the time of Minchah] Gedolah. This is reasonable, since it corresponds to [the offering of a sacrifice] which was not frequent every day.If one recites [the service] as an obligatory prayer [at the time of Minchah] Gedolah, he should recite it only as an optional prayer [at the time of Minchah] K'tanah.
Behold, you have learned that the time of Minchah Gedolah is from six and a half hours until nine and a half hours, and the time of Minchah K'tanah is from nine and a half hours until there are one and a quarter hours left in the day. One may [however,] recite [the afternoon service] until sunset.
The proper time of the Musaf Prayer is after the Morning Prayer, until seven hours of the day. One who recites it after seven hours, even though he has acted negligently, fulfills his obligation, since its time is the entire day.
Regarding the Evening Prayer - even though it is not obligatory - a person who does recite it [must know that] its proper time is from the beginning of the night until dawn.The proper time of the Ne'ilah prayer is such that one completes it close to sunset.
One who recites a prayer before its proper time does not fulfill his obligation and must recite it again at its time. If, due to extenuating circumstances, one recites the Morning Prayer after dawn, [but before the proper time], he does fulfill his obligation.One may recite the Evening Prayer of the Sabbath night on the eve of the Sabbath before sunset. Similarly, he may recite the Evening Prayer of Saturday night on the Sabbath. Since the Evening Prayer is not obligatory, we are not especially careful about its time. Nevertheless, one must recite the Shema at its proper time after the appearance of the stars.
Anyone who intentionally allowed the proper time for prayer to pass without praying, cannot rectify the situation and cannot compensate [for his failure to pray].[If he unintentionally failed to pray or was unavoidably detained or distracted, he can compensate for the [missed] prayer during the time of the prayer closest to it. He should first recite the prayer of this time, and afterwards, the [prayer of] compensation.
How is this [exemplified]?One who errs and does not recite the Morning Prayer before half the day passes should recite the Minchah Prayer twice, the first as Minchah [itself] and the second as compensation for the Morning Prayer.One who errs and does not recite the Minchah Prayer before sunset should recite the Evening Prayer twice, the first as the Evening Prayer [itself] and the second as compensation for the Minchah Prayer.[Similarly,] one who errs and does not recite the Evening Prayer before dawn should recite the Morning Prayer twice, the first as the Morning Prayer [itself] and the second as compensation for the Evening Prayer.
One who errs and does not recite two consecutive prayers can only compensate for the last of them. How is this [exemplified]?One who errs and recites neither the Morning Prayer nor the Minchah Prayer should recite the Evening Prayer twice, the first as the Evening Prayer [itself] and the last as compensation for Minchah. The Morning Prayer, however, has no compensation, since its time has already passed. This is also the case for other prayers.
If two prayers are before him, Minchah and Musaf, he should first recite Minchah and afterwards Musaf. There are those who teach that one should not do this in a congregation, in order that people not err.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
Five things prevent one from praying, even though the time [for prayer] has arrived:1) the purification of one's hands;2) the covering of nakedness;3) the purity of the place of prayer;4) things that might bother and distract one; and5) the proper intention of one's heart.
The purification of one's hands - What does this imply? One must wash his hands in water until the joint. [Only] afterwards may he pray.[The following rules apply when] a person is travelling on the road when the time for prayer arrives: If he has no water, but is within four millin - i.e., 8000 cubits - of a source of water, he should proceed to it, wash his hands, and then pray. If the distance to the water is greater than this, he should clean his hands with pebbles, earth, or a beam, and pray.
When does this apply? [When the water is] ahead of him. However, if the place with water is behind him, we do not obligate him to retrace his steps more than one mil. However, if he has passed further beyond the water, he is not obligated to return. Rather, he should clean his hands and pray.When do the above statements requiring one to purify merely his hands alone for prayer apply? To the other services, but not for the Morning Prayer. For the Morning Prayer, one should wash his face, hands, and feet, and only afterwards, may he pray. If he is far from water, he may clean his hands only and then pray.
All the ritually impure need only wash their hands in order to pray, just like those not in such a state. Even if they are able to immerse themselves [in a mikveh] and ascend from their impure state, this immersion is not required [for prayer].We have already explained that Ezra decreed that only one who has had a seminal emission is prohibited from Torah study until he has immersed himself. The Rabbinical Court [that existed afterwards] decreed that [this applies] even to prayer, i.e., such a person alone should not pray until he immerses himself.These decrees were not put into effect because of questions of ritual purity and impurity, but rather to ensure that the Torah scholars would not overindulge in marital intimacy with their wives. Therefore, they instituted ritual immersion only for one who has a seminal emission, thereby excepting him from the other ritually impure.
Therefore, at the time of this decree, it was said that even a זב who had a seminal emission, a menstruating woman who emitted semen, and a woman who saw traces of menstrual blood after relations, required immersion to recite the Shema and to pray because of the seminal emission, despite [the fact that they remained] ritually impure.This is reasonable, since this immersion was not a matter of purity, but a result of the decree so that they would not constantly be with their wives.This decree regarding prayer was also abolished, since it was not universally accepted by the Jewish people, and the community at large was unable to observe it.
It is widespread custom in Shin'ar and Spain that one who has had a seminal emission does not pray until he has washed his whole body in water, [based on the command]: "Prepare to meet your God, Israel" (Amos 4:12 .To whom does this refer? To a healthy person or to a sick person who engaged in intimacy, but a sick person who has had an accidental emission is exempt from bathing and there is no such custom regarding this matter. Similarly, there is no such custom regarding a זב who has a seminal emission and a menstruating woman who emits semen. Rather, they should clean themselves, wash their hands, and pray.
The proper covering of one's nakedness: What is implied?Even if one covers his genitalia in the fashion necessary for the recital of the Shema, he may not pray until he covers his heart. If one did not - or was unable to - cover his heart, as long as he covered his nakedness when he prayed, he has fulfilled his obligation. However, a priori, he should not do so.
The purity of the place of prayer: What is implied?One should not pray in a place of filth, a bathhouse, a latrine or garbage heap. [Similarly, one should not pray] in a place that is not presumed to be clean until he checks it.The general rule is that one should not pray in any place in which one would not recite the Shema. [Thus,] just as one separates oneself from excreta, urine, a foul odor, a corpse and the sight of nakedness for Kri'at Shema, so too, he should separate himself for Shemoneh Esreh.
[The following rules apply] when one finds excreta in his place [of prayer.] Since he transgressed by not checking the place before he began to pray, he must pray again in a clean place.[The following rules apply] when one finds excreta while he is in the midst of prayer: If he can walk forwards such that [the feces] will be left four cubits behind him, he should do so. If not, he should move to the side. If he is unable [to do the latter], he should stop praying.The great Sages would refrain from praying in a house in which there was beer or brine at the time of its foaming because of the foul odor, even though it was a clean place.
Things that might bother and distract him: What is implied?One who must relieve himself should not pray. Whenever anyone who must relieve himself prays, his prayer is an abomination and he must pray again after he relieves himself.If a person can restrain himself for the length of time that it takes to walk a parsah, his prayer is considered prayer.Nevertheless, a priori, one should not pray until he has checked himself very well, checked his intestines, rid himself of phlegm and mucus and any [other] bothersome thing. [Only] afterwards should he pray.
[The following rules apply to] one who burps, yawns, or sneezes during prayer: Should a person do so voluntarily, it is deprecating. [However,] if the person checked himself before he prayed and did so against his will, it is of no consequence.If saliva comes up during prayer, one should cause it to be absorbed into his tallit or clothes. If he is bothered by this, he may throw it behind him with his hand in order that he not be bothered during his prayer and be distracted.If one passes gas unwittingly during prayer, he should wait until the gas subsides and return to his prayer.
One who desires to pass gas from below and is bothered exceedingly, to the extent that he cannot restrain himself, should walk back four cubits, [expel the gas], and then wait until the gas subsides. He should say:Master of all the world, You created us with many orifices and ducts. Our shame and disgrace is apparent and known before You. Shame and disgrace during our life, worm-eaten and decaying in our death.He then returns to his place and prays.
When urine flows on a person's legs during Shemoneh Esreh, he should wait until the flow ceases, and return to the place at which he stopped. If he waited the time necessary to complete his Shemoneh Esreh, he should return to the beginning.
Similarly, one who urinates should wait the length of time it takes to walk four cubits, and then pray. After one has prayed, he should wait this length of time before urinating, in order to make a distinction following the words of prayer.
Proper intention: What is implied?Any prayer that is not [recited] with proper intention is not prayer. If one prays without proper intention, he must repeat his prayers with proper intention.One who is in a confused or troubled state may not pray until he composes himself. Therefore, one who comes in from a journey and is tired or irritated is forbidden to pray until he composes himself. Our Sages taught that one should wait three days until he is rested and his mind is settled, and then he may pray.
What is meant by [proper] intention?One should clear his mind from all thoughts and envision himself as standing before the Divine Presence. Therefore, one must sit a short while before praying in order to focus his attention and then pray in a pleasant and supplicatory fashion.One should not pray as one carrying a burden who throws it off and walks away. Therefore, one must sit a short while after praying, and then withdraw.The pious ones of the previous generations would wait an hour before praying and an hour after praying. They would [also] extend their prayers for an hour.
A person who is drunk should not pray, because he cannot have proper intention. If he does pray, his prayer is an abomination. Therefore, he must pray again when he is clear of his drunkenness. One who is slightly inebriated should not pray, [but] if he prays, his prayer is prayer.When is a person considered as drunk? When he is unable to speak before a king. [In contrast,] a person who is slightly inebriated is able to speak before a king without becoming confused. Nevertheless, since he drank a revi'it of wine, he should not pray until his wine has passed from him.
Similarly, one should not stand to pray in the midst of laughter or irreverent behavior, nor in the midst of a conversation, argument or anger, but rather in the midst of words of Torah.[However, one should not stand to pray] in the midst of a judgment or a [difficult] halachic issue, even though these are words of Torah, lest one's mind be distracted by the halachah in question. Rather, [one should pray] in the midst of words of Torah that do not require deep concentration, e.g., laws that have already been accepted.
Before reciting occasional prayers, e.g., the Musaf Prayer of Rosh Chodesh or the prayers of the festivals, one must review his prayers lest he make mistakes in them.A person walking in a dangerous place, e.g., a place frequented by wild animals or bandits, when the time of the Amidah arrives, should recite [only] a single blessing:The needs of Your people, Israel, are great and their knowledge is limited. May it be Your will, O God, our Lord, that You will provide each and every one with a sufficient livelihood, and give to each individual all that he lacks. And that which is good in Your eyes, You should do. Blessed are You, God, the One who hears prayer.He may recite it as he walks on the road. [However,] if he is able to stop [to recite it], he should. When he arrives at a settlement and his mind is composed, he should recite a proper Amidah of 19 blessings.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
A person who prays must be careful to tend to [the following] eight matters.1The specific laws regarding these eight categories are discussed by the Rambam in the ensuing halachot of this chapter. [However,] if he is pressured,2and unable to carry out any or all of these prerequisites. confronted by circumstances beyond his control,3e.g., ill, as explained by the Rambam in Halachah 2. or transgresses4i.e., even if one transgresses intentionally. and does not attend to one them, they are not6See Halachah 2. of absolute necessity.5i.e., one is not required to repeat the prayer or compensate for its recitation.In the previous chapter, the Rambam listed five categories which are of absolute necessity for prayer. A person who fails to fulfill any of those requirements must repeat his prayers. These eight categories are לכתחילה (at the outset) necessary for the Amidah, but, do not disqualify the prayer if they were not tended to.The Lechem Mishneh points out that even Chapter 4 refers to certain actions which were only problematic לכתחילה, such as burping and sneezing. Nevertheless, they are included in that chapter because, from a topical perspective, it is more appropriate to discuss them within the context of the general categories mentioned there. They are: 1) standing;2) facing the Temple;3)7See Halachah 3. preparation of his body;4)8See Halachah 4. proper clothing;5)9See Halachah 5. proper place;6)10See Halachah 6-8. control of his voice;7)11See Halachah 9. bowing;12See Halachot 10-12. and8) prostration.13See Halachah 13-15.
Standing: What is implied?[Generally,] one should pray only while standing.1As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 1, prayer is called עבודה - service. Thus, it can be compared to the sacrifices in the Temple which are also referred to by that term. In regard to both these services, Deuteronomy 10:8 states: "...To stand before God and serve Him" (Berachot 30a, Tur, Orach Chayim 98).Indeed, the term Amidah - (lit. "standing") is used to refer to the Shemoneh Esreh because of this requirement. (See Soferim 16:12.) [Thus,] a person sitting in a boat or in a carriage, if able to stand, should do so;2However, unlike one riding an animal, he is not obligated to sit if he is able to stand (Lechem Mishneh). if not, he may sit in his place and pray.3Berachot 30a relates a difference of opinion among the Sages whether it is preferable to recite one's prayers early, before the desired time so that one can stand during Shemoneh Esreh or whether one should set out on a journey in a boat or carriage and pray at the appropriate time even though one will not be able to stand.From this discussion, we may conclude that, under these circumstances, it is acceptable for one to remain seated during the Shemoneh Esreh if doing so will contribute to one's ability to concentrate.A person who is ill4and would have to strain to stand may pray even while lying on his side,5Note Hilchot Kri'at Shema 2:2 which relates that one may recite the Shema lying on one's side, but not lying on one's back. provided he is able to have the proper intention.6i.e., One who is ill should pray only when he is able to concentrate. However, if he is unable to concentrate, it is better that he should not pray (Rabbenu Manoach).Hagahot Maimoniot relates that Rashi was accustomed not to pray when he was ill. Similarly, one who is thirsty or hungry7to the extent that he cannot concentrate is considered as one who is ill.8and is not required to pray. The commentaries point to the statement of the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 5:1) that one in discomfort should not pray as the source for this halachah. [Therefore,] if he is able to concentrate properly he should pray. If not, he should not pray until he has eaten or drunk.9It is questionable whether this halachah is accepted at present, when, after the fact, prayer with a lesser level of concentration is accepted (Ramah, Orach Chayim 101) and siddurim are commonly available (See ibid. 9:3).One riding an animal should not descend [from the animal]10even if he has someone to hold his animal, - Berachot 30a mentions opinions which require one to descend in this instance, however, the accepted view is... - even if he has someone to hold his animal. Rather, he should sit in his place and pray so his mind will be settled.11Even if someone were holding his animal, the person would be preoccupied with worries about his animal and, therefore, would be unable to concentrate on his Amidah.
Facing the Temple: What is implied?A person standing in the Diaspora should face Eretz Yisrael and pray.1Berachot 30a explains that this is derived from King Solomon's prayer at the dedication of the Temple (I Kings 8:48 : "...and they will pray to You towards their land."One standing in Eretz Yisrael should face Jerusalem.2as implied by I Kings 8:44: "...and they will pray to God towards the city that You have chosen" (Berachot, ibid.).One standing in Jerusalem should face the Temple.3as implied by II Chronicles 6:24 (which gives a slightly different account of Solomon's prayer): "...and they will pray towards this House" (ibid.).The Talmud (ibid.) also relates:Rav Avin... said: What is implied by the verse: "Your neck is like the tower of David built with turrets (תלפיות) (Song of Songs 4:4 ."? A hill (תל) to which all mouths (פיות) turn."Thus, the Temple is called תל פיות, the hill to which all mouths turn in prayer.One standing in the Temple should face the Holy of Holies.4as implied by I Kings 8:35: "...and they will pray towards this place." Berachot (ibid.) concludes: "Thus, all of Israel direct their hearts towards one place." (See also the commentary to Chapter 1, Halachah 3.)A blind person, one who is5in a new place and is... unable to determine direction, or one travelling in a boat6who cannot face whatever direction he desires lest he fall should direct his heart towards the Divine Presence7as implied by I Kings 8:44: "...and they will pray to God" (ibid.). and pray.8In his commentary on the Mishnah (Berachot 4:5), the Rambam explains that one should imagine himself facing the Holy of Holies in the Temple.
The preparation of one's body: What is implied?When one stands in prayer, he should place his feet together side by side.1Berachot 10b quotes Ezekiel 1:7 which describes the angels as standing in the following manner: "And their feet are a straight foot." Therefore, when praying, we place our feet together in order to appear as angels - those expert in praising God. He should set his eyes downwards as if he is looking at the ground, and his heart upwards as if he is standing in Heaven.2Yevamot 105b relates:Rav Chiya and Rabbi Shimon bar Rebbe were sitting together. One of them opened the conversation and said: One praying should set his eyes downwards, as [I Kings 9:3] states: "And my eyes and my heart were there all the days" (i.e., towards the land of Israel and set downwards because of the presence of the Shechinah).The other said that one's eyes should be pointed upwards, as [Eichah 3:41] states: "Let us lift up our hearts with our hands [towards God in Heaven]."Rabbi Yishmael, the son of Rabbi Yossi, came and asked them what they were doing. They answered that they were discussing the Amidah. He [Rabbi Yishmael] said: My father said: One praying should set his eyes downwards and his heart upwards in order to fulfill both of those verses.His hands should be resting on his heart - Shabbat 10a relates: "Ravvah threw off his cloak, clasped his hands together and prayed like a servant before his master."His hands should be resting on his heart, with the right hand clasped over the left hand.3The right side always represents the notion of lovingkindness; the left side, stern justice. Therefore, we hold our hands such that the right overpowers the left: i.e., lovingkindness overpowers stern judgement.The right side is given prominence over the left in many other contexts because of this idea. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 2:4.) He should stand like a servant before his master,4The Maharal (Netiv Ha'avodah, Chapter 6), in his commentary on Berachot 10b quoted above, explains that placing our hands and feet together is a statement of absolute dependence on God. We demonstrate that we are neither able to move to our desired place, nor to act with our hands as we wish. In this way, we show how we are totally given over to His service, as a servant who has no independent existence of his own. in fear, awe, and dread.5Berachot 30b bases this on Psalms 2:11: "And you shall serve God in fear." He should not rest his hand on his hips [during the Amidah].6This appears to be based on Rav Yitzchak Alfasi's interpretation of Berachot 24b. The Hagahot Maimoniot explains that such a position conveys an attitude of irreverance. For similar reasons, it is forbidden to lean on anything during the Amidah.
Proper clothing: What is implied?One should adjust his clothing and make himself neat and presentable before [praying], as [implied by Psalms 29:2]: "They bow to God in resplendent holiness."One1Berachot 30b relates that, on the basis of this verse, Rav Yehudah would adjust his clothes before praying. should not pray wearing [only] his undershirt,2Our translation of אפונדתו is based on the Rambam's commentary to the Mishnah, Berachot 9:5, which defines that term as the undergarment worn to collect perspiration, in order that one's outer garments remain fresh. Others explain that it refers to a money belt. bareheaded,3Soferim 14:15 states that one may not utter God's name with his head uncovered. (See also Shabbat 155b.) "One praying must stand with his feet together and cover his head as one standing before the king" (Zohar, Va'etchanan 260b). or barefoot4Shabbat 10a relates: "Ravvah bar Rav Huna put on fine shoes and then prayed. He said: 'Prepare to meet your God, Israel' (Amos 4:12 ."The Rambam does not mention the source of these halachot or the verse from Amos. Rather, he cites the verse in Psalms, which may be understood as producing a halachah that is more subjective in nature, dependent on the commonly accepted rules of etiquette. - if it is the custom of the people of that place5However, where it is normal practice to walk barefoot, as in particularly hot climates, it is permissible to pray that way (Kessef Mishneh). to stand before their most respected people6This introduces a subjective element into these laws. The definition of proper clothing is dependent on local custom, i.e., how people dress when they want to make an impression on the respected people in one's community. See also the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 91:5.Both the Mishnah Berurah and Aruch Hashulchan mention this idea in regard to wearing a hat and require one to do so during the Amidah if this is the usual way people present themselves. with shoes.7with shoes. In all places,8i.e., the following rule in this halachah is in no way dependent on local custom, but applicable in all cases. one should not hold tefillin in his hand or a Sefer Torah in his arms during the Amidah, since he will worry about them.9lest they fall (Rashi, Berachot 23b). [Similarly,] one should not hold utensils or money in his hand.10Berachot (ibid) states: "A knife, money, a plate, and a loaf of bread are like them (i.e., like the Sefer Torah and tefillin)." Rashi explains that in these instances as well, one will fear that they will fall and injure him or become lost or ruined.Based on Rashi's statements, there are authorities who rule that a person may hold an object which would not present a danger or causes worry if it falls, e.g., a notebook. Rabbenu Yonah, however, forbids the holding of any object except the lulav, which is explicitly mentioned in the Talmud. This is also the position of Terumat Hadeshen. (Even according to the latter view, one may hold a prayerbook.)Shulchan Aruch HaRav (Orach Chayim 96:1) rules that one may also hold other objects (in line with Rashi's position), but states that the optimum manner of performing the mitzvah is not to hold anything, so that his hands may be clasped together over his heart, as the Rambam mentions in Halachah 4. However, he may pray while holding his lulav on Sukkot,11Sukkah 41b relates that Rav Ashi would pray with his lulav in his hand. since it is the commandment of the day.12Since it is the mitzvah of the day, it is dear to him and caring for it is not considering an encumberance that will disturb one's concentration (Rashi).If one is carrying a burden of less than four kabbim on his head13This halachah quotes Bava Metzia 105b. See our commentary on Chapter 4, Halachah 6, for the modern equivalent of a kav. when the time for the Amidah arrives, he should throw it over his shoulder and pray.14i.e., holding a burden of this size will not distrub one's concentration. If it is larger than four kabbim,15holding it during prayer will be a distraction. Hence,... he should place it on the ground and then pray.It is customary for all Sages and their students to pray only when wrapped in a tallit.16 Shabbat 10a relates that Rav Kahana would wrap himself in a tallit and pray. Ta'anit 20a also tells of Nakdimon ben Gurion, who when praying in the Holy Temple for rain, "wrapped himself in a tallit and stood to pray."In Hilchot Tzitzit 3:11, the Rambam writes: "It is a great disgrace for a Torah scholar to pray without being wrapped in his tallit."
Proper place: What is implied?One should stand in a low place1Berachot 10b bases this law on the premise, "there is no loftiness before God, as [Psalms 130:1] states: 'From the depths, I call out to you, God.'” and turn his face towards the wall.2Berachot 5b bases this law on Isaiah 38:2: "And Chizkiyahu turned his face towards the wall and prayed."In his responsa, the Rambam explains that the intent of this law is that one should not have anything before him that will disrupt his concentration on the Amidah. (See Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 90)The Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah (Orach Chayim 90:21) discuss this concept. Among their conclusions are that people do not constitute a separation between a person praying and the wall, nor do small objects less than 10 handbreadths (approximately 80 centimeters) tall. Also, one should open windows or doors3Berachot 31a states "A person should always pray in a house with windows."In his responsum, the Rambam mentions that this halachah applies only to a house, as explicitly mentioned in the Talmud and not necessarily to a synagogue. However, the Beit Yosef (ibid.) quotes the Zohar (Vol. II, p. 251a), which requires a synagogue to have 12 windows, which correspond to the 12 seraphim in the Heavenly Court. He also quotes this law in his Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 90:4).Rashi (Berachot 34b) explains that windows are an aid to concentration, as one looks heavenward and is humbled. Rabbenu Yonah suggests that the light has a calming effect, allowing one to concentrate on his prayers. that face Jerusalem and pray opposite them,4in keeping with the obligation to face Jerusalem mentioned in Halachah 3. as [Daniel 6:11] states: "...and he had windows open in his room facing Jerusalem."A5The verse concludes: "...and he kneeled on his knees three times a day and prayed." person should establish a fixed place where he always prays.6Berachot 6b states: "Anyone who establishes a fixed place for his prayer will be assisted by the God of Abraham." Abraham is mentioned because, as can be inferred from Genesis 19:27, he had a fixed place for prayer.The Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 4:4, states that even in a synagogue, a person should have a fixed place for prayer and should not move from place to place.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 90:19 quotes this law. The Magen Avraham adds that within four cubits (approx. six feet) of one's place is also considered acceptable, since it is impossible to be in exactly the same spot at all times. Therefore, a person who finds a colleague sitting in one's place in the synagogue, may pray within four cubits of his place. This is preferable to embarrassing the person sitting in his seat, who might very well be a visitor and not be aware of which seats are occupied by regular congregants. One should not pray in a destroyed building,7This halachah is derived within the context of the following narrative (Berachot 3a):Rabbi Yossi said: Once I was walking on the road and I entered one of the destroyed buildings of Jerusalem in order to pray. Eliyahu [the Prophet] of blessed memory came and waited for me by the entrance until I had finished praying.After I finished my prayer, he greeted me: "Peace unto you, Rebbe."I replied to him: "Peace unto you, Rebbe and teacher."He asked me: "My son, why did you enter this destroyed building?"I answered him: "To pray."He told me: "You should have prayed in the road."The Talmud mentions that one should never enter a destroyed building on any account. Nevertheless, since the Talmud made this statement regarding Rabbi Yossi's prayer, the Rambam teaches the laws concerning destroyed buildings here in Hilchot Tefillah (Kessef Mishneh). nor [should one pray] behind a synagogue, unless he turns his face towards the synagogue.8Berachot 6b states: "Anyone praying behind a synagogue is called wicked,... this applies only when he faces away from the synagogue, but if he faces the synagogue there is no problem."Rashi (in Berachot 6b) states that by facing away from the synagogue when one prays, one appears to deny God who is worshiped within. Therefore, even if facing the synagogue requires one to turn away from Jerusalem, it is desirable.Tosafot, Eruvin 18b, explains that this refers to a person standing on the side of the door facing away from the synagogue, and thus towards the opposite direction of those worshipping inside. Therefore, he must simply turn the other way and solve the problem. Hagahot Maimoniot suggests that “behind a synagogue” may even refer to standing on the side of the synagogue and looking away.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 90:7) mentions all these possibilities and rules that one should refrain from praying in any of these places.It is forbidden to sit down next to someone in the midst of the Amidah9Berachot 31b refers to Chanah's prayers for a son and her subsequent remarks to Eli, the priest: "I am the woman who stood here with you" (I Samuel 1:26 . This verses indicates that Eli, as well as Chanah, was standing at the time.Rabbenu Yonah also mentions that this applies only to a person sitting idly, but one studying or reciting the Shema need not worry and may continue to sit. or to pass in front of him,10for walking in front of someone will disrupt that person's concentration.Rabbenu Yonah (commenting on Berachot 27a) explains that this refers only to "in front of him," but not to the side.The Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 102:5) points out that the Zohar (Parshat Chayei Sarah) mentions that passing on the side is also forbidden.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 102:5 mentions a practical application of this halachah:If one completes his Amidah when a colleague is praying behind him, he is forbidden from taking his three steps [backwards] until the person behind him finishes his Amidah. Were he to [step backwards], he is like one passing before another in the midst of the Amidah. One must be especially careful in this, even if the last one began his Amidah after the first person. except at a distance of four cubits.11which is not likely to distract one's colleague.
One should not stand in a place three or more handbreadths high1A handbreadth is the size of a fist: approximately 8 centimeters according to Shiurei Torah. Based on the principle of lavud, anything lower than three handbreadths is considered to be part of the ground itself. and pray.2Berachot 10b mentions this and the following laws within the context of the requirement to pray in a low place stated in the previous halachah. [Similarly, he should not pray while standing] on a bed, bench, or chair.3The special mention of these objects requires explanation, since presumably, they would be included in the general category of a place three handbreadths or more high. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 90) quotes Rabbi Yitzchak Abuhav as suggesting that it is forbidden to pray while standing on these objects even if they are less than three handbreadths high. Even at this low height, a person may be unable to concentrate out of fear that he might fall.The Prisha (Orach Chayim 90) maintains that it is unlikely that a person would fear falling from such a low height and offers a different rationale. He explains that these objects constitute a separation between the person and the ground. In the Temple, the sacrificial service could be performed only while one was standing directly on the ground. Therefore, our prayers must be recited in a similar manner.A raised platform that has a surface area of four cubits by four cubits which is the [minimum] size of a house,4This measure is also significant in regard to the laws of property and the prohibition of transferring from one domain to another on the Sabbath. is considered like an attic.5i.e., it is considered a space in its own right rather than a raised area within a larger space. Thus, one is permitted to pray there.6Migdal Oz points out that on the basis of this halachah, the leader of the congregation often stands on a raised platform in the synagogue in order that he be heard by all the congregants. Similarly, if it is surrounded by walls, even if it is not four cubits by four cubits,7though it lacks the necessary size, its walls cause it to be considered as an independent entity. Hence,... one may pray there, since its height is not noticeable, because it constitutes an area unto itself.8i.e., because of the walls, no one will worry about falling despite the height.
Craftsmen1who are hired to work for others by the hour or day, in contrast, to a person working on his own time. working at the top of a tree, or on top of a board2In his commentary to the Mishnah, Berachot 2:4, the Rambam explains the meaning of the word נדבך as follows:The custom of those building a wall of earth (as opposed to bricks or stones) was to set up two large boards of wood and throw the earth in between them. They would pack it tight with wooden tools until it had the shape of a wall, and then tie [the two boards together.] Afterwards, they would remove the boards from the structure they had built...בראש הנדבך means "on top of the wall at the time that they are packing (the earth) between the boards that are called נדבכים." or wall when the time of the Amidah arrives must descend in order to pray,3The Mishnah (Berachot 16a) contrasts the Shema which these individuals may recite in their places and prayer, which requires that they descend. The difference is that, in the Shema, intense concentration is only required when reciting the first verse, while the entire Shemoneh Esreh should be recited with such intention. Hence, it is likely that in such precarious positions, the fear of falling will prevent a person from maintaining his concentration for this prolonged period. See also Hilchot Kri'at Shema, Chapter 2, Halachah 4. and then return to their work.4i.e., though they are hired workers and thus, their time is not their own, nevertheless, they are granted the time to fulfill their fundamental religious obligations in the proper manner. However, after discharging those duties, they must return to work immediately. If they were at the top of an olive or fig tree, they may pray where they are, because of the excessive effort [involved in descending].5Berachot 16a differentiates between these trees and those of other species. Rashi explains that the danger of falling from these trees is minimal because of their thick branches, and, therefore, one may stand there firmly and pray.The Rambam, based on the Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 2:5, explains that the wide branches make the descent problematical, and, therefore, the workers may pray in the trees themselves.What is it that they pray? If they are working for meals alone, they recite three prayers of 19 blessings.6Berachot (ibid.) arrives at this differentiation based on an apparent contradiction between two beraitot, one stating that workers must recite the entire Amidah, and the other stating that the abridged version is sufficient.Those working for daily wages are in effect paid by the hour and must use their time for their employer in the fullest manner possible. In contrast, implicit in an agreement to work for meals is that a high rate of productivity is not expected from such a worker. Hence, he is granted greater leniency. If they are working for wages, they recite "Give us understanding."7i.e., the abridged version of the Amidah, discussed in Chapter 2, Halachot 2-4. In either case, they do not lead the congregation8nor participate in communal prayer because of the additional time involved. Rashi (Berachot 16a) also agrees that this applies even to one working for meals. or lift up their hands [to bless the people].9i.e., if the artisan is a Cohen he should not bless the people during the repetition of the Amidah. Rather, he should pray and then return to his work at the earliest possible time.
Control of one's voice: What is implied?A person should not raise his voice during his Amidah,1Berachot 31a explains that these laws are derived from the description of Channah's prayer (I Samuel 1:13 : "Channah spoke unto her heart, only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard." nor should he pray silently.2i.e., merely contemplating on the words of prayer in his heart. The Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 4:1, states that the phrase, "only her lips moved," implies that she was speaking, not only thinking to herself. Rather, he should pronounce the words with his lips, whispering in a tone that he can hear.3Sotah 32b relates: "Why did they decree that the Amidah must be whispered? In order that those who have transgressed will not be embarrassed."Rashi explains that transgressors confess their sins before God during the Amidah, and, therefore, the Sages ruled that the entire Amidah should be recited in a hushed tone so that people would not feel embarrassed to confess.He should not make his voice audible4The first clause of this halachah implies that one should not raise his voice and speak very loudly during the Amidah. This clause teaches that one should not even speak in a normal tone of voice.Both of these laws are based on Berachot 24b:One who makes his voice audible during the Amidah is among those of little faith (i.e., he seems to indicate that it is necessary to speak loudly in order that God should hear him - Rashi).One who raises his voice in the Amidah is among the false prophets. (Rashi explains that this is based on I Kings 18:28, which describes the actions of the false prophets of Ba'al: "And they called out loudly.")Lechem Yehudah notes that the mention of both these halachot is somewhat unnecessary. The prohibition of making one's voice audible alone would appear to be sufficient. However, since that prohibition is lifted on occasion as explained below, the Rambam mentioned also the first law which is followed regardless of the circumstances involved. unless he is sick or cannot concentrate otherwise.5When stating the abovementioned restriction, Berachot (ibid.) mentions that it can be relaxed in this eventuality. In such a case, it is permitted except when in a congregation, lest the others be disturbed by his voice.6The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 101 allows an exception to this rule on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur. On these days, people devote more concentration to their prayers. Also, they generally pray from a prayerbook. Therefore, they are less likely to be disturbed by someone else's voice. Nevertheless, the Magen Avraham notes that the Zohar suggests praying in a hushed tone even on these days.
Bowing:1The bows in the Amidah are intended to express the concept of complete abnegation of self (See Tanya, Chapters 39 and 42). What is implied?One praying bows five times in each and every Amidah:In2Berachot 34a relates that a person who bows at any other time should be taught to discontinue his practice. the first blessing, at the beginning and at the end;in3i.e., one bows during the recitation of ברוך אתה at the beginning of the blessing and the recitation of ברוך אתה at the end. the blessing of thanks,4The blessing מודים, the second to last blessing of the Amidah. at the beginning and at the end;5i.e., at the recitation of the words מודים אנחנו לך (We are thankful to You) and the recitation of ברוך אתה at the end. andupon completing the Amidah, one bows and takes three steps backwards6Hagahot Maimoniot points out that one should begin his three steps backwards with his left foot, in order that his right foot be the last to withdraw from before God. while bowing.7Yoma 53b mentions that Rav Chiya, the son of Rav Huna, saw that Ravva and Abbaye took three steps backwards in the midst of a prolonged bow. He takes leave8Yoma (ibid.) states: "A person who prays must take three steps backwards and then take his leave. Anyone who does not do this is better not to have prayed at all" from his left and afterwards, from his right.9See Halachah 11 for the explanation of this halachah. Then, he lifts his head up from the bowed position.When he bows the [other] four times, he does so at [the utterance of the word] "Blessed" and straightens up when [reciting] G‑d's name.10Berachot 12a explains the latter law based on Psalms 146:8: "God straightens those bent over."The Maharal (Netiv Ha'avodah, Chapter 10) explains that this reflects how God is the source of all life and He grants man the power to act.11Then, he lifts his head up from the bowed position. To whom does the above apply? To an average person. However, the High Priest bows at the beginning and end of each and every blessing.12The commentaries question the Rambam's statements, noting that there are two opinions concerning this law mentioned in Berachot 34a, b and neither corresponds to the Rambam's text. See Kessef Mishneh. A king bows at the beginning [of the Amidah] and does not lift his head until he completes his whole Amidah.13Berachot (ibid.) bases this statement on I Kings 8:54: "And so it was when Solomon completed praying to God..., he rose from kneeling before the Altar of God."Rashi explains that the High Priest and King bow down more because a person who occupies a position of greatness must lower and subjugate himself before God. The Maharal (ibid.) mentions that bowing is a natural response to one's feelings of closeness to God. Therefore, these two men, closer than others to God, bowed more frequently.
Why should one take leave from the left first?1as stated in the previous halachah Because one's left is to the right [side]2Yoma 53b relates:One should take leave from the right and then from the left, as [Deuteronomy 33:2] states: "From His right [came] a fiery teaching for them," and [Deuteronomy 33:2] states: "From His right [comes] a fiery teaching for them."of His countenance - Rashi, Yoma (ibid.) explains that during prayer, one must envision himself standing before the Divine Presence. Thus, his right side is actually opposite God's left, so to speak. of His countenance; i.e., just like when one stands before a3mortal king, he takes leave from the right of the king, and then afterwards from the left of the king. Thus, they4The Sages of the Great Assembly, when laying down the rules for prayer, established that one should withdraw from the Amidah in the same manner as he withdraws from before a king. established that one should withdraw from the Amidah in the same manner as he withdraws from before a king.
All these bows require that one bow until the vertebrae in his spine protrude and he makes himself like a bow.1Berachot (ibid.) states that one should bow until he could see a coin placed opposite his heart. The Rashba explains that this refers to a coin that would be placed on the ground opposite one's heart. Thus, one should not bend over completely, but rather curve his back such that he can see the ground.However, if one bows slightly [to the extent that] it causes him pain and he appears to have bowed with all of his power, he need not worry.2Berachot (ibid.) states:Rabbi Chanina says: "One need not do more than nod his head."Ravva commented: "This is the case if it causes him pain, as long as he appears as one who is bowing."
Prostration, what is implied?After one lifts his head from the fifth bow, he sits on the ground, falls with his face towards the earth, and utters all the supplications1Megillah 22b relates that the custom of falling to the earth in supplication was followed in Babylonia in Talmudic times.The Tur, Orach Chayim 131, explains that the reason for prostrating oneself after Shemoneh Esreh is that by doing so, one prays in all three positions of prayer employed by Moses:sitting (during the verses of Praise), - "...and I sat on the mountain 40 days and 40 nights" (Deuteronomy 9:9), standing (during Shemoneh Esreh) - "And I stood on the mountain as on the first day for 40 days and 40 nights" (Deuteronomy 10:10), prostration - "And I fell down before God, as at first, for 40 days and 40 nights" (Deuteronomy 9:25).The Zohar (Parshat BaMidbar) explains that after prayer, a person should feel as if he has returned his soul to God and has no life-energy left. Thus, he falls to the ground where he receives new spiritual power. that he desires.2i.e., there is no fixed text of prayers recited at this time. In his Seder Tefilot kol HaShanah, the Rambam writes: "It is our custom to make supplication while prostrated with these statements and verses; sometimes, mentioning them all and sometimes, mentioning only some of them."Thus, though there was a basic text for these prayers (which is, to a large extent, included in the extended Tachanun recited on Mondays and Thursdays), what a person actually said was still left to his own creative impulse.There are two different versions of תחנון today. The תחנון of Nusach Ha'ari is based on Psalm 25, whereas that of Nusach Ashkenaz and Nusach Sefard is based on Psalm 6."Kneeling" always refers to [falling to] one's knees;3Megillah 22b derives this law from I Kings 8:54: "And so it was when Solomon completed his Prayer to God... that he rose from kneeling on his knees." "bowing," to bending over on one's face;4This is derived from I Kings 1:31: "And Bat Sheva bowed with her face to the earth" (ibid.). and "prostration," to stretching out on one's hands and feet until he is flat with his face on the ground.5This is derived from Genesis 37:10: "Will it come to pass that I and your mother and brothers will prostrate ourselves to you on the ground" (ibid.).The definition of these three terms is important within the context of the following halachah.
When uttering the supplication1i.e., the prayer recited after Shemoneh Esreh. In Hebrew, the Rambam uses the term נפילת אפים, which means literally "falling on the face." However, this translation is employed since the intent of "falling on one's face" is to recite these supplications. after the Amidah, there are those who bow and there are those who prostrate themselves.2Megillah 22b indicates that this variance in custom existed even in Talmudic times.It is interesting that in Halachah 13, the Rambam mentioned only histachavah, prostrating oneself, as the proper method for נפילת אפים. Perhaps, he considered it the most preferable position.It is forbidden to prostrate oneself on stones except in the Holy Temple, as we have explained in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim.3Chapter 6, Halachot 6 and 7. There, the Rambam explains that it was a normal practice of idolators to place stones down in order to prostrate themselves upon them. He states that the Biblical prohibition - (Leviticus 26:1 : "You shall not place a paved stone in your land to bow upon it" - refers to השתחואה alone, as opposed to simply bowing, which although forbidden, does not obligate punishment. See also Sefer Hamitzvot, Negative Commandment 12.The Rambam also notes that prostration was permitted in the Temple, since the above verse mentioned only "your land". Similarly, because of this prohibition, it is customary to lie rugs or mats on top of the stone floors in most synagogues.An important person is not permitted to fall on his face unless he is certain that he is as righteous as Yehoshua.4Megillah (ibid.) relates:An important person is not permitted to fall on his face unless he will be answered like Yehoshua bin Nun, as [Joshua 7:10] states: "God said to Yehoshua: 'Get up and go. Why is it that you have fallen on your face?'”Rashi explains that a person of stature would be subjected to ridicule if his prayer were not answered as Yehoshua's was.The Jerusalem Talmud, Ta'anit 2:6, restricts the application of this Halachah. According to one version, the limitation exists only to יחיד על הציבור (an individual who is praying on behalf of the community). Another version states יחיד בציבור (an individual in a congregation).In these cases, there might be cause for embarrassment if he was not answered. However, there is no such restriction when an individual prays by himself. See also Tosafot, Megillah (ibid.). Rather, he should tilt his face slightly, but not press it to the ground.5Megillah (ibid.) derives this law from the actions of Ravvah and Abbaye, who followed this practice instead of falling to the ground in accordance with the above rule.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 131:8) rules in accordance with the Rambam. The Ramah adds that no one should prostrate himself on the floor even if it is not stone. Therefore, the custom today is that everyone rests their heads on their arms while reciting Tachanun.One may pray in one place and offer this supplication in another6The Lechem Mishneh maintains that this can be derived from the following narrative in Megillah (ibid.). Rav came to a synagogue in Babylonia, but did not fall to the ground after the Shemoneh Esreh as they did. One of the explanations offered by the Talmud for his behavior is that there was a stone floor in front of Rav, but not in front of the other congregants. The Talmud then asks: "Why didn't Rav move to their place?", obviously implying that one may offer this supplication in a place other than one's place of prayer.
It is an accepted custom among the entire Jewish people not to utter the supplication on Sabbaths or festivals. Nor [does one utter it] on Rosh Hashanah, Rosh Chodesh, Chanukah or Purim1This custom is also mentioned in the Siddur of Rav Saadia Gaon.The days mentioned are all joyous occasions. At such times, we do not beseech God with extra supplication. Rather, we concentrate on the goodness that we have already received from Him. Similarly, we refrain from נפילת אפים at other occasions of joy; for example, a bride and groom on the day of their wedding and the week following it, and the participants in a ברית מילה (circumcision) are exempt from נפילת אפים. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim╟13 131:4.)or in Minchah on the eve of Sabbaths or holidays, - when the festive nature of these days can already be felt. or in Minchah on the eve of Sabbaths or holidays, nor in the Evening Prayer of any day.2The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 131) explains that we refrain from reciting Tachanun at night for mystic reasons. Tachanun relates to the aspect of stern judgement which is also identified with the night. It is not proper to combine both aspects of judgement together. There are [however,] individuals who do utter the supplication in the Evening Prayer.3Otzar Geonim on Megillah 23b discusses the various customs regarding the utterance of נפילת אפים. Rav Sar Shalom mentions that, although it is not his custom, there are some people who do נפילת אפים after מעריב.On Yom Kippur only, one utters the supplication prayer in every prayer, since it is a day of supplication, requests, and fasting.4Though we recite confessional prayers in each service of Yom Kippur, the only times we fall to the ground in supplication is during the Avodah of the Musaf prayers (Ma'aseh Rokeach).

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
A person is forbidden to walk behind a synagogue1This refers to the side of the synagogue on which there is an entrance. However, a person walking on the other side of the synagogue does not appear to dismiss the idea of prayer, since he has not willfully abstained from entering the place of worship (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 90). at the time that the congregation is praying,2Rashi, Berachot 61a, explains that a person passing by appears to be fleeing from the synagogue and the obligations observed therein. unless he is carrying a burden3Since he is carrying a bundle, it is clearly understood why he is not entering the synagogue.Berachot 8b quotes the above prohibition in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi. It then quotes Abbaye who mentions the various qualifications related by the Rambam. or there are two entrances to the synagogue on different sides. [In the latter instance], anyone who sees him would presume that perhaps he is planning to enter [the synagogue] through the other entrance.4Berachot 8b mentions the idea of two entrances to the synagogue. However, the specification that the entrances be on different sides is the Rambam's addition. Only in such a case could one seeing the person imagine that he is entering the synagogue by its other entrance. If the entrances are on the same side, the observer need simply wait to see if he also passes by the second entrance.Similarly, if there are two synagogues in the city, a person seeing him would say that perhaps he is going to his usual synagogue.5and is not shirking his responsibility to pray.If one is wearing tefillin on his head,6See Hilchot tefillin 4:25 which mentions the obligation to wear tefillin throughout the entire day, even after one finished prayer. At present, as explained in the Tur (Orach Chayim 39), it is customary to wear tefillin only during prayer. he is permitted to pass [a synagogue] even without any of these conditions, since the tefillin indicate that he is a person who is seriously interested in the performance of commandments, and not one to refrain from prayer.
One praying with a congregation should not lengthen his prayer excessively.1From the passage from Berachot quoted below, it would appear that the prohibition was instituted to prevent the discomfort that would be caused were the congregation to be forced to wait for one individual to finish his prayers. Rav Kapach notes that even if the congregation would not necessarily wait, it is forbidden to do so, lest one appear haughty. [However,] he may do so when praying alone.2Berachot 31a states:This was the custom of Rabbi Akiva; when praying in a congregation he would shorten his prayer in order not to bother those present, but when he prayed alone, one would leave him while he was in one corner of the room and [return and] find him in the other corner because of his bowings and prostrations. If, after praying,3i.e., after he has completed Shemoneh Esreh he desires to [add to his prayers], he may,4The Talmud (Avodah Zarah 8a and Berachot 31a) states that even though generally one should limit his requests during the recitation of Shemoneh Esreh to the blessing of שומע תפילה, this restriction does not apply after one concludes praying. including even the confession of Yom Kippur.5The Talmud (ibid.) (and, similarly, the authoritative Oxford manuscript of the Mishneh Torah) states that after prayer, one may add “the order of the day of Yom Kippur” and does not mention וידוי (confession).One might conclude that this indicates that one may add as much as he likes. The prayers of Yom Kippur are mentioned since they serve as the paradigm of long prayer.Similarly, he may add in each of the middle blessings something relevant to that blessing if he desires.6as explained in the following halachah.
What is implied?If1by the last clause of the previous halachah. one has a sick person [for whom he wants to pray], he should request mercy for this person in the blessing for the sick2Avodah Zarah 8a notes:Even though [the Sages] taught that a person should make his special requests in [the blessing of] שומע תפילה, one may add at the end of each blessing something relevant to that blessing.The Talmud quotes a second teaching which specifically mentions the two examples given by the Rambam. as eloquently as he can.3Note Chapter 1, Halachah 4, which explains that the reason the Sages established a standard text of prayer was to prevent people from praying in a non-eloquent manner. Though a person is allowed to make whatever additions to prayer he desires, he should try to use the most elegant means of expression as possible.If he requires sustenance, he should add a supplication and request in the blessing for material prosperity.4The sixth of the intermediate blessings. The same applies regarding each of the other blessings.5For example, Rashi (Avodah Zarah, ibid.) explains that one desiring not to forget that which he has learned should make such a request in חונן הדעת [the first of the intermediate blessings].Should one desire to ask for all his needs in the blessing of "the One who hears Prayer," he may do so.6without qualms. There is no requirement to make one's requests in the other blessings as mentioned above. However, he should make no requests in the first three or last three [blessings].7See Berachot 34a and also Chapter 1, Halachah 9, and commentary.
A person is forbidden to taste1This includes both eating and drinking and indicates that one is forbidden from even tasting the smallest amount of food. anything2Berachot 10b relates: What does [Leviticus 19:26]: "You should not eat with blood" mean? You should not eat before you have prayed al dimchem [lit. “for your blood”]... Anyone who eats and drinks and [only] afterwards prays - about him [I Kings 14:9[ states: "... and you have cast Me behind your body." Do not read גויך (your body), but rather גאיך (your pride). The Holy One, blessed be He, says: "After you have acted proudly and haughtily [by eating], will you accept upon yourself the sovereignty of Heaven?" Thus, it is clear that one must deal with his spiritual obligations before fulfilling his physical needs.  Note Chapter 5, Halachah 2, where the Rambam states that one who is hungry or thirsty is considered sick and must eat or drink before prayer in order to pray with proper intention. For this reason, medicines also present no problem and may be taken before Shacharit (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 89:3).The Mishnah Berurah (89:22) grants permission to drink tea or coffee before prayer, if this will help one's concentration during prayer. However,he suggests not putting sugar into the drink. The Aruch Hashulchan (Orach Chayim 89:23) allows one to add sugar to tea and even suggests that adding milk is permissible. or to do any work3Berachot 14a relates:A person is forbidden to deal with his personal matters before he prays, as [Psalms 85:14] states: "[He will place] righteousness before him and he will place his feet in the path."Rashi explains that first one must pay heed to the righteousness of the Creator, and only then walk in the way - i.e., do work that is necessary for his own personal needs. from dawn until after he has recited the Morning Prayer.4Dawn is the earliest possible time for the Morning Prayer. (See Chapter 3, Halachah 7.) Therefore, as soon as the obligation of prayer exists, one is forbidden to eat or drink. He should also refrain from visiting the house of a friend to greet him before he has recited the Morning Prayer;5Berachot 14a relates:Anyone who greets his friend before praying has, so to speak, made his friend into an altar, as [Isaiah 2:22] states: "Desist from the man whose life is in his nostrils, as for what is he considered." Do not read bemah (“for what”) but rather bamah (“an altar”).Nevertheless, the Talmud explains that this prohibition only applies to going to a friend's house to greet him. Greeting him in the street is permitted. nor should he set out on a journey before he has prayed.6Berachot 14a derives this law based on the same verse used as the source for the prohibition of working before praying.However, one may taste food or do work before reciting Musaf or Minchah,7Berachot 28b quotes two opinions, one of Rav Huna forbidding eating before Musaf, and one of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi forbidding eating before Minchah, but does not accept either of them as binding. although he should not have a full meal close to the time for Minchah.8Though the Talmud rejects the opinion of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi regarding טעימה (tasting). However, there are restrictions in regard to eating a meal as explained in the following halachah (Kessef Mishneh).
Once the time for Minchah Gedolah arrives,1i.e., six and a half hours (שעות זמניות) of the day, as explained in Chapter 3, Halachah 2. one should not enter a bathhouse,2This and the following laws are based on the Mishnah (Shabbat 9b): "One should not sit in front of the barber close to Minchah until he has prayed..." The Talmud explains that this refers to Minchah Gedolah. even [if only] to sweat, until he has prayed,3This person is not interested in bathing in the hot or cold bath or washing himself well, which are time-consuming activities. Nevertheless, since a prohibition was instituted against bathing... lest he faint and neglect prayer.4the restriction was enforced even in this instance.He should not eat, even a snack, lest he continue eating and neglect prayer,5In the previous halachah, the Rambam rules that one may taste food before Minchah, but forbade eating a meal. Here, he states that even a snack is forbidden. The Kessef Mishneh explains that eating a כביצה (the equivalent of an egg, 52 or 100 cubic centimeters, according to Shiurei Torah and the Chazon Ish, respectively) of fruit, or a כזית (an olive size, approximately 26 or 50 cubic centimeters, according to the same references cited) of bread constitutes achilat ari’ai which we have translated as a snack. nor [should he] judge [a court case], even if only to render a final judgment, lest the decision be questioned and the matter be drawn out and cause him to miss prayer.6The Mishnah quoted above states simply that one must not sit in judgment close to Minchah. In his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam states:Even if the case is finished and the judges have heard the claims of the adversaries in the case, and have deliberated [and reached a verdict], and need only announce their final decision, the judge should not sit to render this decision close to the time of Minchah, lest he see the case in a different light and be required to start again, or the adversaries restate their claims and the matters drag on until the time [for Minchah] passes.Similarly, one should not sit in a barber's chair, even for a regular haircut,7as opposed to the especially intricate haircut given the High Priest, called the haircut of "ben Elasa" (Shabbat 9b). (See also Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 5:6) until he prays, lest the scissors break.8and the time for prayer pass before the barber can secure another scissors. He should not enter a tanning house close to Minchah before he has prayed, lest he see a deficiency in his work which he will deal with, and [thereby] be delayed from praying.9The Rambam explains, in his commentary on the Mishnah, that if one sees a deficiency in the skin he will attempt to stop further damage, and his involvement in this work could last until after the end of the time for Minchah.The Rambam's interpretation of the mishnah is not accepted by other authorities. Tosafot (Shabbat, loc. cit.) rules that only complicated activities are forbidden and simple acts, e.g., a snack or a normal haircut are permitted.This disagreement finds expression in the rulings of the later authorities. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 232:2) quotes the Rambam's view. The Ramah brings a third opinion (of the Ba'al HaMa'or) which rules that even a large meal is permissible before Minchah Gedolah, and that a snack is permissible even before Minchah K'tanah. He adds that perhaps the reason for this leniency is that since it was customary to call people to synagogue, it is unlikely that they would not forget to go. However, he advises following the more stringent view when praying alone.If he begins doing one of these things,10Even if he began after the time of Minchah Gedolah and, therefore, his beginning was a transgression (Hagahot Maimoniot). he need not stop, but may finish and then recite Minchah.11This leniency is also based on the Mishnah (Shabbat, loc. cit.). After listing all the activities that are forbidden once Minchah Gedolah arrives, the Mishnah concludes: "And if he starts, he need not stop."The Kessef Mishneh explains that this is the case only if he will be able to recite Minchah before the conclusion of the appropriate time. To emphasize this point, the Rambam mentions explicitly: "and then recite Minchah" - i.e., after he finishes doing whatever it is that he has started doing. However, if there will not be time to pray afterwards, he must stop and pray. Only then may he resume his activity.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 232:2, follows this interpretation of the Rambam and adds that if there will not be time afterwards, one must stop what he is doing immediately. The Magen Avraham points out that this means that even if it is still relatively early, if one is eating and expects the meal to continue until after the time of Minchah, he must stop immediately and pray, rather than wait until sometime later before the end of the day.
When is the beginning of a haircut?1In Halachah 5, the Rambam taught us that if one had already begun his involvement in any of these activities, he need not stop in order to recite Minchah. Therefore, it is necessary to understand what constitutes involvement in these activities. When he puts the barber's cloth over his knees.2The מעפורת is an apron used to collect the hairs falling from one's head during a haircut, so that they do not fall onto his clothes. (Shabbat 9b) In his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam states that one who has put the cloth over his knees "is prepared for a haircut." From that point on, even though no hair has actually been cut, he is considered involved in the haircut, so that he need not stop to pray.When is the beginning of a bath?3i.e., when is he considered to be bathing, so that he need not stop to pray? When he takes off his underclothes.4literally, "the garments next to his skin." This is based on the Rambam's interpetation of Shabbat 9b: "When he removes his מעפרתו from himself." Rashi, in his commentary on that passage, offers a different interpretation - one's outermost garment, i.e., the first garment removed. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 232:2) rules in line with Rashi's position.When is the beginning of [work in the] tanning house? When he ties the apron between his shoulders, as is the way of artisans.5Shabbat 9b states simply: "When he ties between his shoulders." In his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that it is when he ties his belt in order to work with the skins. Evidently this means the belt around his apron. There is a version of the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah which mentions also that he begins working with the skins. This is, however, hard to understand in light of his commentary here in the Mishneh Torah.When is the beginning of eating? For those who live in Eretz Yisrael, it is when one washes his hands.6Shabbat 9b records a disagreement between Rav and Rabbi Chanina. Rav states that washing one's hands constitutes the beginning of eating, whereas Rabbi Chanina is of the opinion that loosening one's belt before eating is the beginning of the meal. The Talmud concludes that there is no real argument. Rav described the halachah for inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael, and Rabbi Chanina, for those of Babylonia. For inhabitants of Babylonia, it is when they loosen their belts.7Rashi explains that the custom in Babylonia was to wear their belts particularly tight, necessitating that they be loosened prior to eating. This was not the case in Eretz Yisrael.It is interesting to note that in his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam mentions only the halachah of washing one's hands. Since the Mishnah was written in Eretz Yisrael, its interpretation must be in line with the customs and realities of Eretz Yisrael. However, in the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam focuses on the actual halachah. Hence, he defines the beginning of eating in line with both positions, one relevant to Eretz Yisrael and the other to Babylonia.When is the beginning of judgment? When the judges robe themselves in their taleisim and sit down.8Rashi explains that the judges wore their talleisim in court in order to focus their attention on the serious nature of the matter at hand. Shabbat 10a states: "Any judge who adjudicates a judgment of absolute truth ..., is considered by the Torah to be a partner with God in the creation of the world." If they were [already] sitting, it is when the adversaries begin to make their claims.9Shabbat 10a makes this point of clarification.
Even though the Evening Prayer is not obligatory,1See Chapter 1, Halachah 6 and the commentary there. one should not come home from his work and say: "I will eat a little and sleep a little and then I will pray," lest sleep overtake him and he sleep all night. Rather, he should [first] pray, and afterwards he may eat, drink or sleep.2Berachot 4b discusses the decree of the Sages requiring the recitation of the Shema before midnight even though its actual time lasts until dawn (See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:9.). That passage states:The Sages produced a support for their words in order that a person not come in from the field in the evening and say: "I shall go home, eat a little, sleep a little and then recite the Shema and pray," lest he be overcome by sleep and sleep all night.Rather, he should come from the field in the evening and enter the synagogue. If he is accustomed to recite the Shema immediately, he should. If he is accustomed to study Torah first, he should study, recite the Shema, pray and then eat his bread and recite grace.In contrast to the restrictions mentioned in the previous halachah in regard to the afternoon prayers...It is permissible to have a haircut or enter a bathhouse before the Morning Prayer. [The Sages] only established their decree before Minchah, since it is common for most people to go there during the day. However, in the morning, [these actions] are uncommon. Hence they did not establish a decree. - Since the Mishnah cited above mentions only "close to Minchah," the Rambam assumes that the halachot apply only to מנחה and not to שחרית for the reason he explains.The Rambam does not mention going to the tanning house or eating in this halachah, because they are included in Halachah 4 regarding working or eating before the Morning Prayer, both of which are prohibited.It is permissible to have a haircut or enter a bathhouse before the Morning Prayer. [The Sages] only established their decree before Minchah, since it is common for most people to go there during the day. However, in the morning, [these actions] are uncommon. Hence, they did not establish a decree.
A person who is involved in the study of Torah when the time for prayer arrives must stop and pray.1The Mishnah (Shabbat 9b) states that one must stop for Kri'at Shema, but not for prayer. The Talmud (11a) explains that this refers to one involved in the study of Torah. If the study of Torah is his full-time occupation and he does not work at all,2Shabbat (ibid.) continues:This applies only to Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai and his colleagues, whose full time occupation was the study of Torah, but we stop studying to recite the Shema and to pray.Rashi explains that anyone who interrupts his studies in order to work, must also interrupt his studies in order to pray. and he is involved in the study of Torah at the time of prayer, he need not stop, since the commandment of the study of Torah is greater that the commandment of prayer.3In Hilchot Talmud Torah 3:3, the Rambam states: "There is no commandment among all the commandments that is equal to the study of Torah. Rather, the study of Torah is equal to all the other commandments, since study brings one to action. Therefore, study comes before action at all times."A person involved in Torah study achieves a level of unity with God that is unparalleled by any other activity. One's intellect and God's wisdom become inextricably linked, until they are indistinguishable during the moments of one's actual involvement in study. On this basis, we can understand the description of Torah with the metaphor of bread (Proverbs 9:5, Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 4:13). After bread is consumed by a person, it becomes assimilated into his blood and becomes part of the person himself. Similarly, when Torah is studied, it becomes absorbed into the person's character and becomes an integral part of his being (Tanya, Chapter 5).As explained in the introduction to this text, prayer focuses on our attempt to relate to the Godliness that permeates our worldly existence. Though this is an extremely significant service, the connection established through Torah study is more complete. Thus, Shabbat 10a records how Ravvah rebuked Rav Hamnuna for neglecting his Torah studies to prolong his prayers. By doing he was "abandoning eternal life for transcient life." Therefore, Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai and his colleagues whose commitment to Torah was all encompassing were not required to interrupt their studies for prayer.Anyone involved in efforts for the welfare of the community is like one involved in Torah study.4i.e., he can be compared to one whose full time occupation is the study of Torah. Therefore, he is exempt from the Amidah at that time.This comparison of community work to the study of Torah is found in the Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 5:1. However, there it is taught in the context of praying in the midst of words of Torah. (See Chapter 4, Halachah 18.) Community work is also considered like Torah, so that one may pray after such work and it is considered as if he prayed in the midst of words of Torah.The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam derives this law from the continuation of the Talmudic passage (Shabbat 11a) cited above. The Talmud states that one involved in the decision of whether or not to proclaim a leap year (עיבור שנה) need not stop to pray, even though Torah study is not his full-time occupation. The Kessef Mishneh posits that the Rambam views involvement in עיבור שנה as community work. On this basis, he concludes that one need not stop in order to pray if he is involved in such activities.
One is forbidden to interrupt his Amidah except in a situation where his life is endangered.1In Hilchot Kri'at Shema 2:15-17, we discussed the various situations in which one is allowed to interrupt his recitation of the Shema. Here, the Rambam teaches that the laws regarding the Amidah are much more strict. Only a threat to one's very life is considered sufficient cause to interrupt the Amidah. Even if the King of Israel greets him, he must not answer him.2The Mishnah (Berachot 29b) states: "Even if the king greets him, he may not answer." The Talmud explains that this applies only to a Jewish king, but not to a foreign king. A Jewish king is expected to appreciate the seriousness of prayer and realize that a person's unwillingness to interrupt his prayers is not intended as an insult to the king's authority, but rather, submission to an even greater authority.It is interesting to note that this halachah is taught in the Mishnah within the context of halachot stressing the serious nature of the Amidah and the high level of concentration necessary. Just as we learned that the level of intention necessary for the Amidah is greater than that necessary for Kri'at Shema (see Chapter 5, Halachah 8 and the commentary there), so too, the halachot regarding interruptions are stricter, as mentioned. However, he may interrupt [to answer] a non-Jewish king, lest he3fail to understand the concept explained above and... kill him.4as a rebel against the king.Berachot 32b-33a relates the following story which shows that the Sages did not always avail themselves of the leniency granted:A righteous man was once praying on the road. A minister approached him and greet him. However, he did not respond. [The minister] waited until he had finished praying and said to him: "Empty one! Is it not written in your Torah: 'Take heed and watch yourself carefully' (Deuteronomy 4:9 , and 'Guard yourselves very carefully' (Deuteronomy 4:15)." "When I greeted you, why didn't you answer? If I had cut off your head with my sword, who would have sought vengeance for your life?"He said to him: "Let me appease you with words. If you were standing in front of an earthly king and your friend came and greeted you would you answer him?"[The minister] said: "No.""And if you did answer him what would they do to you?"He replied: "They would cut off my head!"He said: "And is it not reasonable that if you [would not interrupt] while standing in front of an earthly king who is here today and in the grave tomorrow, so too I, standing in front of the King of Kings, the Holy One blessed be He, who is eternally present, all the more so [should I not interrupt in order to return greetings]."The minister was appeased immediately, and the righteous person returned home in peace."A person standing in the [midst of the] Amidah who sees a non-Jewish king or tyrant approaching him should shorten [his prayer].5Rabbenu Yonah explains that this means simply to recite the beginning and end of each blessing. The Kessef Mishneh also agrees with this explanation.In Chapter 2, Halachot 2-3, the Rambam mentions the text for a shortened prayer. However, there is not necessarily a contradiction between this opinion and that law. If unable to do so, he may stop.6Berachot 32b offers these two alternatives.Rabbenu Yonah maintains that if possible, one should move slightly in order to avoid confronting the king or tyrant, and thus avoid the need to talk. Similarly, if one sees snakes or scorpions approaching him in a place where their bite is fatal, he should stop [praying] and flee. If they are not fatal, he should not stop.7The Mishnah (Berachot 29b) states: "...and even if there is a snake curled around his ankle, he should not interrupt [his Amidah]." The Talmud (33a) mentions that a snake does not cause an interruption, but a scorpion does. Rashi explains that though snakes are not likely to bite, scorpions are likely to sting. Thus, the passage raises questions on the Rambam's decision, for he does not distinguish between snakes and scorpions.The Rambam's statements appear to be based on the Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 5:1, which states that one ignores a snake only if it is simply curling around his leg. However, were the snake to approach him in a menacing fashion, appearing likely to bite, he may flee from the snake.It is important to note that there is no actual need to interrupt his Amidah in the case of the dangerous creatures. He need simply leave that spot, find a safe place and continue praying.Hagahot Maimoniot points out that in all the cases mentioned, even if he did actually speak in the middle of Shemoneh Esreh, he need only start again at the beginning of the blessing in which he stopped. If, however, he interrupted himself during the first or last three blessings, he should return to the beginning of the beginning of the first of the three blessings.The laws mentioned in this halachah are discussed in the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 104.
Women, slaves and children are obligated to pray.1This is based on the Mishnah (Berachot 20a-b). This halachah is discussed in Chapter 1, Halachah 2. Anyone exempt from Kri'at Shema is also exempt from the Amidah.2The laws regarding those exempt from Kri'at Shema are contained in Hilchot Kri'at Shema 4:3-6. The exemption of these people from the Amidah is stated explicitly in the Mishnah (Berachot 17b).All those accompanying the dead [for burial], even if they are not required to carry the coffin, are exempt from the Amidah.3This is also based on the Mishnah (Berachot 17b) which teaches that though there are differences between the obligations people have regarding the recitation of the Shema (See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 4:4.), "both are exempt from the Amidah."Rashi and Tosafot explain that the distinction between Kri'at Shema and the Amidah is based on the fact that the recital of the Shema is a Torah obligation. Some commentaries explain that this explanation would even be acceptable according to the Rambam. Though he holds that the Amidah is also a Torah obligation (see Chapter 1, Halachah 1), it is only necessary to pray once daily in order to fulfill one's Torah obligation. Therefore, one may be more lenient in granting an exemption from the Amidah, since the Torah obligation may have already been fulfilled or may be fulfilled by another Amidah later in the day.However, the Rambam, himself, offers a different explanation in his commentary on the Mishnah. There, he states that since one is troubled (לבו טרוד) by the burial, he is exempt from the Amidah. This seems to be a function of the greater need for intention in the Amidah rather than its non-Torah status.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
When the Sages1Ezra and his court, the Anshei K'nesset HaGedolah instituted [a text for] these prayers,2See Chapter 1, Halachot 2-5. they [also] established other blessings to be recited every day.3In Hilchot Berachot 1:4, the Rambam writes:There are three types of blessings: blessings associated with [deriving] satisfaction, blessings associated with mitzvot, and blessings of thanksgiving which are a process of praise, thanksgiving, and request so that we will continually remember the Creator and fear Him.In Hilchot Berachot 10:1, the Rambam writes that the blessings associated with the prayer service are included in the category of blessings of thanksgiving. This position is not accepted by all authorities. For example, the Avudraham considers the blessings associated with the prayer service as a separate category of blessings. These are:When a person gets into bed4Note the Otzar HaGeonim which requires that both this blessing and the Shema be recited in one's bed, directly before retiring. to sleep at night,5The Rambam begins his discussion of the blessings of prayer with one recited at night in keeping with the concept that the new day starts after sunset. (See also Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:1 and our commentary there.) he says:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who causes6This blessing, with certain textual differences, is found in Berachot 60b. the bonds of sleep7Our translation is based on Esther 1:6 which mentions חבלי בוץ - "bonds (or cords) of linen" (Otzar HaTefilot). The phrase may also be rendered as "the pains of sleep" based on Hoshea 13:13 חבלי יולדה - "the pains of childbirth." Exhaustion is painful to one's eyes and makes it difficult to keep them open. to fall upon my eyes, who sinks [one into] restful slumber,8Rav Kapach's manuscript of the Mishneh Torah omits the latter clause. He also notes that the Yemenite siddur, which was composed in accordance with the Rambam's opinion, follows this version. Rav Yitzchok Alfasi's Halachot, which the Rambam often used as a source, also omits this clause. and illuminates the pupil of the eye.9See the Targum to Psalms 17:8. In Nusach Ashkenaz, this clause appears later in the blessing. May it be Your will, God, our Lord,10The version in our texts of Berachot (ibid.) contains additional requests:May it be Your will, God, my Lord, to lay me down to peace and grant my portion in Your Torah. Accustom me to commandments and not to transgressions and bring me not to sin or transgression, trial, or embarrassment.This text is found in the Siddur of Rav Amram Gaon. The Vilna Gaon, in his emendations to the Talmud, suggests that these requests were not originally included in the Talmud and were added later by Rav Amram Gaon. to save me from the evil inclination and from a bad occurrence. May I not be disturbed by bad dreams or evil thoughts.11The prevention of sinful thoughts and the avoidance of nocturnal emissions during sleep are two of the main reasons given for reciting the Shema before retiring. Let my bed be perfect before You12Rashi (Berachot 60b) explains that this is a prayer for spiritually healthy children. See Sifre (Deuteronomy 31). and may You raise me up from it to life and peace and illuminate my eyes lest I sleep a sleep of death.13This is based on Psalms 13:4. Blessed are You, God, who illuminates the whole world in His glory.14This is based on Ezekiel 43:2. Metzudat Tzion explains that the radiance of the Divine Presence is a source of light to the whole world. As we go to sleep at night in a dark world, we express our thanks for the Divine light that constantly fills the world.The recitation of a blessing for sleep is based on our Sages' conception of sleep as one of God's greatest gifts because it allows man to rest and awake refreshed, able to serve his Creator with renewed energy and vigor. In Bereishit Rabbah 9:8, Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar interprets the words uttered by God at the end of the sixth day of creation, "and behold it was very good" (Genesis 1:30 , as referring to the creation of sleep.
[Then,1Berachot 60b states that one first recites Kri'at Shema and then, the blessing of hamapil (the blessing discussed in Halachah 1). This opinion is quoted by the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 239:1). However, this order is only followed in Nusach Ari. Both Nusach Ashkenaz and Nusach Sephard follow the order stated by the Rambam.The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 1:1) relates that Rav Zeira was accustomed to recite the Shema over and over until he fell asleep. This indicates that the Shema is the last thing said at night before sleeping (Hagahot Maimoniot in the name of Rabbenu Nissim Gaon).] one reads the first section2This is consistent with our text of Berachot (loc. cit.) which states that, before going to sleep, one recites "from Shema until V'haya im shamoa." This is the opinion followed in most communities at present.Rabbenu Chananel rules that one recites the first two sections of Shema since both contain the phrases "with all your heart" and "while laying down" (See the commentary below). Rabbenu Asher also follows this position.The Magen Avraham (239:1) quotes the Ari, Rabbi Yitzchok Luria, as requiring the recitation of all three sections of the Shema so that the 248 words it contains will guard the 248 limbs of the body during sleep. According to the opinion of Rashi mentioned below, it is also necessary to read all three sections. of Kri'at Shema and goes to sleep.3Berachot 4b explains that "it is a mitzvah" to recite the Shema before retiring. These statements are based on Psalms 4:5: "Tremble, but do not sin. Speak in your heart upon your bed and be still." Our Sages interpreted "Speak in your heart" and "upon your bed" as allusions to the phrases "with all your heart" and "upon your bed" in theShema.That Talmudic passage implies that the reason for reciting the Shema before retiring is to protect oneself from undesirable influences during the night. According to Rashi (Berachot 2a) and others who allow the evening service to be recited before sunset, the recitation of Shema before retiring enables us to fulfill the mitzvah of Kri'at Shema at night. According to the writings of the Ari, the reciting of the Shema before retiring is a service of spiritual preparation for the soul's ascent from the body during sleep.Since Berachot (ibid.) mentions that "it is a mitzvah" to recite the Shema before retiring, it was customary in certain communities to recite a blessing before reciting the Shema as is customary before performing other mitzvot. In his responsa (Pe'air HaDor 100), the Rambam specifically rules against reciting such a blessing. [However, note the Kolbo (29) who quotes the Rambam as stating in a responsa that such a blessing is required.] [This applies] even if his wife is sleeping with him.4This line does not appear in either the Oxford or Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:ibid. which permits the recitation of the Shema while touching one's wife because one is familiar with her.If he is overcome by sleep,5and cannot recite the entire first section, at the very least he should read the first verse [of Kri'at Shema]6which contains the essential statement of the unity of God. or verses of mercy7Berachot 4b-5a states:Rabbi Nachman says: "A Torah scholar need not [recite Kri'at Shema before sleep] for his Torah will protect him."Abbaye says: "Even a Torah scholar must recite at least one verse describing God's mercy, for example: 'Into Your hand I entrust my spirit, You will redeem me, God, God of truth' (Psalms 31:6).Sh'vuot 16b mentions that Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi would recite Psalm 91 as protection against unfavorable influences at night. Other verses that have a similar intent have been included by Kabbalistic authorities in the text of the Shema recited before retiring.and, afterwards, he may go to sleep. and afterwards, he may go to sleep.
When a person awakes after concluding his sleep,1I.e., in the morning when he has completed his night's sleep.The Kessef Mishneh points out that although Berachot 60b states that one recites this blessing upon arising, the Rambam specifies that it be said only after concluding one's sleep. This makes it clear that a person who wakes up in the middle of the night and intends to return to sleep, need not recite this blessing. while still in bed,2Rabbenu Yonah (in his commentary to the Halachot of Rav Yitzchok Alfasi) takes issue with this statement. He writes:This is difficult to understand. Since [upon waking] one's hands are not clean, how is it possible that [the Rambam] says that one should recite these blessings [while still in bed]. The Talmud mentions this [practice. However, this is because the Sages] were particularly holy. They would wash their hands [at night before sleep] and would be able to maintain a state [of purity] such that they could recite the blessings in the morning in cleanliness. We, however, are unable to maintain this state of cleanliness. Therefore, it is proper that we recite them only after נטילת ידים (the washing of the hands).This position is widely accepted and is the basis of our practice today. See the commentary to Halachah 9. he says:My Lord,3In Hilchot Berachot 11:1, the Rambam writes:All of the blessings begin with Baruch and conclude with Baruch except the final blessing of the blessings associated with the Shema, a blessing which follows directly after another blessing, and a blessing over fruit, those [blessings] which resemble it, or a blessing for mitzvot.Given this statement, the commentaries wonder why this blessing does not begin with Baruch. Furthermore, in Hilchot Berachot 1:5, the Rambam writes that, unless a blessing follows another blessing, it must mention God's sovereignty over the world and no such mention is made in this blessing.The Meiri in his commentary to Berachot (loc. cit.) offers the following resolution to these difficulties: Despite the fact that the entire period of a person's sleep divides between the recitation of hamapil and E-lohai Neshamah, the sleep is not considered as an interruption and E-lohai Neshamah is considered as following directly after hamapil. Accordingly, it is not required to begin with Baruch or mention God's sovereignty.Other commentaries who follow different halachic perspectives than the Rambam offer these resolutions:1) E-lohai Neshamah is a blessing of praise and prayer and does not require an opening phrase of blessing, in the same way that the blessing recited before travelling does not (Tosafot, Pesachim 104b).2) E-lohai Neshamah is generally recited immediately after the blessing of אשר יצר and therefore can be considered as a blessing which follows another blessing. the soul that You have placed within me4Each morning, we renew our thanks for the soul which God has returned to us, refreshed and revitalized. is pure.5Despite his lowly physical state, man possesses an innate spirituality, a pure Godly soul, which is the source of all his positive actions and thoughts. You have created it, You have formed it, You have breathed it into me6The three verbs used in this blessing correspond to three different descriptions of the creation of man in the Torah:1) ויברא א-להים את האדם - "And the Lord created man" (Genesis 1:27). 2) א-להים את האדם וייצר ה' - "And God, the Lord, formed man" (Genesis 2:7). 3) ויפח באפיו נשמת חיים - "And He blew into his nostrils the soul of life" (ibid.).These three verbs also relate to the three components of the soul, נפש, רוח, ונשמה (Maharsha, 14Berachot 60b).In Kabbalah, the three verbs are understood as referring to the three worlds: עולם הבריאה - the world of creation, עולם היצירה - the world of form, and עולם העשיה - the world of physical action. The word טהרה - "pure" refers to עולם האצילות - the world of emanation, the highest of the four worlds. Thus, this prayer traces the descent of man's soul from God's Throne of Glory into the physical world. and You preserve it within me.7Although the natural inclination of the soul is to return to its Source, God preserves its presence within the body in order that the person may serve His Creator in this world (Midrash Tehillim 62). You will ultimately take it from me8at the time of death. and restore it to me in the Time to Come.9at the time of the resurrection of the dead. As long as the soul is lodged10Though the word, "lodged," is present in the printed texts of the Mishneh Torah, it is lacking in most manuscripts. Similarly, it is not included in the text of the blessing in most siddurim. within me, I am thankful before You, O God, my Lord, Master of all works.11Some siddurim add the phrase, "Lord of all souls," at this point so that the concluding phrase of the body of the blessing will correspond to the wording of the blessing itself. Blessed are You, God, who restores souls to dead bodies.12Berachot 57b compares sleep to 1/60 of death. Therefore, waking can be compared to the resurrection of the dead (Rabbi Ya'akov Emden in his commentary on the siddur).
When one hears the crow of a rooster, he recites: Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who gives the rooster understanding to distinguish between day and night.1Since the crowing of the rooster generally heralds the dawn, the Sages established this blessing in response to it.The word שכוי is translated as "rooster" based on Rosh HaShanah 26a which refers to Job 38:36: "Who has put wisdom in the inward parts and [given] understanding to the rooster (שכוי)."Rabbenu Asher (in his halachic commentary to Berachot) interprets שכוי as "heart." The heart is the source of understanding which allows man to distinguish between day and night.When he puts on his clothes,2This refers to one's outer garment. Therefore, even a person who has slept in pajamas or in his underwear should recite this blessing (Pri Chadash, Orach Chayim 46). he recites: Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who clothes the naked.3Understood simply, this blessing expresses our appreciation to God for the clothes we wear. On a deeper level, it also expresses our cognizance of the sanctity of physical modesty.When he puts his cloth on his head,4This blessing is also mentioned in Berachot, loc. cit. The Rambam interprets it as referring to an ordinary head covering. In contrast, Rabbenu Yitzchok Alfasi interprets the Talmud's statement as referring to donning the tallit.Tosafot and other Ashkenazic authorities maintain that this blessing should be reciting upon putting on a hat, yarmulke, or other headcovering. he recites: Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who crowns Israel in glory.5The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 46) associates this blessing with the prohibition of walking four cubits with one's head uncovered (Shabbat 118b; See Hilchot De'ot 5:6). Covering our heads symbolizes Israel's fear and awe before God's presence. This is their glory, as Isaiah 62:3 states: "You shall be a crown of glory in the hand of God."When he passes his hands over his eyes,6In order to cause sleep to pass from their eyes, people often rub them vigorously.Our text of Berachot (loc. cit.) states when "one opens his eyes." Many authorities favor this version over the text quoted by the Rambam (and Rav Yitzchok Alfasi) because Shabbat 108b warns of the dire consequences of touching one's eyes before washing one's hands in the morning. The Magen Avraham (Orach Chayim 46:2) suggests that people might have avoided the problem by cleaning their eyes with a cloth or rubbing their eyes with closed eyelids (Sha'arei Teshuvah). he recites: [Blessed...] who opens the eyes of the blind.7This blessing is based on Psalms 146:18 and can be interpreted as a statement of gratitude for more than our physical eyesight. We thank God for the ability to see His greatness in creation. These are our metaphorical "eyes of reason."When he sits up in his bed, he recites: [Blessed...] who unties those bound.8thanking God for the ability to move our limbs after sleep.When he lowers his feet from the bed and rests them on the ground, he recites: [Blessed...] who spreads the earth over the waters.9This blessing is based on Psalms 136:6: "[Give thanks] to the One who spread the earth over the waters, for His lovingkindness is eternal."When he stands up, he recites: [Blessed...] who straightens the bowed.10This is based on Psalms 146:8. This blessing expresses gratitude for the uniquely human characteristic of upright posture. It may also be interpreted as giving thanks to God, the source of salvation for those bowed and downtrodden.The Tur (Orach Chayim 46) states that if one recites this blessing before the blessing "who unties those bound," he should refrain from reciting the latter blessing. Though there is some difference of opinion about the matter, most later authorities accept the Tur's decision.When he washes his hands,11In Hilchot Berachot 6:2, the Rambam specifically states that one should recite this blessing before washing one's hands so that the blessing will precede the performance of the mitzvah (Pesachim 7a). Rabbenu Yonah states that one should not recite this blessing until after washing one's hands because until one has washed his hands, he is not in a fit state to mention God's name (See Mishnah Berurah 4:2). (According to others, the recitation of this blessing should be delayed until after drying one's hands.)The Rambam obviously does not accept this rationale since he requires many blessings to be recited before the washing of the hands as above. he recites: [Blessed...] who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us12Although this washing was instituted by the Rabbis, this wording is appropriate, as is explained in Hilchot Berachot (loc. cit.). regarding the washing of hands.13This washing is required in preparation for the recitation of the Shema and the morning service.Based on the Zohar (Vol. I, 169b, 184b), the Rabbis rule that, on washing in the morning, one pours water over his hands three times alternately, i.e., once over the right hand, once over the left hand, once more over the right, etc. This is done in order to remove the spirit of impurity that remains after sleep.When he washes his face,14Note Chapter 4, Halachah 2, which states that a person must wash his face in the morning as a preparation for prayer. he recites:15There are slight, but significant, differences between the text of the blessing here and its source in Berachot (loc. cit.). Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who removes the bonds of sleep from my eyes16The last traces of drowsiness disappear when one washes his face (Avudraham).and slumber from my eyelids. May it be Your will, God, - This entire prayer is considered one blessing. Therefore, one should not recite "Amen" after hearing a colleague recite the opening sentence of the blessing (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 46:1). Tosafot (Berachot 46a) states that one should say "and may it be..." to emphasize that the prayer is a single blessing.my Lord and Lord of my fathers, that You accustom me - The Rambam, and similarly the Tur, use the first person singular, thus, making the prayer an individual statement. However, most siddurim use the first person plural, "us."to the performance of [Your] commandments and do not accustom me to sins or transgressions. Cause the positive inclination to rule over me and not the evil inclination. - Though we always have free will, we ask God to strengthen our potential for making the proper choice (Taz).Strengthen me in Your commandments and grant my portion in Your Torah. Allow me to find favor, lovingkindness, and mercy in Your eyes and the eyes of all who see me and bestow upon me benevolent kindnesses. Blessed are You, God, who bestows benevolent kindnesses. - The kindnesses refer to the return of the soul in the morning (Tosafot, loc. cit.) and also the instilling of a spirit of purity within us (Rikanti). and slumber from my eyelids. May it be Your will, God, my Lord and Lord of my fathers, that You accustom me to the performance of [Your] commandments and do not accustom me to sins or transgressions. Cause the positive inclination to rule over me and not the evil inclination. Strengthen me in Your commandments and grant my portion in Your Torah. Allow me to find favor, lovingkindness, and mercy in Your eyes and the eyes of all who see me and bestow upon me benevolent kindnesses. Blessed are You, God, who bestows benevolent kindnesses.
Whenever one enters the toilet,1This halachah is dealt with among the morning blessings, since a person generally relieves himself shortly after arising. Nevertheless, its instructions apply whenever one relieves himself.[Note, however, the opinion quoted by the Shulchan Aruch HaRav 6:1, which maintains that the blessing, אשר יצר, can be considered as one of the morning blessings and should be recited even if one does not relieve oneself.] before entering, he says:Be honored, holy honorable ones, servants of the Most High.2This statement is quoted from Berachot 60b, but there are slight variations between the way the passage appears in the Talmud, the manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah, and its published text.In his commentary to Berachot, Rashi explains that this statement is addressed to the angels that accompany us at all times as Psalms 91:11 states: "He will command all His angels for you, to guard you in all your ways." Help me. Help me. Guard me. Guard me.3I.e., continue to do that which you have been commanded even though I am about to take leave of you momentarily. Wait for me4for it is not fitting for the angels to enter a toilet. until I enter and come out, as this is the way of humans.5The Avudraham states that this prayer should only be recited by extremely righteous men. Anyone else who recites it would appear conceited. For this reason, the Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 3) rules that this prayer is not recited today.After he6relieves himself, whether he defecated or urinated (Kessef Mishneh, in contrast to an opinion quoted by the Hagahot Maimoniot which rules that the blessing which follows should be recited only after defecating). comes out, he recites:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who formed man in wisdom7See the Targum Yonaton to Ezekiel 28:12 which uses similar terms to praise the Divine wisdom manifest in the creation of the human body. and created within him many openings and cavities.8e.g., the mouth, nose, anus. It is revealed and known before the throne of Your glory that if one of them were to be blocked or if one of them were to be opened, it would be impossible to exist for even one moment.9Tosafot (Berachot, loc. cit.) quotes Bereishit Rabbah (1:3) which states that unlike a manmade container which is unable to hold liquid when pierced by even the smallest pin, the body that God created is full of holes and cavities which open and close in a manner that allows man to continue to exist.The Midrash Tanchuma (Shemini) relates: Happy are you, Israel! A mitzvah was granted correspondent to each and every one of your limbs.... The numerical value of חלולים חלולים is 248, the number of limbs in the human body and the number of positive commandments in the Torah. Blessed are You, God, who heals all flesh10This is based on Exodus 15:26: "For I am God, your healer." and works wonders.11This is based on Psalms 77:5: "You are the God who works wonders." The phrase מפליא לעשות is found, in a different context, in Judges 13:19.The Darchei Moshe (Orach Chayim 6) explains that the wonders spoken of in this blessing refers to the maintenance of our spiritual soulsáwithin ouráphysical bodies. This may explain the accepted order of the blessings in which א-להי נשמה (Halachah 3) is recited immediately after this blessing, אשר יצר.
When one fastens his belt,1The Rambam accepts the interpretation most commentaries have given to the words מייניה אסר in Berachot 60b, the source for this blessing. The Ra'avad interprets the Talmud as referring to putting on one's trousers. he recites: [Blessed...universe,] who girds Israel2The Taz (Orach Chayim 46) points out that, of the morning blessings, only this and the blessing uttered after covering one's head (עוטר ישראל בתפארה) mention Israel. The other blessings praise God for kindnesses enjoyed by all people. In contrast, these two blessings highlight actions performed by the Jewish people as an expression of modesty. The belt is intended to separate the heart from the lower half of the body (See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 2:7 and 3:17). The covering of one's head signifies one's awareness of the Divine Presence, as stated above (See Halachah 4).The Avudraham notes that this blessing is conceptually rooted in Jeremiah 12:11: "'As a girdle clings to a man's loins so have I caused the whole of the House of Israel and the House of Judah to cleave unto Me,' says God; 'that they might be unto Me, a people, a name, a praise and a glory.'” with strength.3The Avodat Yitzchok explains that a belt or girdle protects a person's body and affords him greater strength. Rav Asher of Lunil explains that this blessing refers to the spiritual strength granted to Israel through Torah study.When he puts on his shoes, he recites: [Blessed...universe,] for You have provided me4Our text follows the published text of the Mishneh Torah. The same text is also quoted by Rav Yitzchok Alfasi and Rabbenu Asher.However, our text of Berachot (loc. cit.), the source for this blessing, reads: שעשה לי כל צרכי - "who provides me with all my needs"; referring to God in the third person rather than in the second person. This version is found in most siddurim today. It is also found in the authoritative Oxford manuscript of the Mishneh Torah and many Yemenite manuscripts. with all my needs.5Several different explanations are given for the association of this blessing with the putting on of one's shoes. The Avudraham states simply that a person is unable to move about freely without shoes. Therefore, putting on shoes enables him to acquire whatever he needs.Rav Shlomo Kluger cites our Sages' statement, "A person should sell everything he owns and buy shoes," as evidence that a person who has shoes to wear has acquired that which is most necessary.The Sh'loh quotes the Maharshal as explaining the source for this blessing as Psalms 8:6-9.You have made him [man] a little lower than angels.... You have given him dominion over the works of Your hands. You have put everything under his feet, all sheep and oxen, and also the beasts of the field, the birds of the sky and the fish of the seas.Wearing leather shoes demonstrates the way in which the animal kingdom has been placed "under man's feet" and makes us aware that the dominion we have been granted over all creation allows us to acquire "all our needs."When he walks to depart on his way, he recites:6Our text of Berachot 60b and similarly, most contemporary siddurim, place this blessing before the previous one. Nevertheless, Rav Yitzchok Alfasi and Rabbenu Asher follow the same order as the Rambam. [Blessed... universe,] who prepares the steps of man.7This blessing is based on Psalms 37:23: "The steps of man are ordered by God" and Proverbs 20:24: "The steps of man are from God," both of which imply that in addition to giving man the ability to walk, God also guides the direction of his steps.[Also,] every day, a person should recite:Blessed8Based on Menachot 43b, the following three blessings are recited daily as an expression of thanks for the renewal of our being. Some authorities require a person to have seen a gentile, woman, or slave before reciting the appropriate blessing. However, the Rambam maintains that the blessing should be recited each morning unconditionally (The Responsa of Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son). are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has not made me a non-Jew.9We thank God for creating us with the opportunity to relate to Him through the Torah and mitzvot which were given only to the Jews.Menachot (loc. cit.) uses a positive statement for the formula of this blessing: "Blessed... who has made me a Jew." Rabbenu Asher quotes this text. The Rambam's version is found in the Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 9:2. Rabbenu Yitzchok Alfasi also follows the Jerusalem Talmud.The Levush, Orach Chayim 46, explains the reason for reciting the blessing in the negative: Eruvin 13a states that it would have been better for man not to have been created than to have been created (i.e., man's soul was in a higher state before its descent into the world than it is while in this world). Therefore, we do not express thanks for being created. Nevertheless, having been created, we thank God for not creating us as gentiles since gentiles have a far lesser number of commandments to fulfill.The Bayit Chadash explains that the negative formula was chosen for the following reason. Our Sages required that we recite three blessings each morning. Torah law states that whenever a single blessing covers two different circumstances, the second blessing may not be recited. Therefore, since a statement thanking God "for making me a Jew" would make the blessing for "not making me a servant" superfluous, it is preferable to recite this blessing using the negative formula.Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has not made me a woman.10A woman is not obligated to fulfill all the positive mitzvot whose performance is limited to a specific time. As a result, a man has many more mitzvot to fulfill and recites this blessing thanking God for that privilege.The Tur (Orach Chayim 46) mentions that a woman should recite a blessing thanking God "for making me according to His will."Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has not made me a servant.11i.e., a Canaanite servant who is not a full member of the Jewish people (see Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 13:11). Like women, a Canaanite servant is exempt from all the positive mitzvot whose performance is limited to a specific time.The published text of the Mishneh Torah and Menachot (loc. cit.) list these blessings in this order. However, the authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah, Rav Yitzchok Alfasi, and most siddurim today reverse the sequence of the last two blessings. This order reflects an ascending hierarchy, with women who are endowed with the holiness of the Jewish people, placed after servants.
These eighteen blessings1Only seventeen blessings are recited in the morning. The eighteenth blessing is hamapil, the blessing recited before retiring at night. Nevertheless, as explained in the commentary to Halachah 3, the Rambam views it as connected to the morning blessings.The eighteen blessings correspond to the eighteen blessings of the Shemoneh Esreh, and also to the number of times God's name is mentioned in Psalms 29, in the song sung by the Jewish People after the splitting of the Red Sea (Exodus 15:1-19), and in the three sections of Kri'at Shema. (See also our commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 4.) do not have a particular order.2as might be inferred from the previous halachot. (The practice of reciting the blessings in a set order is discussed in Halachah 9.) Rather, one recites each of them in response to the condition for which the blessing was instituted, at the appropriate time.3The Rambam's statements in this and the following two halachot are all based on the idea that these blessings are ברכות הודאה - "blessings of thanks." Therefore, a person who does not receive the benefit associated with a particular blessing does not recite the blessing thanking God for that particular condition.Rav Natrunai Gaon and Rav Amram Gaon differ with the Rambam. They consider these blessings to be ברכות שבח - "blessings of praise" for the goodness which God has granted the world as a whole and not thanks for benefit which one has derived as an individual. This opinion is accepted by the Ramah (Orach Chayim 46) and other Ashkenazic halachic authorities. The Shulchan Aruch and the Sephardic authorities accept the Rambam's view with certain reservations.What is implied?4As the Rambam explained, each blessing is recited in response to a particular action generally carried out each morning. Therefore, should these actions be performed in a different order, the sequence of the blessings is changed correspondingly. One who fastens his belt while still in his bed recites [the blessing] "who girds Israel with strength."5Although in Halachah 6, the Rambam stated that this blessing should be recited after one has gotten off his bed, if one fastens his belt while still in bed, he recites the appropriate blessing at that time. One who hears the voice of the rooster recites [the blessing] "who gives understanding to the rooster."Any6This halachah is restated here as a prelude to the law that follows, i.e., that one not obligated in a blessing should not recite it. According to the Rambam, one who did not hear a rooster in the morning does not recite the blessing of הנותן לשכוי בינה. blessing in which one is not obligated7because one has not personally derived the benefit associated with the mitzvah should not be recited.8As mentioned above, this is one of the differences between the Rambam's conception of the morning blessings and that of the other Geonim, who maintain that the blessings should be recited regardless. In consideration of the Rambam's position, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 46:8) suggests reciting the blessings without mentioning God's name. The Ramah maintains that one should follow the other opinion.Even among those who accept the Rambam's conception of these blessings, some authorities would disagree regarding this particular blessing. With this blessing, we are not thanking God for hearing the rooster's crow itself, but for the benefit which we receive from the daylight which the rooster discerns. (See Tosafot and Rabbenu Asher, Berachot 60b.)
What is implied?1This halachah exemplifies the final principle mentioned in the previous halachah, that a person should not recite a blessing if he does not derive the benefit associated with it. One who sleeps in his outer garment2in contrast to pajamas or underwear should not recite the blessing "who clothes the naked" upon rising.3Since, though he is clothed, he performed the activity associated with the blessing on the previous day.One who walks barefoot does not recite the blessing, "for You have provided me with all my needs."On4the blessing associated with wearing shoes.On Yom Kippur and the ninth of Av, when one does not wash, - Washing is one of the five afflictions forbidden on these two days. See Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor 1:5 and 3:1-6 and Hilchot Ta'aniot 5:10. Yom Kippur and the ninth of Av, when one does not wash, one does not recite the blessing al netilat yadayim,5In Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor 3:2, the Rambam qualifies the prohibition against washing by stating: "One [who is] soiled from excrement or dirt may wash the dirty area in the normal fashion without worry." He also allows a woman to wash her hands in order to feed her child.The source for the Rambam's statements, Yoma 77b, explains that the reason for this leniency is the presence of shivta on her hands. Rashi interprets this as רוח רעה, the spirit of impurity which rests on our hands before the morning washing.Tosafot (Yoma, ibid.) rules that one does wash his hands upon rising in the morning on Yom Kippur since רוח רעה is considered like any filth and may be removed in its normal fashion. As apparent from the previous halachot, the Rambam does not consider רוח רעה as a significant factor and forbids such washing. (See Lechem Mishneh, Hilchot Sh'vitat Asor.)The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 613:2) accepts Tosafot's opinion and states:One washes his hands in the morning [on Yom Kippur] and recites על נטילת ידים. One should be careful to wash only the ends of the joints of his fingers.The Ramah adds: "And he should not intend to enjoy the washing, and do so [only] to remove the רוח רעה from his hands." nor the blessing "who removes the bonds of sleep...."One6which is associated with washing one's face. Since washing in this manner is prohibited on these days, one does not recite this blessing.This ruling is also questioned by other halachic authorities. The Ra'avad states that since it is permissible to clean one's face if it is dirty, one may clean the dirt that collects in one's eyes overnight and recite the blessing associated with this washing.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 613:4 rules that one who is particularly fastidious may wash his face with water on the morning of Yom Kippur. The Ramah adds that the custom is to be very strict in this regard and not even to wash the eyes. The Mishnah Berurah (basing himself on the Bayit Chadash) permits one to moisten his fingertips and clean the dirt from his eyes. All of these laws regarding Yom Kippur also apply to the ninth of Av.One who does not relieve himself - in the morning. who does not relieve himself does not recite the blessing, "who created man in wisdom...."7as part of the morning blessings. The same applies regarding the remainder of the blessings.8Though Ashkenazic authorities do not accept the Rambam's ruling as explained above, we do find a law which parallels the Rambam's stance here. Even according to the Ashkenazic authorities, one should not recite the blessing "who has provided me with all my needs" on Yom Kippur or Tish'ah B'Av, since it is forbidden for everyone to wear shoes on these days.
It is the custom of the people in the majority of our cities to recite these blessings one after another in the synagogue, whether or not they are obligated in them.1This practice has its source in the opinions of the other Geonim mentioned above. The Tur (Orach Chayim 46) explains the custom:Since one's hand are not clean [upon rising], the [rabbis] instituted the practice of reciting the [blessings] in order in the synagogue. [Another reason for the institution of this practice is that] many of the common people do not know how to recite the [blessings] and when they are recited in the synagogue, they can answer "Amen" afterwards, and thus, fulfill their obligation.This is a mistake and it is not proper to follow this practice. One should not recite a blessing unless he is obligated to. - The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam sees two difficulties in this practice:a) The blessings are not recited at their proper time, i.e., immediately after the action to which they are a response;b) In the synagogue, all the blessings are recited and it is improper to recite a blessing that one is not obligated to recite.In answer to the first objection, Rabbenu Asher and Rabbenu Yonah explain that there is no problem with reciting these blessings after the actions to which they relate have been completed. The only blessings that must be recited in direct conjunction with the deed with which they are associated are those recited before fulfilling commandments. However, blessings of thanks or praise may be uttered later. This opinion is accepted by all Ashkenazic authorities.Today, many people recite these blessings at home after washing and dressing. In certain communities, they are recited communally in the synagogue. In all cases, however, each individual who is able to read the blessings from a siddur or knows them by heart should recite the blessings himself every morning.This is a mistake and it is not proper to follow this practice. One should not recite a blessing unless he is obligated to.
One who rises to study Torah, whether the Written or Oral Law,1There is debate in the Talmud about this matter. Some Sages did not require the recitation of a blessing for the study of certain portions of the Oral Law (See Berachot 11b). Nevertheless, the decision quoted by the Rambam is accepted by all halachic authorities. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 47:2 explains the reason for this decision, "They [all portions of the Oral Law] are all Torah and were given to Moses at Mount Sinai." before he recites the Shema,2Berachot 11b states:Once one has recited the Shema, he need not recite a blessing [for Torah study] since he has fulfilled his obligation with Ahavah Rabbah (the second blessing before the Shema).This blessing praises God for teaching our ancestors "the laws that bring eternal life" and includes our prayers that He "grant our hearts understanding... to learn and to teach... all the teachings of Your Torah." Therefore, Ahavah Rabbah is considered as comparableáto the blessings recited before Torah study (Rashi, Berachot, ibid.).Rabbenu Asher quotes an opinion in the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 5:1) which states that the blessing of Ahavah Rabbah can replace the blessings before the study of the Torah only when one studies immediately after reciting the Shema and Shemoneh Esreh. The Ra'avad and the Rashba, however, maintain that the recitation of the Shema is also considered as Torah study. Therefore, if one recites the Shema after Ahavah Rabbah, one is considered to have fulfilled his obligation.The Rambam appears to follow the latter opinion, however, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 47:8) accepts Rabbenu Asher's view.should wash his hands beforehand, - to fulfill the obligation of נטילת ידים upon rising in the morning. should wash his hands beforehand, recite [the following] three blessings, and then study.3Both here and in Halachah 11, the Rambam states that one must study immediately after reciting these blessings. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 47) explains the motivating principle: All blessings recited before the performance of a commandment must be followed immediately by the fulfillment of the commandment.This position is, however, not universally accepted. Tosafot (Berachot 11b), Rabbenu Yonah, and the Mordechai disagree and do not require the repetition of the blessings even if an interruption was made between their recitation and Torah study. The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.,:9) warns against making such an interruption.[The comparison of the blessings before Torah study to the blessings of the mitzvot is not universally accepted. In addition to the opinion of the Ramban mentioned in the following halachah, the Levush (Orach Chayim 47) compares the blessings before Torah study to the blessings recited before partaking of food. Just as one thanks God for the satisfaction granted from food and other physical things, one blesses Him for the satisfaction derived from Torah study. See also Shulchan Aruch HaRav 47:1, Likkutei Sichot Vol. 14.][These blessings] are:[Blessed... universe,] who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the words of Torah.4There are two different versions of this blessing:a) one which has its source in the published text of the Talmud, Berachot 11b, and concludes: לעסוק בדברי תורה - "to occupy [ourselves] in the words of Torah."b) the version quoted by the Rambam: על דברי תורה - "concerning the words of Torah." This version is also found in the siddur of Rav Amram Gaon and the Halachot of Rav Yitzchok Alfasi.The siddurim of the Sephardim, Yemenites and Nusach Ari follow the Rambam's text, whereas Nusach Ashkenaz reads לעסוק בדברי תורה.[In both versions, this blessing contains thirteen words corresponding to the thirteen principles of Biblical exegesis that apply to the Torah (יºג מדות שהתורה נדרשת בהן, Shulchan Tahor).]And5The presence here of the Hebrew letter vav (ו) which is generally translated as "and" is the subject of much discussion among the Rabbis.Tosafot (Berachot 46a) explains that, according to Rabbenu Tam, any blessing that follows another blessing of only a single line must itself begin "Blessed are You..." and cannot be included in the phrase "Blessed are You..." in the first blessing. Therefore, since this paragraph does not begin "Blessed are You...," it appears to be a continuation of the first blessing and not a blessing of its own. The vav - "and" - indicates the connection between the two paragraphs.The Rambam, however, clearly states that the second paragraph is considered as a blessing in its own right and not a continuation of the first blessing. The vav would, therefore, appear to be superfluous. Though most printed texts of the Mishneh Torah include a vav, the authoritative Oxford manuscript of the Mishneh Torah, the Yemenite manuscripts, and the Ramah's text of the Mishneh Torah all lack a vav. (Note Shulchan Aruch HaRav 47:5, which explains that even according to the opinion that the second paragraph is a separate blessing, adding the vav is in place.)The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 47:6 rules that the vav should be recited. The Ramah adds that although the custom is not to say it, it should be said. Most siddurim of Nusach Ashkenaz and Sefard include the vav. please, God, our Lord, make pleasant the words of Your Torah6We ask God to let us appreciate the sweetness of His Torah so that we will study it with love (Rashi, Berachot 11b). in our mouths and in the mouths of Your people, the entire House of Israel. May we, our offspring,7The Bayit Chadash adds "and our offsprings' offspring" as a reference to the statement (Bava Metzia 85a) that the Torah will never depart from a family which has three generations of Torah scholars. However, this version is not included in many siddurim. and the offspring of Your people, be knowers of Your name and among those who occupy themselves with Your Torah. Blessed are You, God, who teaches Torah to His people, Israel.8This version is found in the published texts of the Mishneh Torah and the published texts of Berachot 11b, the source for this blessing. However, in his responsa, the Rambam suggests a different conclusion for this blessing: "Blessed are You, God, the Giver of the Torah." He explains the reasons why he favors the latter version:This [wording] alludes to our recognition that God gave us the Torah so that we will learn to do everything it states. [The blessing is a request] that He open our hearts to the study of Torah, for this was the reason it was given to us as a heritage.However, to conclude [the blessing with] "who teaches Torah..." is incorrect, for God... does not teach us the Torah. Though in His love for us, He separated us from the gentiles and gave us the Torah of truth, the actual performance of the mitzvah is left to us and doing His will is in our hands.Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has chosen us from among all the nations and given us His Torah.9The designation of Israel as God's chosen people is associated with His giving them the Torah on Mount Sinai (Tur, Orach Chayim 47). Blessed are You, God, who gives the Torah.10Berachot (loc. cit.) refers to this as "the most exalted of these blessings" because it contains thanks to God and praise of Israel and the Torah (Rashi).Rabbenu Yonah points out that although this blessing follows directly after another blessing, it departs from the normal pattern of such blessings and begins "Blessed are You...." He explains that this is because this blessing is also often recited in isolation, before the reading of the Torah in the synagogue.The recitation of the blessings of the Torah is very important. Bava Metzia 85a states that Eretz Yisrael was destroyed because the Jews forsook the Torah. Our Sages clarified that statement, explaining that it means that the people would study Torah without reciting the blessings before it. A person who studies Torah without reciting the blessings fails to realize its holiness and sanctity, therefore, it is considered as if he ""forsook the Torah.''
One is obligated to recite these three blessings1The nature of this obligation is debated among the commentaries. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 47) and others understand the Rambam as considering these blessings similar to any other blessing recited before the performance of a mitzvah and hence, of Rabbinic origin.Nevertheless, Berachot 21a and Yoma 37a state that the obligation to recite a blessing on Torah study stems from the Torah itself. In keeping with this view, the Ramban (Hosafot to Sefer HaMitzvot, positive commandment 15) reckons the recitation of the blessings of the Torah as a separate mitzvah. every day.2Perhaps with the words "every day," the Rambam is implying that these blessings should be recited even if one does not sleep at night. See Magen Avraham 47:11.The blessings are recited only once a day. In contrast to the blessings recited over other mitzvot, even if one interrupts his study and occupies himself with other matters, one need not recite a second blessing. The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 4:7 gives two reasons for this difference:1) The blessings before the Torah resemble the other morning blessings. A person enjoys the benefits associated with the morning blessings intermittently throughout the day, yet he only recites the blessings once in the morning. Similarly, though one may study at several different occasions in a single day, the blessings are recited only once daily.2) The obligation to study Torah is incumbent upon one throughout the entire day and, at all times, one's attention should be on one's studies. Afterwards, one should read a few words of Torah.3If these blessings are comparable to other blessings recited before the performance of mitzvot, the mitzvah (studying Torah) must also be fulfilled immediately after the recitation of the blessing (Kessef Mishneh). [To fulfill this obligation,] the people adopted the custom of reading the Priestly Blessing.4The Priestly Blessing is found in Numbers 6:22-27. Tosafot (Berachot 11b) also mentions the custom of reciting the Priestly Blessing each morning and Rav Amram Gaon includes the Priestly Blessing in his siddur.The Avudraham mentions that the recitation of these verses arouses Divine blessing for the Jewish people. The Even Yarchi notes that the verses of the Priestly Blessing contain 60 letters, corresponding to the 60 tractates in the Talmud. In certain places, they recite [the passage, (Numbers 28: 1-9)]: "Command the children of Israel...,"5These verses describe the morning sacrifice offered daily in the Holy Temple. The Machzor Vitri (an early siddur of French origin) does not include the Priestly Blessing and mentions these verses instead. and there are places where they read both of them.6In the Order of the Prayers for the Entire Year found at the conclusion of Sefer Ahavah, the Rambam includes both these passages, with the verses describing the sacrifices preceding the Priestly Blessings.The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 47:9) both understand the Priestly Blessing to be a fulfillment of the requirement to study Torah after the blessings. The verses of the Daily Sacrifice are recited later, with the intention that our recitation of these verses will compensate for our inability to actually offer these sacrifices (Ta'anit 27b, Orach Chayim 48).Also, [it is proper] to read chapters or laws from the Mishnah and the Beraitot.7so that we will have studied passages from the written law, the Mishnah, and the Talmud and thus, emphasize how our obligation to study Torah applies to all three. Note Kiddushin 30a and Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:11, which advises one to divide his Torah study, a third in the Written Law, a third in Mishnah and a third in Talmud.In his Order of Prayers, the Rambam lists the following passages from the oral law after the the Priestly Blessings:These are the precepts for which no fixed limit is prescribed: Pe'ah (the corners of the field left unharvested for the needy, Leviticus 23:22 , Bikkurim (the first fruits, Exodus 23:19 , HaRei'on (the pilgrimage offerings, Deuteronomy 16:16-17), acts of kindness and the study of Torah. [A Mishnah, Pe'ah 1:1.]These are the precepts, the fruits of which a person enjoys in this world, while the principle remains [for him] in the world to come: Honoring one's mother and father, acts of kindness, concentration during prayer, visiting the sick, waking early to go to the study hall, hospitality to guests, bringing peace between man and his fellow man, and the study of Torah, which is equivalent to them all. [A beraita, Shabbat 127a]Rav Zeira says: "Jewish women imposed a stringent practice upon themselves. Even if they saw a drop of [vaginal] blood the size of a mustard seed, they would count seven clean days after it." [An example of Torah law, Berachot 31a, Nidah 66a, and Megillah 28b]It was taught in the School of Elijah: Whoever studies Torah law every day is assured of life in the world to come [as implied by Chabakuk 3:6]: "Halichot (the paths of) the world are his." Do not read halichot, but halachot (Torah laws) [Megillah 28b].Rabbi Eliezer said in the name of Rabbi Chanina: Torah scholars increase peace in the world as [implied by Isaiah 54:13]: "And all your children will be students of God and great will be the peace of your children." [Berachot 64a.]
The Sages praised1Rav Kapach notes that at the beginning of this chapter, the Rambam attributes the order of the prayers to the Anshei K'nesset HaGedolah. Therefore, we can assume that they also instituted the practice of reciting verses of praise before the blessings of the Shema. (Note the statement of Rabbi Simlai, Berachot 32a, which suggests praising God before reciting the Shemoneh Esreh.) Though from the passage from Shabbat quoted below one might infer that the recitation of these verses was instituted later, perhaps this refers to the designation of the specific verses to be recited, while the practice of reciting verses itself had already existed. those who recite songs from the Book of Psalms every day; from "A song of praise by David... (Tehillah l'David)" (Psalms2Berachot 4b states that anyone who recites Psalms 145 three times each day is guaranteed a place in the World to Come. 145) until the end of the Book [of Psalms].3Shabbat 118b relates:Rabbi Yossi said: "May my portion be with those who complete [the recitation of] Hallel every day."That cannot be. Behold, the master taught that one who recites Hallel every day is considered as a blasphemer and abuser.In regard to what did [Rabbi Yossi] make his statement? In regard to פסוקי דזמרא - the verses of song.The Rambam understands פסוקי דזמרא as referring to the last six chapters of Psalms (Kessef Mishneh). This definition is also accepted by Rav Yitzchok Alfasi and Rabbenu Asher. It has become customary to read verses before and after them.4In his Order of Prayers for the Entire Year, the Rambam mentions a series of verses from Psalms and from I Chronicles 29:10-14 which are recited before and after these six Psalms. See Soferim 17:11. These verses are customarily recited today in both Ashkenazic and Sephardic communities.They instituted a blessing before the [recitation of the] songs, Baruch She'amar..., - Tradition states that the Anshei K'nesset HaGedolah received this blessing and the blessing,Yishtabach, from Heaven. Therefore, our custom is to recite these blessings standing (Or Zerua).The Pri Chadash takes issue with this view and maintains that these blessings were instituted by the Geonim after the conclusion of the Talmud. Though the Or Zerua's opinion is based only on "tradition," the fact that the Jerusalem Talmud refers to these blessings, as mentioned below, indicates that they were recited during the Talmudic era.They instituted a blessing before the [recitation of the] songs, Baruch She'amar..., and a blessing after [concluding] them, Yishtabach.5The Hagahot Maimoniot explain that the blessings, Baruch She'amar and Yishtabach are considered a single unit. Therefore, Yishtabach is considered a blessing which follows directly after another blessing - despite the verses recited between the two blessings. Accordingly, it does not begin "Blessed are You, God...."Though the verses of פסוקי דזמרא are not considered an interruption between the blessings, idle conversation certainly would be. Thus, the Jerusalem Talmud rules that anyone who talks between Baruch She'amar and Yishtabach has transgressed and is not fit to be part of the Jewish army (which must be composed only of righteous men). Afterwards, one recites the blessings for Kri'at Shema and recites the Shema.6See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:5-8.
There are places where they are accustomed to recite the Song of the Sea (Exodus 14:30-15:26) each day1The Zohar (II:54b) states that anyone who recites this song at present will merit to recite it in the Messianic age.See also the Tosefta, Berachot (2:1) and the Shulchan Aruch HaRav 66:4 which emphasize (albeit in a different context) that the obligation to recall the exodus from Egypt each day should also include the recollection of the miracle of the splitting of the sea. after they recite Yishtabach.2In his siddur, Rav Sa'adia Gaon writes that "though this is a fine custom, it is not obligatory or necessary." Afterwards, they recite the blessings for theShema.3It is improper to make an interruption between Yishtabach and the blessings of the Shema. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 54:3) However, verses of praise and prayer are not considered an interruption. Note the custom of reciting Shir hama'alot at this point in prayer during the Ten Days of Repentance.Today, we recite the Song of the Sea before Yishtabach. Sefer HaBatim suggests that this is because it is also praise of God and thus, is appropriate within the context of פסוקי דזמרא.There are places where they recite the song, Ha'azinu (Deuteronomy4Ha'azinu is also a song of general relevance. The Maggid of Meseritch advised reciting it daily as a means of evoking Divine blessing.Among Sephardic Jews, there is a custom to recite Ha'azinu in place of the Song of the Sea on the Tish'ah b'Av because of the verses of reproof contained in it (Ma'aseh Rokeach). 32:1-43), and there are individuals who recite both of them. Everything is dependent on custom.
A person is obligated to recite 100 blessings [in the period of one] day and night.1Menachot 43b relates:Rabbi Meir used to say: "One is obligated to recite 100 blessings every day as [implied by Deuteronomy 10:12]: 'And now Israel, what is it that God, your Lord, asks of you.'”Rashi explains that the word, מה- "what" can be read as מאה - "100", allowing for the interpretation, "And now Israel, 100 [blessings] is what God, your Lord, asks of you."The Tur (Orach Chayim 46) quotes Rav Natrunai Gaon who attributes the institution of this custom to King David. What are these 100 blessings?The twenty-three blessings that we have counted in this chapter,the2i.e., the eighteen blessings discussed in Halachot 1-9, the three blessings recited before studying Torah (see Halachot 10, 11) and the two blessings associated with פסוקי דזמרא (see Halachah 12). seven blessings before and after Kri'at Shema in the morning and in the evening;When3Two blessings before the Shema and one blessing afterwards in the morning; two blessings before the Shema and two afterwards in the evening. (See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:5.) one wraps himself in tzitzit, he recites: Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to wrap ourselves in tzitzit.4See Hilchot Tzitzit 3:8.When he puts on his Tefilin, he recites: Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to put on Tefilin.5Note Hilchot Tefilin 4:5, where the Rambam states that only one blessing should be recited when putting on tefillin. Other authorities require two blessings to be recited: one, on the Tefilah placed on the arm, and another, on the Tefilah placed on the head. See also the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 25:9 and the Ramah's notes there.[One recites] three Amidot, each of which contains eighteen blessings.6The Rambam mentions the addition of the nineteenth blessing in the Shemoneh Esreh in the next halachah. Here he is discussing the 100 blessings in their original historical context.Behold, this is 86 blessings.7i.e., the 23 of the morning blessings, the 7 associated with the Shema, 1 on tefillin, 1 on tzitzit, and 54 (18x3) from the three Shemoneh Esreh prayers.When one eats two meals, [one] during the day and [one] at night,8In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Pe'ah 8:7, the Rambam explains that two meals, one during the day and one at night, is the normal fare for a person each day. one recites 14 blessings, seven for each meal:one when he washes his hands before eating,and,9See Hilchot Berachot 6:2. on the food itself, one before10HaMotzi. See Hilchot Berachot 3:2. and three afterwards,on11These are the three blessings which constitute the Torah's requirement for the grace after meals:1) ברכת הזן,2) ברכת הארץ, and3) בונה ירושליםSee Hilchot Berachot 2:1. The Rambam mentions the fourth blessing included in the grace in the next halachah. the wine, one before12See Hilchot Berachot 7:14-15 which mentions the custom of reciting the grace after meals over a cup of wine. Before drinking from that wine, one recites the blessing: borey pri hagefen. and one afterwards,[a13i.e., מעין שלש - the blessing which is reciting after drinking wine. See Hilchot Berachot 8:15. total] of seven.14[a total] of seven. Thus, there are 100 blessings all told. Thus, there are 100 blessings all told.
At present, since the [Sages] established the blessing [cursing] the heretics in prayer and added hatov v'hameitiv in the grace after meals,1This refers to the fourth blessing of the grace after meals. As explained in Hilchot Berachot 2:1, this blessing was instituted later than the first three blessings, its recitation having been ordained by the Sages of the Mishnah. there are five more blessings.2recited every day.On Sabbaths and holidays,3Yom Kippur presents a particular problem for although there are five prayer services, one is not permitted to eat and cannot recite blessings over food. when the Amidah contains [only] seven blessings,4See Chapter 2, Halachah 5. and similarly, on other days, if one is not obligated in all of these blessings5This follows the Rambam's view (see Halachot 7-9) that a person should not recite the morning blessings unless he performs the actions with which they are associated. - e.g., one did not sleep at night,6If a person does not sleep at night, he misses at least two blessings: hamapil (Halachah 1) and E-lohai neshamah (Halachah 3). According to some opinions, he also should not recite hama'avir sheinah (Halachah 4). nor loosen his belt,7in which case, he would not be obligated to recite the blessing, ozer Yisrael b'gevurah - "who girds Israel with strength" - upon fastening it the following morning. nor go to the bathroom,8in which case, he is exempt from the blessing of asher yatzar discussed in Halachah 5. or the like9i.e., any one of the morning blessings, with the exception of shelo asani goy, shelo asani aved, shelo asani isha. - he must complete the 100 blessings by [reciting blessings over] fruits.10as explained in Halachah 16.Menachot 43b, the source for the requirement to recite 100 blessings, also recognized the difficulties inherent in fulfilling that requirement on the Sabbaths and holidays, and advises completing the sum of 100 blessings by reciting blessings before smelling spices or before eating sweets.The Hagahot Maimoniot quotes an opinion that allows the blessings recited on the reading of the Torah and haftorah to be included in the calculation of the 100 blessings. This yields another 27 blessings. For this reason, Hagahot Maimoniot suggests that the blessings on the Torah should be recited loudly so that those present are able to answer "Amen." The Magen Avraham (46:8) suggests that one should rely on this opinion only when he cannot recite sufficient blessings on fruits.
What is implied?[When]1I.e., how does one supplement the number of blessings recited on the Sabbath and festivals. one eats a small amount of vegetables, he recites a blessing before2borey pri ha'adamah (Hilchot Berachot 8:1). and after it.3borey nefashot (ibid.). [When] he eats a small amount of a particular fruit, he recites a blessing before4borey pri ha'etz (ibid.) and after it.5borey nefashot or al hapeirot (ibid.). He should count all the blessings [he recites] until he completes [the requirement of] 100 each day.6The Rambam's choice of words implies that each day, a person should carefully keep track of the number of blessings he recites until he fulfills the requirement.Note the comments of the Lechem Mishneh who explains that although one should try to recite 100 blessings each day, one should be careful not to recite unnecessary blessings.
The order of prayer is as follows:In the morning, a person should rise early1so that he will be able to complete the recitation of the Shema and the blessing which follows it before sunrise, Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:11). and recite the blessings [mentioned above].2i.e., the morning blessings mentioned in Halachot 3-6, 10-11. [Then,] he recites the songs [of praise] and the blessings before and after them.3as explained in Halachah 12. [Afterwards,] he recites the Shema,4in fulfillment of his obligation to recite the Shema each day (Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:1). [together with] the blessings before and after it.5the two blessings before the Shema and the one blessing afterwards (See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:5). He should omit the Kedushah6The passage which quotes the praises of the angels who recite "Holy, Holy, Holy is the God of Hosts, the whole world is full of His glory" (Isaiah 6:3 and "Blessed is the honor of God from His place" (Ezekiel 3:12). This passage is recited three times during the morning service, once in the first blessing before Kri'at Shema, once in the repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh, and once at the conclusion of the service. (See Chapter 9, Halachot 4-5.) from the first blessing before [the Shema]7Precisely which portion of the blessing to omit is a matter of debate among the Rabbis. See Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 59. because an individual8praying without a quorum (minyan) does not recite Kedushah.9As stated in Chapter 8, Halachot 4-6, any "holy matter" should not be recited in the absence of a minyan of ten people. The Kedushah recited when repeating the Shemoneh Esreh is considered as a "holy matter" of this nature. (See Berachot 21b, Megillah 23b. See also Chapter 8, Halachah 4, and Chapter 9, Halachah 5 for a discussion of the text of Kedushah.)In this halachah, the Rambam equates all three recitations of the Kedushah in the morning service. The Tur (Orach Chayim 59) cites Rav Natrunai Gaon as also sharing this opinion. There is no specific Talmudic or Midrashic source to this effect. However, the Zohar (Vol. II, 129b, 132b) also considers all three recitations of Kedushah to be bound by the same rulings.Rabbenu Yonah quotes the opinion of the Ashkenazic authorities who distinguish between these recitations of Kedushah. They maintain that since, in the repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh, we liken ourselves to the angels and recite the same praises, a minyan is necessary. However, the other Kedushot are simply narrative descriptions of the praises uttered by the angels and therefore, do not require a minyan.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 59:3) quotes the Rambam's position. The Ramah concludes that even an individual should recite the blessing without deleting the Kedushah.The Kessef Mishneh writes that Rabbi Avraham, the Rambam's son, states that his father later changed his position regarding this halachah and wrote in a responsum that one should recite Kedushah even without a quorum of ten. This is also recorded by Orchot Chayim, Rashba, and Rabbenu Manoach. However, there are other responsa which indicate that the Rambam did not change his mind.When he concludes [the blessing,] ga'al Yisrael,10The blessing beginning Emet v'yatziv, which follows the recitation of the Shema. he should stand immediately to connect [the blessing of] redemption to prayer.11Berachot 42a relates: "prayer should follow immediately after [the blessing of] redemption." Berachot 9b states: One who connects [the blessing of] redemption to prayer will not be harmed the whole day...[Rav Bruna] was a great man who experienced intense joy in his [performance of] mitzvot. One day, he connected [the blessing of] redemption to prayer and the smile did not leave his face all day. The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 1:1) equates one who does not fulfill this practice to a loved one who knocks on the door of the king and then departs. When the king answers the door and sees no one there, he also turns away. He should pray standing, as we have said.12See Chapter 5, Halachah 2.When he concludes, he should sit, fall on his face and recite the supplication prayer.13See Chapter 5, Halachah 13. [Afterwards,] he should lift up his head and recite a few [additional] supplications while sitting amid supplication.14In his Order of Prayers for the Entire Year, the Rambam lists these verses beginning with - "And we do not know what to do for our eyes are directed towards You" (II Chronicles 20:12).In Chapter 4, Halachah 16, and Halachah 18 of this chapter, the Rambam requires one to sit a short while after prayer before taking his leave. Perhaps that is the basis for the suggestion to sit during these supplicatory prayers.Afterwards, while sitting, he recites Tehillah l'David (Psalms15Berachot 4b states: "Anyone who recites Tehillah l'David three times daily is guaranteed a place in the World to Come." Since this Psalm is not included in the evening service, it is recited twice in the morning service.adds supplications according to his ability - In Chapter 9:5, the Rambam rules that one should recite the passage, U'va l'Tzion go'el. However, that passage includes the Kedushah and hence, according to the opinion mentioned above, should only be recited in communal prayer. Therefore, an individual recites only the supplications found at the end of that prayer.In his Order of Prayers, the Rambam also mentions the custom of reciting the "song of the day" and of eyn k'e-loheinu.and departs to his own affairs. - The Tur and Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 155:1) quote Berachot 64a which states that after prayer, one should proceed to Torah study. It is unclear why the Rambam does not mention this point. 145), adds supplications according to his ability and departs to his own affairs.
One begins the Minchah service by reciting Tehillah l'David (Psalm 1451This is the third time this psalm is recited in the daily prayers in keeping with the directive of Berachot 4b mentioned in the previous halachah.Reciting Tehillah l'David here also fulfills the obligation (Berachot 31a, Chapter 4, Halachah 18) to pray "amid words of Torah." See also Chapter 9, Halachah 8.) while sitting.2The siddur of Rav Sa'adia Gaon states that תהילה לדוד should be recited sitting until one is calm and properly prepared to pray. Only then should one stand and recite Shemoneh Esreh. See Chapter 4, Halachah 16. Afterwards, one stands and recites the Minchah prayer.3See Chapter 5, Halachah 2. When he finishes, he falls on his face and recites the supplication prayer,4See Chapter 5, Halachah 13. raises his head and utters [more] supplication according to his ability and departs to his own matters.5as explained in the previous halachah.In the evening service, he recites the Shema together with the blessings before and after it,1See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:5-6. connects [the blessing of] redemption to prayer2See the previous halachah. Note also the concluding statement of this halachah. and prays standing.3See Chapter 5, Halachah 2. When he finishes, he sits a short while4See Chapter 4, Halachah 16. and departs.5Here, the Rambam does not add "to his own matters" as in regard to the morning and afternoon service. Before the evening service, a person should have concluded his work and business affairs.One who offers prayers of supplication after the evening service is praiseworthy.6In Chapter 5, Halachah 15, the Rambam writes that the common custom is not to fall on one's face and recite supplications in the evening service. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 131) explains that both falling on one's face and night are associated with God's attribute of judgement and it would be inappropriate to combine the two.It is unclear whether the Rambam is here referring to the practice of falling on one's face (nefilat apayim) or merely the recitation of supplicatory prayers (tachanun). Rav Amram Gaon records that in Babylonia, it was the custom to recite such prayers every night except Friday.Even though one recites the blessing hashkiveinu7the second blessing recited after the Shema at night afterga'al Yisrael, it is not considered as an interruption between [the blessing of] redemption and prayer, for they are both considered as one long blessing.8Hashkiveinu is considered as a continuation of the theme of redemption (Tosafot, Berachot 4b) because it contains the request for God to save us from many different types of difficulties just as He redeemed us from Egypt (Maharit Algazi). The connection is further emphasized by the fact that in the exodus from Egypt, God protected the Jews on a night where permission was granted for the forces of destruction to act. Similarly, in hashkiveinu, we ask Him to protect us from "all evil matters and fears of night" (Birkai Yosef).

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
Communal prayer is always heard. Even when there are transgressors among [the congregation], the Holy One, blessed be He, does not reject the prayers of the many.1Berachot 8a cites Psalms 55:19: "He delivered my soul in peace from the battle against me, for there were many who strove with me," as the prooftext for this concept. Therefore, a person should include himself in the community2This phrase is quoted - somewhat out of context - from Berachot 29b-30a which explains why we recite our prayers in the plural. The Rambam borrows the concept and uses it to summarize the above teachings and derive the following directive. and should not pray alone whenever he is able to pray with the community.3i.e., though praying without a minyan is permissible, one should do so only when he has no other alternative.One should always spend the early morning and evening [hours] in the synagogue - i.e., one should be found in the synagogue at the times of the three Daily Prayers; Shacharit in the morning, Minchah in the late afternoon and Maariv at night.The Rambam uses the word ישכים - to rise early. Perhaps he is alluding to Berachot 47b which states:One should always rise early and go to the synagogue in order to merit being counted among the first ten present. Even if 100 people come after him, he receives the reward of all of them.Alternatively, perhaps he is referring to his statement, Hilchot Kri'at Shema 1:11, that one should recite the Shema before sunrise.One should always spend the early morning and evening [hours] in the synagogue, for prayer will not be heard4i.e., accepted by God at all times5The Lechem Mishneh explains: Prayer which is recited with the proper intentions outside the synagogue may be accepted, but there is no guarantee that prayer will be accepted at all times... except [when recited] in the synagogue.6Berachot 6a derives this concept from I Kings 8:28: "...to listen to the song and the prayer." "In the place of song (i.e., the synagogue where the people sing God's praises - Rashi), prayer should be [recited]."The Kessef Mishneh adds that based on this concept, one should pray in the synagogue even when he is praying alone. The Kessef Mishneh also rules that if one is unable to go to the synagogue he should, at least, attempt to pray at the same time as the community. He quotes both these concepts in his Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 90:9.Though this and the following two halachot mention the importance of a synagogue, the synagogue is discussed here only within the context of the importance of communal prayer. In Chapter 11, the Rambam focuses on the sanctity of the synagogue as a subject in its own right.Anyone who has a synagogue in his city and does not pray [together] with the congregation in it is called a bad neighbor.7Berachot 8a derives this concept based on Jeremiah 12:14: "So says God regarding all my evil neighbors that touch the inheritance (i.e., the synagogues and houses of study) that I have bequeathed to My people Israel."When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 90:11) also quotes the continuation of the above Talmudic passage:Furthermore, they cause dispersion to themselves and their children as [the verse in Jeremiah continues]: "Behold, I will uproot them from their land."
It is a mitzvah to run to the synagogue as [Hoshea 6:3] states: "Let us know. Let us run to know God."1The Tur (Orach Chayim 90) adds that it is also a mitzvah to run to perform other commandments. A person should not take long steps when he leaves the synagogue. Instead, he should proceed [slowly,] step by step.2Rashi (Berachot 6b) explains that hurrying away from the synagogue, suggests that one views the synagogue and the obligations contained therein to be a burden.When one enters a synagogue, he should go in the distance of two doorways and then pray,3Rashi (Berachot 8a) explains that we are obligated to enter the distance of two doorways widthwise in order not to appear anxious to leave. The Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 90) explains that this refers to a distance of eight handbreadths.The Hagahot Maimoniot interprets the Talmud's statement, "the measure of two doorways" as a matter of time, not distance. One should wait a few moments after entering the synagogue before he starts to pray.The Hagahot Maimoniot also states that according to the interpretation that the "measure of two doorways" refers to actual distance, this requirement only applies when the synagogue is located near the public thoroughfare. If it is not, one may pray near the door. Rabbenu Yonah also mentions that a person whose fixed place for prayer in the synagogue is beside the door does not violate this requirement. It is obvious that he is sitting there not because of his desire to leave quickly, but because it is his seat in the synagogue. [in order] to fulfill [the instructions of Proverbs 8:34] which states: "to guard the posts of My doors."4The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 5:1) points to the plural forms of "posts" and "doors" as indicating the need to enter the distance of two doorways.
A study hall is greater1i.e., it is a more auspicious place to pray. than a synagogue.2Other ramifications of this concept are mentioned in Chapter 11, Halachah 14, and in Hilchot Talmud Torah 4:9. Even though [some of the] great Sages [lived in] cities where many synagogues were located, they would pray only in the place where they studied Torah.3Berachot 30b relates: "Even though there were thirteen synagogues in Tiberias, Rav Ami and Rav Assi would pray only between the pillars in the study hall."Berachot 8a interprets the phrase "the gates of Zion" in Psalms 87:2: "God loves the gates of Zion above all the dwellings of Jacob" as referring to "the gates of those who are בהלכה המצויינים (distinguished by the halachah studied there)" and states that they receive the highest degree of Divine attention.The Talmud continues: Abbaye says: "Originally, I would study in my house and pray in the synagogue. After hearing this, I pray only where I study."The above applies, [however, only] when one can participate in communal prayer there.4The Kessef Mishneh mentions the view of certain rabbinic authorities who maintain that it is preferable for a scholar to pray in a study hall even without a minyan. However, he also mentions the opinion of Rabbenu Asher (See Responsum 4) who writes that if the scholars do not appear in the synagogue the common people will assume that their presence is also unnecessary. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 90:18) quotes the Rambam's position.
What is implied by [the term,] communal prayer? One [person] prays aloud and all [the others] listen.1With this statement, the Rambam touches on a point debated both by the Sages of the Talmud and the later Rabbis. The mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 33b, states:Just as the leader of the congregation is obligated [to pray], each individual is obligated. Rabban Gamliel states: "The leader of the congregation fulfills the obligation on behalf of the community."The Talmud (34b) elaborates on the difference of opinion:They asked Rabban Gamliel: "According to your opinion, why does the community pray?"He replied: "In order to allow the leader of the community to prepare his prayers."Rabban Gamliel asked them: "According to your opinion, why does the leader of the congregation pray aloud?"They replied: "In order to allow those who are not knowledgeable to fulfill their obligation."He told them: "Just as he fulfills the obligation on behalf of those who are not knowledgeable, he fulfills it on behalf of those who are knowledgeable."The Sages of the Talmud continued to debate the issue. The ultimate decision accepted by Rav Yitzchok Alfasi, the Rambam (See Halachah 9), and Rabbenu Asher, is that during the entire year, the Sages' opinion is accepted. However, on Rosh HaShanah, because of the complexity of the blessings (See Halachah 10), Rabban Gamliel's opinion prevails.Both Rabban Gamliel and the Sages agree that the practice of communal prayer involves two elements:a) the silent prayers of many individuals; andb) the chazan's repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh.They differ, however, as to which of these elements is considered of primary importance. According to the Sages, the essential element of communal prayer is that ten or more people recite the Shemoneh Esreh at the same time. According to Rabban Gamliel, the essential element of communal prayer is, as the Rambam states in this halachah, the prayer of the leader of the congregation.[Note Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 24, which explains that their difference of opinion revolves around a more general issue: Which is of higher priority, quantity (the prayers of the many) or quality (the prayers of the leader of the congregation)?]The Rambam's statement here is difficult to place in perspective. Though in Halachah 9, he accepts the Sages' view (See also Chapter 9, Halachot 2-3) in this halachah, his opinion follows that of Rabban Gamliel. In one of his responsa, the Rambam explains that after the Sages instituted the silent Shemoneh Esreh to allow the leader of the congregation to prepare his prayers, even Rabban Gamliel would agree that all the individuals praying in a minyan also fulfill their obligation to pray by reciting their own prayers. Still it is difficult to understand why the Rambam would have the individuals forfeit the higher quality of communal prayer in order to pray individually.In his notes to Rosh HaShanah, ibid., Rav Chayim Soloveichik writes that to take into consideration the Rambam's statements in this halachah, after concluding his individual prayers, each person should stand and listen to the prayer of the leader of the congregation and thus, fulfill the mitzvah of communal prayer. Note Likkutei Sichot, ibid., which compares answering to the chazan's prayer to reciting a voluntary prayer (See Chapter 1, Halachah 9). By doing so, one will have both the advantages of individual and communal prayer. This should not be done with fewer than ten2See Halachot 4 and 5. adult3Males who have reached the age of thirteen years and a day and manifested signs of physical maturity. (See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:19.)The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam derives this halachah from Berachot 47b-48a which allows for the inclusion of a child in the zimmun for the grace after meals. (See Hilchot Berachot 5:7.) We assume that this leniency was granted only in regard to grace, but not in regard to prayer. See also Bereishit Rabbah 91:3.Many Halachic authorities do not accept this conclusion. In his siddur, Rav Sa'adia Gaon rules that a child may be counted as the tenth in a minyan. Similarly, the Ba'al HaMe'or holds that even up to four minors may be counted in a minyan for prayer.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 55:4), rules that a minor may not be included in a minyan for prayer. The Ramah adds that under extraordinary circumstances, a minor may be counted. There are opinions that in such a case, the minor must be at least six years old, understand that prayer is service to God, and hold a chumash (Magen Avraham 55:5, Shulchan Aruch HaRav 55:5). free males.4i.e., excluding a Canaanite slave. However, a Jewish slave (עבד עברי) may be counted as part of a minyan. Berachot 47b relates that once, Rabbi Eliezer entered the synagogue and finding only nine people there, freed his slave to complete the quorum of ten. The leader of the congregation is [counted as] one of them.5Though there is no explicit source to this effect, a number of midrashim (e.g., VaYikra Rabbah 23:4) lead to this conclusion.One of the communal rites listed in Megillah 23b which requires a minyan is ברכת אבלים - the blessing one utters to those in mourning. For the recitation of that blessing, the presence of ten men other than the mourner himself is required. (See Hilchot Eivel 13:1.) Perhaps the Rambam feels that this statement is necessary to clearly distinguish between the different requirements of a minyan for prayer and ברכת אבלים.Even if some of them have already prayed and fulfilled their obligation, they can complete the [quorum of] ten6Though they do not pray together with the others, their presence in the room where the others pray can complete a minyan. provided the majority of the ten have not prayed.7Soferim 10:7 states:Our Sages in the West say [that Kaddish and barchu may be recited] even with seven. They explain their position [based on Judges 5:2]: "In the time of tumult in Israel when the people volunteered themselves, blessed be God." [The number of people correspond] to the number of words [in the verse which describes the blessing of God].There are those who say only six [are required], since ברכו is the sixth word [of the above verse].The Rambam differentiates between the ruling regarding prayer and his statements in Hilchot Berachot 5:8 where he writes that it is necessary that seven people out of ten eat bread in order to constitute a minyan for zimmun, for "a noticeable majority" is required.There are two views quoted in the name of Rabbenu Tam (Tosafot, Megillah 23b); one, requiring a minimum of seven people who have not prayed for a minyan just as seven who have eaten bread are required for a minyan in regard to grace after meals and, another, requiring, only five. However, the Rambam's opinion is universally accepted as halachah.Similarly, we should not recite Kedushah, - See Chapter 7, Halachah 17.In the chazan's repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh, it is customary to recite three verses in the Kedushah:a) "Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts; the entire earth is full of His glory" (Isaiah 6:3 ;b) "Blessed be the glory of God from His place" (Ezekiel 3:12 ;c) "The Lord shall reign forever, your God, O Zion, throughout all generations" (Psalms 146:10 .Only the first two of these verses are recited in the Kedushah of the blessings before the Shema. However, in theKedushah recited at the end of the service, a verse similar to Psalms 146:10 is also included.The commentaries debate the definition of Kedushah and therefore, question which passage the Rambam requires to be omitted when one prays alone. The Rambam's statements in Chapter 9, Halachah 5, appear to define Kedushah as only the first of these three verses.Similarly, we should not recite Kedushah, read the Torah with its blessings8i.e., the reading of the Torah as part of the prayer service. Reading from a Torah scroll for the purposes of study does not require a quorum. before and after it,9See Chapter 12, Halachah 3. or read the haftorah from the Prophets except in [a quorum of] ten.10The Mishnah (Megillah 23b) equates the reading of the haftarah with other "holy matters" that require a minyan.
Similarly, one [person] should not recite the blessings1Even though the published text of the Mishneh Torah uses the singular term, "blessing," as will be explained, the plural is more appropriate. The authoritative Oxford and Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah also use the plural. associated with the Shema while the others listen and answer "Amen" except [in the presence of a quorum of] ten. This is called poreis al Shema.2This law is also based on the mishnah in Megillah 23b. Commenting on that mishnah, the Rambam defines פריסה as "presentation," i.e., the public reading of the blessings before the Shema. If people want to fulfill their obligation to recite the blessings associated with the Shema by answering "Amen" to the chazan's blessings instead of reciting those blessings themselves, a quorum of ten is required. See also Chapter 9, Halachah 1.[Rabbenu Yonah supports this definition of פריסה based on the Targum Yonaton of I Samuel 9:13.]Rashi, the Ra'avad, and others (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 69:1) define פריסה as "dividing in half." They explain the ceremony of poreis al Shema to refer to a situation where ten individuals who have already recited their prayers come together. One individual acts as a chazan and recites Kaddish, Barchu, and the first of the blessings before the Shema.One only recites Kaddish - Kaddish is recited to mark different stages in the prayer service, after public study, and in memory of the departed.Note also the brief remarks the Rambam makes concerning this prayer in his Order of Prayers for the Entire Year.One only recites Kaddish with ten.3Soferim 10:7 also considers Kaddish as a "holy matter" which requires a minyan. The priests do not bless the people4literally, "raise their hands," for the priestly blessing is recited with raised hands. See Leviticus 9:22 and Chapter 14, Halachah 3. except [in the presence of a quorum of] ten. The priests [themselves] may be considered part of the quorum.5See Chapter 15, Halachah 9.[Ten are required] because6These prayers and rituals are considered "holy matters" which require a congregation (as mentioned in the following halachah) and... every [group of] ten Jews is called a congregation as [implied by Numbers 14:27]: "How long [must I suffer] this evil congregation."7This verse records God's complaint about the spies sent to collect information about Eretz Yisrael (Numbers, Chapters 14 and 15). Twelve spies were sent. They8The spies whom God condemned for trying to persuade the Jews that it was impossible to conquer Eretz Yisrael were ten, for Joshua and Calev9though also sent on the mission were not included [among them].10and, in fact, resisted these attempts, calling for the Jews to enter the land as God had commanded.
Any holy matter1e.g., the prayers and rituals mentioned in Halachot 4 and 5. may only [be performed] in a congregation2i.e., a quorum of ten (see the previous halachah). of Jews, as [Leviticus 22:32] states: "And I shall be sanctified among the children of Israel".3Megillah 23b explains as follows: Leviticus 22:32 states, "And I shall be sanctified among the children of Israel." A גזרה שוה (an analogy based on the use of common words) is made between this verse and Numbers 16:21, "Separate yourselves from among this congregation" and a second גזרה שוה between the latter verse and the verse, Numbers 14:27, quoted in the previous halachah. Extending our use of the principle of גזרה שוה, we conclude that just as in regard to the spies, a congregation meant a minimum of ten people, the same applies in regards to all situations in which God is "sanctified."Regarding all these matters, if they were begun with ten [people] and some leave4the place of prayer - even though they are not permitted to5The Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 4:4) states that Isaiah 1:28, "And those that forsake God will be consumed" applies to those that leave in the middle of communal prayer when less than ten men remain. If more than ten are left, although leaving is undesirable, there is no prohibition. - the remainder6of those left in the minyan. A minimum of six people is, nevertheless, required (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 55:2). should conclude [the holy matter].7In one of his responsa, the Rambam writes that if a congregation began the first blessing before Kri'at Shema with ten people and then some left, leaving less than a minyan, the congregation may continue and recite the Kedushah in that blessing (see Chapter 7, Halachah 17). The chazan may also repeat the Shemoneh Esreh out loud including Kedushah, but he should not recite the Kaddish after Shemoneh Esreh, since it is not part of the "holy matter" started while the minyan was present.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 55:2-3) rules that, in such an instance, though the blessings of Kri'at Shema may be recited without deviating from the normal practice, the Shemoneh Esreh with Kedushah should not be recited. If the repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh was begun with ten, it may be completed including its Kedushah.The Ramah (ibid.) adds that, in such a case, one even recites Kaddish after ובא לציון גואל since the Kaddish refers to Shemoneh Esreh.
All [ten members of a congregation] and the leader of the congregation must be in one place.1This principle is the basis for the particular laws which follow.[The following rules apply when] a small courtyard opens up in its entirety into a large courtyard:2This situation is described by the Mishnah, Eruvin 92a. The laws that follow in this and the following halachah are discussed by the Talmud immediately thereafter.In his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam explains that the small courtyard has only three walls. The fourth side opens into the larger courtyard. The large courtyard has three full sides, with the fourth side consisting of two short walls on each side of the opening into the small one. The accompanying diagram is based on a diagram drawn by the Rambam (accompanying his Commentary on the Mishnah) to depict this situation.micha, drawing If there are nine [people] in the large one and one in the small one,3since the majority of the people are in the larger courtyard and the smaller courtyard opens up to the larger one in its entirety they may be considered as a4single group5located in the larger courtyard. [to form a quorum of ten].6The same law would apply if four people were in the smaller courtyard. If there are nine [people] in the small one and one in the large one,7Since the majority is in the smaller courtyard they are not considered as a8single group.9located in the smaller courtyard because the walls of the larger courtyard separate it from the smaller one.If a congregation is in the large one, but the leader of the congregation is in the small one, - he, like the individual(s) mentioned above, is considered part of the group in the larger courtyard. Hence,If a congregation is in the large one, but the leader of the congregation is in the small one, they10the congregation, can fulfill their obligation.11by listening to his prayers and answering "Amen" as stated in Halachah 9. If the congregation is in the small one, but the leader of the congregation is in the large one,12he, like the individual(s) mentioned above, is not considered part of the group in the smaller courtyard. Hence, they do not fulfill their obligation13by listening to his prayers since he is separate from them and not with them in one place.14since he is separate from them and not with them in one place. [The motivating principle15i.e., the reason why individuals in the smaller courtyard can be considered as part of a group located in the larger courtyard, but individuals in the larger courtyard cannot be considered as part of a group located in the smaller courtyard, is] that the walls on each side of the large courtyard separate it from the small one. [However], the smaller one is not separated from the large one, but rather, is considered as its corner.16It follows that if the smaller courtyard has walls on the side that opens to the larger courtyard, the above laws do not apply. By the same token, a person(s) standing in the courtyard of a synagogue or in an adjoining room cannot be considered as part of a minyan.Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 55:14) qualifies this restriction and states that if the person in the outer room can see - and be seen by - the people in the main room, he may be counted together with them. Even if he is merely peering through a window, he is considered as part of that group.The Shulchan Aruch 55:20 also mentions that even when the people in adjoining rooms cannot see each other, those in the outer room may respond to Kaddish and Kedushah. The rabbis differed as to whether a person praying in a separate room next to the room where a minyan is praying may be considered to have participated in communal prayer or not (See Mishnah Berurah 55:58).
Similarly, if there were feces in the larger [courtyard], it is forbidden to pray1as stated in Chapter 4, Halachot 8-9, or recite the Shema2as stated in Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:6-15, in the larger courtyard or [even] in the smaller one.3for it is considered as part of the larger courtyard. Thus, one is considered as praying in a place which contains feces. If there were feces in the smaller one,4The recitation of any holy matter is forbidden in the smaller courtyard. Nevertheless, because the larger courtyard is considered a separate place it is permissible to pray and recite the Shema in the larger one5even if the feces are visible; see Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:10. provided there is not a foul odor6in which case it would be forbidden. See Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:10. since [the larger courtyard] is set apart7by its walls from [the feces].
The leader of the congregation can fulfill the obligation [of prayer] on behalf of the congregation.What is implied? When he1the leader of the congregation, the chazan prays2recites the Shemoneh Esreh (and according to the Rambam - see Halachah 5 - the blessings before the Shema) aloud and they listen3while standing in the posture for prayer and respond "Amen" after each and every blessing, it is considered as if they prayed [themselves].4If one desires to fulfill his obligation with the chazan's prayer, he should answer "Amen," but he should not answer Baruch Hu, uvaruch shemo after the mention of God's name.To whom does this apply? To one who does not know how to pray.5This follows the opinion of the Sages in the difference of opinion between them and Rabban Gamliel (Rosh HaShanah 33b, 34b) as explained in Halachah 2. However, one who does know how to pray, only fulfills his obligation by praying himself.6Since the essence of prayer is the request for Divine Mercy, it is fitting that each person request for himself (Tosafot Yom Tov, Rosh HaShanah).See also the opening halachot of Chapter 9 which deal with the practical application of the concepts mentioned in this halachah.
When does the above apply? Throughout the entire year with the exception of Rosh HaShanah, and Yom Kippur of the Jubilee year.1specifically, in contrast to the yearly Yom Kippur services.Even on Sabbaths and festivals when the prayers differ from those recited every day, a person who knows how to pray is expected to pray alone. However, note one of the Rambam's responsa which states that, on Sabbaths and festivals, rather than begin with silent prayer, the chazan should begin by reciting the Shemoneh Esreh out loud together with Kedushah. Those who do not know how to pray should listen to his prayers with the intention of fulfilling their obligation. Those who know how to pray should recite their prayers, word by word, together with the chazan.On these two2Though we celebrate Rosh HaShanah as two days by Rabbinic decree, the Torah itself requires only one day to be celebrated. days,3All the Rabbis agree that although the halachah follows the Sages throughout the entire year, on these two days, an exception is made and Rabban Gamliel's opinion prevails. the leader of the congregation can fulfill the obligation [of prayer]4In particular, this refers only to the musaf prayer. on behalf of those who know [how to pray] just as he can fulfill the obligation [of prayer] on behalf of those who do not know [how to pray]5This leniency is granted because [the Shemoneh Esreh recited on these days contains] long blessings6See Chapter 2, Halachah 6, and in greater detail, Hilchot Shofar 3:8-9. There, the Rambam explains that, on these days, one is required to recite three extra blessings:Malchuyut - which expresses the theme of God's sovereignty,Zichronot - which describes God's remembrance of His love for the Jews, andShofrot - which praises the shofar as a means of manifesting the previous two concepts.Each of these three blessings includes the recitation of ten verses that express these themes: four from the Torah, three from the prophets, and three from Psalms.In Chapter 2, Halachah 8, the Rambam writes that on Yom Kippur of the Jubilee year, one recites exactly the same blessings as on Rosh HaShanah. and most people do not know them [to the extent] that they can have the same intention as the leader of the congregation.7Here, the Rambam does not appear to interpret "intention" as referring to the chazan's concentration and spiritual awareness, but simply, to his familiarity with the text of the blessings.Therefore, on these two days, even a person who knows [how to pray] is granted permission to rely on the prayers of the leader of the congregation to fulfill his obligation [of prayer] if he so desires.8Though in principle, this ruling is accepted by all authorities, in practice, Ashkenazic Rabbis have advised each person to pray individually even on Rosh HaShanah since, at present, the use of machzorim which include a full text of the blessings is widespread. Furthermore, the inclusion of piyyutim (liturgical poems) in the chazan's repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh makes it very difficult to fulfill one's obligation by listening to his prayer and reciting "Amen." See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 591:1-4.
Only a person of great stature within the community in both wisdom1Torah knowledge and deed2performance of the mitzvot; alternatively, deeds of kindness, so that his appointment will be appreciated by all members of the community. should be appointed3The Lechem Mishneh mentions that this applies only to the appointment of a permanent chazan and does not apply to someone who leads the congregation in prayer on occasion. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 53:6) mentions this in regard to a chazan having a full beard. as the leader of the congregation.4Ta'anit 16a interprets Jeremiah 12:8: "She raises his voice against Me, therefore, I (God) have hated her" as a reference to a chazan who is unfit for this responsibility.Most of the commentaries point to the mishnah (Ta'anit 2:2) as the source for the Rambam's statements. Though that mishnah deals with the appointment of the leader of communal prayer for a public fast, there is no reason to assume that the same principles should not apply to the appointment of a chazan at other times. In the Talmud (e.g., Rosh HaShanah 32a), we find many examples of leading Sages serving as chazanim. If he is an older man,5Though the Hebrew, זקן, is often used to connote a wise man (See Hilchot Talmud Torah 6:1), this translation has been chosen based on the later statements of this halachah. it is very praiseworthy. An effort should be made6i.e. it is desirable, but not an absolute requirement. to appoint as the leader of the congregation, someone who has a pleasant voice7so that listening to his prayers will be enjoyable.Throughout the generations, in their responsa, our Rabbis have chided the people for putting a pleasant voice at the top of their priorities for a chazan. [Note the Ramah (Orach Chayim 53:5) who states that it is preferable to appoint a boy of thirteen who understands his prayers as chazan rather than an older man with a pleasant voice who does not know what he is saying. See also Shulchan Aruch (ibid., 53:11).]In particular, this applies regarding the High Holiday services. These days of sincere prayer should not be turned into concerts of ritual music. Instead, attempts should be made to find a chazan who can truly serve as a spiritual leader. If he also has a pleasant voice, it is obviously more desirable. and is familiar with reading [Biblical verses].8so that he will not err in his recitation of the prayers.A person who does not have a full beard9The Rabbis have explained that this simply refers to a person of intermediate age. Therefore, in one of his responsa, the Rambam states that a person who is physically incapable of growing a beard may serve as chazan and the requirement of a beard is only mentioned as a sign of "a full state of knowledge which one [usually] reaches at the age when one's beard begins to grow." See also Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 53:8).However, a beard is also considered a sign of commitment to Jewish practice. The Rambam (Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 12:7) associates shaving with the practices of gentile priests. Many Rabbis have strongly encouraged growing a beard even when there is no question of violating the prohibition against shaving. (See Sefer Mitzvot Gadol 7, Shibolei Leket Vol. II, 41.)However, in communities where removing one's facial hair in a permitted manner is an accepted practice, the lack of a beard is not considered as a deterrent against a person serving as a chazan. should not be appointed as the leader of the congregation even if he be a wise man of great stature, as a gesture of respect to the congregation.10The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:6) states that this only refers to the appointment of a permanent chazan. However, Rabbenu Nissim interprets the Rambam's words as meaning that even on occasion, a youth should not serve as a chazan. See also Chapter 15, Halachah 4. However, he may recite the Shema publicly11haporeis al Shema as described in Halachah 5. See Megillah 24a. after he has reached the age of thirteen and manifested signs of physical maturity.12until then, he is a minor and incapable of fulfilling the obligation of prayer on behalf of an adult.
Similarly, the inarticulate who pronounce an alef as an ayin or an ayin as an alef1Megillah 24b relates that a chazan should not be appointed from Beit Shean or Haifa, since they mispronounce these letters. Rashi explains that such mispronunciations will cause blessings to be read as curses. For example, if the word, יאר, the first word of the second priestly blessing, פניו אליך ‘ה יאר, is read with an ע instead of an א, it becomes a curse. or one who cannot articulate the letters in the proper manner should not be appointed as the leader of a congregation.2For many Jews today, this halachah is rather difficult to observe since we do not differentiate between the pronunciation of an alef and an ayin or a sin and a samech. The Radbaz and the Pri Chadash write that if these pronunciation errors are commonplace, even someone who pronounces a chet as a hay or a shin as a sin may serve as a chazan. See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 53:16, Mishnah Berurah 53:37-38.The Mishnah Berurah also cites Chapter 15, Halachah 1, from which it appears that a person who stutters, lisps, or has another speech defect which prevents him from pronouncing the letters properly should not serve as a chazan.A teacher may appoint one of his students to lead the prayers in his presence. - even if the student lacks the above qualities (Kessef Mishneh). Though the previous halachah stated that the leader of the congregation should be the man of the greatest stature in the community, the mishnah (Megillah, ibid.) and similarly, several sources throughout the Talmud (See Berachot 33b) indicate that a teacher could appoint a student to serve as a chazan instead of doing so himself.The Or Sameach explains that this refers to a student who does not articulate the letters properly. Though such a person should not ordinarily serve as a chazan, if he is appointed by his teacher he may. Thus, we find that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi appointed Rabbi Chiya as a chazan (Bava Metzia 85b) even though he would pronounce a chet as a hay (Megillah 24b).A teacher may appoint one of his students to lead the prayers in his presence. A blind person may recite the Shema publicly3even though the first blessing before the Shema thanks God for creating light, a blind person also benefits from light (Megillah ibid.). and serve as the leader of a congregation.4Perhaps the Rambam thought it necessary to clarify this point because there was a difference of opinion among the Sages as to whether a blind person is obligated in all the mitzvot or not. The Sages concluded that he is obligated. Hence, he can also fulfill the obligations of others as the leader of the congregation. A person whose shoulders are uncovered5though he may recite the Shema publicly - may not serve as the leader of the congregation until he is covered by a cloak. - Soferim 14:15 understands this as a gesture of respect for the congregation. See also Rosh HaShanah 17b which states that when God taught Moses the thirteen attributes of mercy, "He robed himself as a chazan."This does not necessarily refer to wearing a tallit gadol, but rather to a cloak or jacket that covers his shoulders and arms (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 53:13). However, in many communities, it is customary for a chazan to wear a tallit as a token of respect for the community. - though he may recite the Shema publicly - may not serve as the leader of the congregation until he is covered by a cloak.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
The order of prayer is as follows:In the morning, [while] all the people are sitting, the leader of the congregation descends before the ark in the midst of the people and recites the Kaddish. Everyone responds with all their strength: Amen. Yehei shemeih rabba mevarach le'alam ul'almei almaya. They answer "Amen" at the end of the Kaddish.Afterwards, [the chazan] declares: Barchu et Ado-nai hamevorach, and they answer: Baruch Ado-nai hamevorach le'olam va'ed. He then begins by reciting the Shema and its blessings out loud. They answer "Amen" after each blessing.A person who knows how to recite the blessings and read [the Shema] with him should read [the blessings by himself] until he recites the blessing ga'al Yisrael.
Immediately [afterwards], all stand and pray in a hushed tone. A person who does not know how to pray should stand in silence while the leader of the congregation prays in a hushed tone together with the others. Whoever concludes his prayers with the congregation should take three steps back and stand [still] in the place he reached when he stepped backwards.
After the leader of the congregation takes three steps backwards and stands still, he begins and prays in a loud voice from the beginning of the blessings, in order to fulfill the obligation on behalf of those who did not pray.Everyone - both those who did not fulfill their obligation [to pray] and those who fulfilled their obligation - stands, listens, and recites "Amen" after each and every blessing.
[The leader of the congregation] recites Kedushah in the third blessing.When the leader of the congregation reaches Kedushah, each individual may return to the place where he originally stood in prayer.When the leader of the congregation reaches Modim and bows, everyone should also bow - but not bow exceedingly - and say:We give thanks to You, God, our Lord, and Lord of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all existence. [We offer] blessings and thanks to Your great and holy name, for You have granted us life and sustained us. So may You continue to grant us life and sustain us, and gather our exiles into the courtyards of Your Sanctuary [so that we may] keep Your laws, serve You in truth, and fulfill Your will with a perfect heart, for we thankfully acknowledge You.Whoever says Modim, modim should be silenced.
After the leader of the congregation concludes the entire Shemoneh Esreh, he and the entire congregation should sit, fall on their faces, and lean over slightly, reciting supplicatory prayers while fallen on their faces.Then, he and the entire congregation should sit, lift their heads, and recite a small amount of supplicatory prayer out loud while seated. Afterwards, the leader of the congregation alone should stand and recite Kaddish a second time. The congregation should answer as they did previously.Afterwards, while he is standing, he recites V'hu rachum... and Tehillah [l'David]... The congregation remains seated and recites together with him. Afterwards, he recites [the following verses]: U'va l'Tzion go'el..., Va'ani zot..., V'attah kadosh... and V'kara zeh el zeh, v'amar: Kadosh... and completes the Kedushah.They respond: Kadosh, Kadosh three times. He then recites the Kedushah in an Aramaic translation. Afterwards, he recites [the verse] Vatisa'eni ruach and reads it in Aramaic, and then recites [the verse], Ado-nai yimloch le'olam va'ed and reads it in Aramaic. [The Aramaic translations are intended] in order that the [common] people should understand.
These verses [which are recited] before Kedushah and afterwards, together with their Aramaic translations, are referred to as "the order of Kedushah."Afterwards, he recites supplicatory prayers and verses of mercy. He then recites the Kaddish. The people respond as is customary, and depart.
One who says in his supplicatory prayers: "May He who showed mercy on a bird's nest prohibiting the taking of the mother together with the chicks, or the slaughter of an animal and its calf on the same day, also show mercy on us," or [makes other] similar statements should be silenced, because these mitzvot are God's decrees and not [expressions] of mercy. Were they [expressions] of mercy, He would not permit us to slaughter at all.Also, a person should not be profuse in his mention of adjectives describing God, and say: "The great, mighty, awesome, powerful, courageous, and strong God," for it is impossible for man to express the totality of His praises. Instead, one should mention [only] the praises that were mentioned by Moses, of blessed memory.
In the Minchah service, the leader of the congregation recites Ashrei yoshvei veitecha..., Tehillah l'David.... He and the congregation recite this while seated. [Then,] the leader of the congregation stands and recites Kaddish. They stand and respond in their normal manner. [Afterwards,] they all pray in a hushed tone.Afterwards, the leader of the congregation prays out loud, as in the morning service, until he concludes the Shemoneh Esreh. Then, both he and the congregation fall on their faces, recite supplicatory prayers, lift their heads, and recite a few supplicatory prayers while seated, as in the morning service.[The leader of the congregation] rises and recites Kaddish. The congregation responds in the normal manner and they depart to their affairs.
In the evening, all the people sit, and [the leader of the congregation] stands and recites: V'hu rachum.... [He announces:] Barchu et Ado-nai hamevorach, and they answer: Baruch Ado-nai hamevorach le'olam va'ed. He then begins by reciting the Shema and its blessings out loud and recites Kaddish. [Afterwards,] they all stand and pray in a hushed tone.When they conclude, [the leader of the congregation] recites Kaddish and they depart. He does not repeat the evening Shemoneh Esreh out loud, since the evening service is not obligatory. Therefore, he should not recite blessings in vain, for there is no one who is obligated [to recite these blessings] whose obligation he would fulfill [by his recitation].
On the night of the Sabbath, after praying together with the congregation in a hushed tone, the leader of the congregation prays out loud. However, he does not recite all seven blessings, but rather one blessing that includes all seven. He states:Blessed are You, God, our Lord and Lord of our fathers, the Lord of Abraham, the Lord of Isaac, and the Lord of Jacob, the great, mighty, and awesome God, the supreme God, who, in His mercies, creates heaven and earth.He shielded our ancestors with His word. He resurrects the dead with His statements - the holy God, like whom there is none. He causes His people to rest on His holy Sabbath, for to them did He desire to grant rest. We will serve Him with awe and fear and give thanks to His name every day, continually, according to the blessings [appropriate for that day]. God who is worthy of thanks, Lord of peace, who sanctifies the Sabbath and blesses the seventh day and brings rest with holiness to a people satiated with delight in commemoration of the work of creation.Our Lord, and Lord of our fathers, desire our rest.... Blessed are You, God, who sanctifies the Sabbath.He recites Kaddish and the people depart.
Why did the Sages institute this [practice]? Because the majority of people come to recite the evening service on Friday night. It is possible that someone will come late, remain alone in the synagogue, and thus be endangered. Accordingly, the leader of the congregation repeats his prayers in order that the entire congregation will remain, [allowing] the one who came late to conclude his prayers and leave together with them.
Therefore, when a festival, Rosh Chodesh or Yom Kippur coincides with the Sabbath, the leader of the congregation who recites the evening service does not mention the unique aspect of the day in this blessing. Instead, he concludes, "[Blessed are You, God,] who sanctifies the Sabbath," [mentioning] only [the Sabbath], because [on the other] days, there is no obligation [to recite] this blessing.
On the Sabbaths and the festivals, after the leader of the congregation completes the recitation of the Shemoneh Esreh of the morning service out loud, he recites Kaddish and afterwards, Tehillah l'David. He recites Kaddish [again] and [the congregation] recites Musaf in a hushed tone. Afterwards, he recites the Musaf Shemoneh Esreh out loud, in the same manner as the morning service. He recites Kaddish after Musaf and the people depart.We do not recite Kedushah and supplicatory prayers after the morning service. Instead, we recite them before the Minchah service. What is implied? We recite Tehillah l'David, the order of the day, and supplicatory prayers. [The leader of the congregation] recites Kaddish and the Minchah service is recited [in a hushed tone.] Afterwards, [the leader of the congregation] repeats the service out loud, and then recites Kaddish.
On Rosh Chodesh and Chol Hamo'ed, one recites the order of kedushah before the Musaf prayer. On the night following the Sabbath, the order of the day is also recited after the evening service. [Then] one recites Kaddish and afterwards, Havdalah.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
A person who prayed without concentrating [on his prayers] must pray a second time with concentration. However, if he had concentrated during the first blessing, nothing more is necessary.A person who errs in the recitation of the first three blessings [of the Shemoneh Esreh] must return to the beginning [of the Shemoneh Esreh]. Should one err in the recitation of the final three blessings, one should return to [the blessing, R'tzey]. If one errs in the midst of [one of] the intermediate blessings, one should return to the beginning of that blessing and [then] conclude one's prayers in the [proper] order.Should the leader of the congregation err when he is praying out loud, he should [correct himself] based on these principles.
However, if the leader of the congregation errs while he is praying in a hushed tone, I maintain that he does not repeat his prayers a second time, because of the difficulty it will cause the congregation. Rather, he relies on the prayer which he will recite out loud.The above applies when he does not err in the first three blessings. If he errs in their [recitation], he always repeats [his prayers] in the same manner as any [other] individual.
Should the leader of a congregation err [in his repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh], become confused and not know where to begin [again] - if he waits for a prolonged period, another person should replace him.If he errs in the recitation of the blessing [that curses] the heretics, we do not wait for him [to correct himself]; rather, another person should replace him. This applies only when he did not begin this [blessing]. However, if he did begin [the blessing], we wait for him.The second person should not refuse at this time.
From which point should [the substitute for the leader of the congregation] begin? If the first one erred in one of the intermediate blessings, [the substitute] should begin from the beginning of the blessing in which he erred. However, if he erred in one of the first three blessings, the [substitute] starts from the beginning [of the Shemoneh Esreh. If he erred in one of the final [three] blessings, the substitute should begin from [the blessing, R'tzey].
A person who says, "I will not lead the congregation in prayer because [I am wearing] colored clothes," should not lead the congregation in that prayer service even when wearing white clothes. If he said, "I will not lead the congregation because I am wearing sandals," he should not lead the congregation even when barefoot.
A person who is in doubt whether he prayed or not should not repeat his prayers, unless he recites the second prayer with the intention that it is a voluntary prayer, since an individual may recite voluntary prayers throughout the entire day.A person who remembers that he has already prayed while he is in the midst of the Shemoneh Esreh should cease [praying] immediately, even if he is in the midst of a blessing. [However,] if he was reciting the evening service, he need not cease [praying], for even at the outset, he did not begin that prayer service with the thought that it was an obligation.
A person who erred and recited a weekday prayer on the Sabbath does not fulfill his obligation. If he recalled while he was in the midst of the Shemoneh Esreh, he should conclude the blessing which he has begun and [continue] reciting the Sabbath prayers.When does the above apply? In the evening, morning, and Minchah services. However, in the Musaf service, one should cease [praying] even in the midst of a blessing. Similarly, if one completed a weekday Shemoneh Esreh with the intention that it be one's Musaf prayers, one must recite Musaf again. This applies on the Sabbath, on a festival, and on Rosh Chodesh.
[When] one errs during the rainy season and does not recite either morid hageshem or morid hatal, he must return to the beginning of the prayers. However, if he mentions dew, he need not repeat [his prayers].Should one err in the summer and recite morid hageshem, he must return to the beginning of the prayers. However, if he omits mention of dew [in the summer], he need not repeat his prayers, for dew is never held back, nor is there a need to request it.
[The following rules apply when] one forgets to request rain in the blessing for material prosperity: If he remembers before [the blessing,] shome'a tefilah, he should request rain in [that blessing]. If he [recalls] after reciting the blessing, shome'a tefilah, he should return to the blessing for material prosperity. If he does not recall until after he completes the Shemoneh Esreh, he must return to the beginning of the prayer and pray a second time.
[The following rules apply when] a person errs and fails to mention Ya'aleh v'yavo: If he remembers before he has concluded the Shemoneh Esreh, he should return to [the blessing, R'tzey], and recite it. If he remembers after he has concluded his prayers, he must repeat the Shemoneh Esreh from the beginning. If he is accustomed to recite supplicatory prayers after Shemoneh Esreh and remembers after he has concluded his prayers, but before he has lifted up his feet [to step backwards after prayer], he should return to [the blessing, R'tzey].
When does the above apply? On Chol Hamo'ed or in the morning or Minchah services of Rosh Chodesh. However, in the evening service of Rosh Chodesh, if one failed to mention it one need not repeat his prayers.
In every case in which an individual is required to repeat his prayers [because of an error], the leader of the congregation is also required to repeat his prayers if he made a similar mistake while praying out loud, with the exception of the morning service of Rosh Chodesh.[In this instance,] if the leader of the congregation failed to mention Ya'aleh v'yavo before completing his prayers, he is not required to repeat his prayers because of the difficulty it would cause the congregation. The Musaf service is still to be recited and Rosh Chodesh will be mentioned there.
If during the ten days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, one erred and concluded the third blessing, Ha'El hakadosh, he should return to the beginning of the Shemoneh Esreh.If he erred and concluded the eleventh blessing, Melech ohev tzedakah umishpat, he should return to the beginning of the blessing and conclude Hamelech hamishpat, and continue reciting his prayers in order. If he did not remember until he concluded his prayers, he must recite [his prayers again] from the beginning.[These laws apply] to both an individual and to the leader of the congregation.
If a person erred and did not mention Havdalah in the blessing, chonen hada'at, he should conclude his prayers, without returning [to correct himself]. Similarly, one who did not mention Al hanisim on Chanukah or Purim, or Anenu in the prayers on a fast day, need not repeat his prayers. [These laws apply] to both an individual and the leader of a congregation.If one remembers before lifting his feet [to step backwards after prayer], he should say: "Answer us because You are the one who hears prayer, redeems, and rescues in all times of difficulty and distress. May the words of my mouth...."
[A person who] forgot to recite the afternoon service on the Sabbath eve should recite the Sabbath evening service twice. [The same law applies] on a festival.[A person who] forgot to recite the afternoon service on the Sabbath or a festival should recite the weekday evening service twice after their conclusion.He should recite Havdalah in the first of these prayers and not in the second. However, if he recited Havdalah in both prayers or omitted it in both prayers, he fulfills his obligation. Nevertheless, if he did not recite Havdalah in his first Shemoneh Esreh, but mentioned it in his second, he [must] return and recite a third Shemoneh Esreh, since his first prayers were not acceptable because they were recited before the evening service.Whoever recites two prayers [in succession] - even the morning service and the Musaf service - should not recite them one immediately after the other. Rather, he should wait between prayers, so that his mind will be settled.
It is forbidden for a person who is praying with a congregation to pray before the congregation.[The following rules apply when] a person enters a synagogue and finds the congregation praying in a hushed tone: If he could begin and complete his prayers before the leader of the congregation reached Kedushah, he should recite the Shemoneh Esreh. If not, he should wait until the leader of the congregation begins reciting the Shemoneh Esreh out loud, and pray together with him word for word until the leader of the congregation reaches Kedushah. He should respond to Kedushah with the rest of the congregation and then recite the remainder of the Shemoneh Esreh alone.One who began reciting the Shemoneh Esreh before the leader of the congregation, [but was unable to conclude his prayers before] the leader of the congregation reached Kedushah, should not interrupt his prayers [to] respond to Kedushah with [the congregation]. Similarly, one should not respond Amen, yehei shemeih rabba mevarach... while in the midst of Shemoneh Esreh. Needless to say, [this applies regarding responding "Amen"] to other blessings.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
Wherever ten Jews live,1Since communal prayer is impossible without a quorum of ten, this is the minimum number of people that must live in a community before constructing a synagogue becomes obligatory. it is necessary to establish a place for them to congregate for prayer at the time of each prayer service.2Note Hilchot De'ot 4:23, which states that a Torah sage is not allowed to live in a city which lacks any of ten community resources, one of which is a synagogue.This place is called a Beit K'nesset.3literally, "a house of congregation," generally, translated as "synagogue." The inhabitants of a city can compel each other4The Ramah (Choshen Mishpat 163:1) states that even if the majority of the inhabitants do not desire the construction of a synagogue, the minority have the right to compel them to build it. to construct5i.e., participate both financially and in the actual construction work, if necessary, a synagogue and to purchase scrolls containing the Torah, the Prophets, and the Sacred Writings.6so that these texts will be available for Torah study (Hilchot Sh'chenim 6:1). At present, when a greater number of Torah texts are available, the congregation is obligated to buy the Torah texts needed by the congregation - both adults and minors - for study (Magen Avraham 150:1).
When a synagogue is built, it should be built only at the highest point of the city [as implied by Proverbs 1:21]: "She cries at the head of the public places."1These statements are quoted from the Tosefta, Megillah 3:14. The commentaries question how this verse serves as a prooftext for the law which is stated. It should be built [so that] its height exceeds [that of] all the other buildings in the city [as implied by Ezra 9:9]: "to lift up the house of our God."The2Shabbat 11a states: "Any city whose roofs are higher than the synagogue will ultimately be destroyed."The Hagahot Maimoniot maintain that this applies only to buildings with flat roofs. However, if the roofs are slanted and therefore, will not be used by people, the height of the other buildings may exceed that of the synagogue. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 150:2) states that apartments or offices in other buildings should also not be higher than the synagogue's roof.The Mishnah Berurah 150:5 notes that many communities are not stringent in the observance of this law and quotes sources which explain that since buildings owned by gentiles are often taller than the synagogue, the synagogue is not likely to be the tallest building in the city in any case. Therefore, other Jewish houses may also be built higher than the synagogue. His own opinion, however, is not to seek leniency in this regard. entrance to the synagogue should open only on the east [as implied by Numbers 3:38]: "...And those who camped before3The word "before" is understood to mean "at the entrance to." the sanctuary on the4This law is quoted from the Tosefta (loc. cit.). The Tur and Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 150:5) explain that this law applied only in Babylon, where their synagogues faced west. Thus, the doorway on the eastern side would be opposite the ark. However, since the Rambam mentions the possibility of the heichal being built on different walls, but mentions only one position for the entrance, it appears that he requires the entrance to be placed at the east at all times. east."In [the synagogue], a heichal, where the Torah scroll is placed, should be constructed.5This refers to a fixed structure like the ark (Aron HaKodesh) which is found in contemporary synagogues. In addition, as explained in the following halachah, the custom was to have a tevah, a smaller ark, positioned next to the place where the chazan would stand. The heichal should be constructed in the direction to which the people pray in that city,6As mentioned in Chapter 5, Halachah 3, one should always pray facing the direction of the Temple. Thus, if the synagogue is located to the west of Jerusalem, the heichal should be built into the eastern wall. so that they will face the heichal when they stand to pray.7It is apparent from the Rambam's statements that, if for some reason, the heichal of a synagogue was not positioned in the direction of Jerusalem, one should pray facing Jerusalem and not facing the heichal.
A platform is placed in the center of the hall,1both lengthwise and widthwise. (See the Jerusalem Talmud, Sukkah 5:1.) so that the one who reads the Torah2as described in the following chapter or one who gives a sermon3The Mishnah (Ta'anit 2:1) explains that on fast days, one of the elders of the congregation would speak and call the people to repent. Similarly, the Talmud mentions that some of the leading Sages would visit distant communities and address the people in the synagogue. can stand on it, so that all the others will hear him.4can stand on it, so that all the others will hear him. When one positions the tevah which contains the Torah scroll,5In contrast to the heichal whose position is fixed, thetevah is a movable ark, in which the Torah scrolls used for the public reading of the Torah were kept. (See the responsa of the Radbaz, Vol. II, 157.) one should position it in the center of the hall,6widthwise in the direction of the heichal7i.e., close to the wall on which the heichal is constructed and facing the people.
How do the people sit in the synagogue? The elders sit facing the people with their backs toward the heichal. All the people sit row after row, each row facing the back of the row before it. Thus, all the people face the sanctuary,1the heichal the elders, and the tevah.2which should all be positioned in the direction of JerusalemWhen the leader of the congregation stands to pray, he stands on the ground - praying from a low place, as implied by Psalms 130:1: "From the depths, I called out to You, O God" (Berachot 10b).When the leader of the congregation stands to pray, he stands on the ground, before the tevah,3Hence, the expression, 18ינפלáדרוי הביתה (literally, "descend before the ark") is often used to refer to leading communal prayer, because the chazan would pray "on the ground, before the tevah." facing the sanctuary4the heichal like the others.5i.e., facing the same direction as the other congregants.
Synagogues and houses of study should be treated with respect.1The Mishneh Berurah (151:1) notes that Megillah 29a quotes Ezekiel 11:16: "I have been a sanctuary in microcosm to them in the countries where they have come" to describe the synagogues in the Diaspora. This association allows one to infer that the obligation to honor a synagogue is related to the mitzvah (Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive Commandment 21) to revere the Temple.The S'dei Chemed cites Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 65) which mentions the prohibition against "destroying the houses where God is worshiped," indicating that the obligation to honor the synagogues has its source in a Torah commandment. (Note the commentary on Halachah 12.) They should be swept clean2Sefer Chassidim 128 relates tht Rabbi Ya'akov bar Yakar, Rashi's teacher, would polish the floor before the ark with his beard. and mopped.3Their synagogues often had dirt floors. Thus, mopping them would also keep the dust from rising (Megillah 28b).All the Jews in Spain, the west,4i.e., North Africa, Babylonia,5The translation is based on Targum Onkelos to Genesis 19:1. and Eretz Yisrael,6The term ארץ הצבי is applied to Eretz Yisrael, based on Jeremiah 3:19: "I will give you a delightful land (ארץ צבי), the finest heritage of a host of nations." (See also Daniel 8:9, Gittin 57a.) are accustomed to light lamps in the synagogue7The Rambam appears to imply that in addition to lighting lamps at night, when their light would be necessary, lamps were lit during the day as a mark of respect. and spread mats over the floor to sit on. In European communities,8literally, "in the cities of Edom (i.e., Rome)." they sit on chairs.
No lightheadedness - i.e., jests, frivolity, and idle conversation1cheapen the respect and awe one has for the synagogue. Rashi also includes in the category of קלות ראש all the other activities the Rambam mentions in this halachah because they all cause us to view the synagogue as a place where mundane affairs can be carried out, and thus, minimize our appreciation of its holiness. - should be seen in a synagogue.2The Sefer Mitzvot Gadol states that the sin of frivolity in the synagogues causes them to be sold to gentiles and transformed into houses of idol worship.The Zohar (Parashat Vayakhel) severely condemns the sin of idle conversation in a synagogue, because God's presence is manifest there, and, therefore, any activity of this sort indicates a lack of reverence for Him. We may not eat or drink inside [a synagogue],3Pesachim 101a relates that wayfarers would eat meals in the synagogue. However, Tosafot, Megillah 28a, explains that synagogues would have a side room that was used as a guest house. However, eating and drinking would not be permitted in the room used for prayer. nor use [a synagogue] for our benefit,4Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Berachot 8:6. Rashi (Megillah 28b) renders ניאותין as "adorn ourselves." According to his interpretation, the synagogue should not be a place where people come to show off their clothes and jewelry. nor stroll inside one.5i.e., it is forbidden to go to a synagogue for the purpose of walking around to release tension (Kessef Mishneh).On a sunny [day], one should not enter [a synagogue to seek shade] from the sun, and on a rainy [day], [one should not enter a synagogue to seek shelter] from the rain.6Megillah 28b relates that Ravina and Rav Ada bar Matanah were discussing a Halachic problem with Ravva outside. When it began raining, they entered a synagogue to continue their discussion. They explained, "We did not enter the synagogue because of the rain, but because the comprehension of the passage requires a relaxed state of mind." [However,] the sages and their students7The Magen Avraham 151:2 states that this license is granted only to scholars who spend the majority of their time in the house of study. Others, however, are not granted such privileges. are permitted to eat and drink in a synagogue8Megillah 28b states that a house of study is called "the rabbis' house," implying that they can do anything they would do in their own homes in the house of study. Since the holiness of a house of study exceeds that of a synagogue (see Halachah 14), we can assume that these activities are also permitted in a synagogue.Nonetheless, this license is granted only... because of the difficulty [observing the prohibition would cause them].9Forcing the scholars to leave the synagogue whenever they wanted to eat or drink would cause them to waste time that could be devoted to Torah study (Magen Avraham, loc. cit.:2).The Magen Avraham cites authorities who permit wider use of synagogue facilities if they were originally constructed with this use in mind. This leniency is based on Megillah, loc. cit., which states that the synagogues in Babylonia could be used for mundane purposes since they were constructed with this condition in mind.
It is forbidden to calculate accounts in [a synagogue], unless the accounts are connected with a mitzvah:1See Ketubot 5a, which states that though it is forbidden to think over one's accounts on the Sabbath, one is permitted to calculate accounts that are associated with a mitzvah even in a synagogue. for example, the collection of charity,2For a more precise definition of the term קופה, see Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 9:1. the redemption of captives,3Note the Rambam's comments on the importance of the redemption of captives, Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 8:10-18.or the like. [Similarly,] eulogies - This does not refer to a eulogy recited in the presence of the corpse itself, but rather a public meeting in honor of the deceased after his burial (Rav Kapach). or the like.[Similarly,] eulogies should not be recited inside them, except a eulogy that involves many [of the inhabitants of the city]; for example, [if] there were a eulogy of the great sages of that city for which all the people would gather together and come.4From Megillah 28b, it appears that this refers to a eulogy recited over a great sage, by a great sage, or attended by a great sage.
If a synagogue or a house of study has two entrances, one should not use it for a shortcut,1Note Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:2, which mentions a similar prohibition with regard to the Temple Mount. i.e., to enter through one entrance and leave through the other to reduce [the distance one] travels, because it is forbidden to enter [these buildings] except for a mitzvah.2Note Halachah 10, which states that if one enters a synagogue for the sake of a mitzvah, one may afterwards leave from the other entrance to shorten his way.The Be'ur Halachah (151) questions whether a person who is going to do a mitzvah may take a shortcut through a synagogue. Though the Pri Megadim states that this might be permissible, the Be'ur Halachah maintains that the wording the Rambam chose implies that one must enter the synagogue to do a mitzvah within, and not to pass through for the sake of a mitzvah.
A person who has to enter a synagogue to call a child or his friend should enter and read [a portion of the written law] or relate a teaching [of the oral law] and then call his friend,1The Lechem Mishneh explains that the person should study first and then call his friend, so that it will not appear that he entered the synagogue only to serve his personal concerns. so that he will not have entered [a synagogue] for his personal reasons alone.2which is forbidden, as mentioned above.If he does not know [how to study], he should ask one of the children3This suggestion is quoted from Megillah 28b, the source for this halachah. As obvious from Gittin 58a and other sources throughout the Talmud, synagogues were often used as classrooms for younger children. [to] tell him the verse he is studying4for listening to the words of Torah recited by another person is also considered as Torah study. or, [at the very least,] wait a while in the synagogue5The Ramah (Orach Chayim 151:8) states that one must wait at least the length of time it takes to walk eight handbreadths (slightly less than five feet). and then leave, since spending time [in the synagogue] is one of the aspects of the mitzvah as implied by [Psalms 84:5]: "Happy are those who dwell in Your house."6The Bayit Chadash (Orach Chayim 151) points out that the emphasis is not on sitting, but on spending time, whether one stands or sits. To clarify this point, the Rambam does not quote the Talmudic source (Megillah, loc. cit.) exactly. That passage reads, "[he should] wait a while, get up, and leave." The Rambam omits the expression, "get up," to indicate that one need not actually sit.
A person who enters [a synagogue] to pray or to study is permitted to leave by the opposite door to shorten his way.1Megillah 29a bases this law on Ezekiel 46:9 which states that in the Messianic age, after the people complete their service in the Temple, they will not leave through the same gate through which they entered. If this will be permitted in the Temple, it is surely permitted in a synagogue.2The Kessef Mishneh questions the order of the halachot chosen by the Rambam, noting that it would have seemed more logical to mention this law directly after Halachah 8, which forbids taking a shortcut through a synagogue. The Or Sameach points out a possible resolution of this difficulty, noting that in teaching this law after Halachah 9, the Rambam implies that leniency is granted only for the sake of calling a friend. However, it is forbidden to enter a synagogue and study Torah in order to leave by the opposite door. A person is permitted to enter a synagogue3The Mishnah (Berachot 9:6) forbids the following four activities on the Temple Mount, considering them as irreverent. See also Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:2. [holding] his staff, [wearing] his shoes,4Though there is no obligation to remove one's shoes before entering a synagogue, we find the practice mentioned in various sources. The Jerusalem Talmud (Bava Metzia 2:8) relates that Rabbi Yehuda HaNasi's son removed his sandals before entering a synagogue. When he left, he discovered that they had been stolen. He said, "If I had not entered the synagogue, my sandals wouldn't have been stolen." wearing [only] lower garments,5In his commentary on the above mishnah, the Rambam defines אפונדתו as "a garment which one wears against his flesh to collect perspiration, so that... he will not spoil his dress clothing." Others render אפונדתו as "money-belt." or with dust on his feet.6Berachot 63a compares a synagogue to one's house. Since these activities are accepted in one's home, they are also acceptable in the synagogue.It must be noted that many authoritative manuscripts of theMishneh Torah omit the phrases "wearing [only] lower garments" and "with dust on his feet." Note also the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 151:8) which states that a person should clean mud from his shoes before entering a synagogue. If it is necessary for him to spit, he may spit in the synagogue.7Rabbenu Manoach cites the following statement from the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 3:5):A person who spits in the synagogue is considered like one who spits in [God's] eye. Rabbi Yonah would spit and wipe it with his foot.Rabbenu Manoach explains that this passage does not contradict the Babylonian Talmud (Berachot, loc. cit.) which allows one to spit in the synagogue. As long as Rabbi Yonah's practice is followed, there is no prohibition.Though some authorities disagree, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 151:7) accepts Rabbenu Manoach's decision. However, while reciting the Shemoneh Esreh, spitting is forbidden (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 97:2). The Magen Avraham 151:9 mentions that the Ari zal would refrain from spitting within a synagogue.
Synagogues and houses of study that have been destroyed remain holy [as can be inferred from Leviticus 26:31]: "I will destroy your sanctuaries."1The commentaries explain that since the verse states והשמותי את מקדשיכם, with the noun "sanctuaries" following the verb "I will destroy," rather than ואת מקדשיכם אשמים, one may draw the following inference. [Our Sages explained]: Even though they are destroyed, they remain2sanctuaries and therefore, must be regarded as holy.3Therefore,Just as one must treat them with respect while they are standing,4as explained in Halachot 5-10. so must they be treated [with respect] when they are destroyed5Megillah 28b mentions that if one constructed a synagogue with the condition that it can be used for mundane purposes, one may do so. As mentioned in the commentary to Halachah 6, the Ramban and other authorities maintain that if a synagogue was constructed with such a condition, guests may eat inside and it may be used for other mundane purposes.Tosafot disagrees, maintaining that the condition has no effect while the synagogue is standing and applies only after it has been destroyed. Thus, were a synagogue to be built with such a condition, as were the synagogues in Babylonia in Talmudic times, mundane activities could be carried on within its premises after it was destroyed. However, even then, activities directly opposed to the sanctity of the synagogue, e.g., sowing crops on the land, are forbidden.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 151:11) quotes Tosafot's opinion. Interestingly, the Rambam does not mention either the Ramban's or Tosafot's interpretation of the possibility of making the condition mentioned in Megillah (loc. cit.). with the exception of sweeping and mopping them. [When destroyed], they need not be swept or mopped.6for there would be no benefit in doing so.If grass grows in them, it should be pulled out and left there7The Mishnah (Megillah 28b) states, "If grass grow in it, it should not be pulled out." The Talmud comments that one is not allowed to pull out the grass to use as fodder for animals, but one may pull out the grass and leave it there.In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam writes that one is permitted to pull the grass out and leave it in its place. The published text of the Mishneh Torah (which we have quoted) appears to imply that one should pull them out (i.e., it is imperative to do so). However, the version of the halachah found in authoritative manuscripts is closer to the understanding in the Commentary to the Mishnah.The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.:10) quotes the version of the halachah in the published texts of the Mishneh Torah. However, the Mishnah Berurah (151:29) quotes the Commentary to the Mishnah. so that it will be seen by the people [in the hope that] it will rouse their spirits and rebuild them.8In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam adds that if it is impossible for the synagogues to be rebuilt, the grass should be left there since seeing it will motivate the people to Teshuvah.
One should not tear down a synagogue in order to build another in its place or in another place.1Note Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 65), which states that destroying a synagogue is a transgression of a Torah commandment. Nonetheless, if one's intention is to build a new synagogue, the destruction of the old one is permitted (See also Ramah, Orach Chayim 152:2). Instead, one should build the [new synagogue] and then, one [may] tear down the [previous] one2This law is quoted from Bava Batra 3b. Two reasons are mentioned by the Talmud. The Rambam quotes one: lest unforeseen difficulties arise [which prevent it] from being built.3The second reason mentioned in the Talmud is so that people will have a place to pray in the interim. The Talmud notes that different corollaries result from these two explanations. If there is another synagogue in the city, according to the second explanation (not mentioned by the Rambam), one could tear down the first synagogue while building a new one, since people would be able to pray in the other synagogue in the interim. However, according to the explanation quoted by the Rambam, it would be improper to destroy the synagogue lest the new synagogue never be built.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 152:1) quotes the Rambam's decision. The Mishnah Berurah 152:4 states that this law applies even if all the money necessary to build the new synagogue has been collected.This applies even to a single wall of [a synagogue]. One should build the new wall next to the old wall and then, tear down the old wall.4The Be'ur Halachah (152) mentions the opinion of Rabbenu Asher who permits a community to enlarge a synagogue by tearing down an existing wall before building a new one if there is no other alternative. He maintains that the Rambam might also agree to this decision. However, most authorities interpret the Rambam's words as forbidding such a practice.
When does the above apply? When its foundations are not ruined or its walls are not leaning perilously.1so that there is no danger in continuing to pray within. However, if its foundation is destroyed or its walls are leaning perilously,2and there is a danger that it may collapse it should be destroyed immediately3The Be'ur Halachah (152) states that this applies even if the community does not have another place to pray. and [then, efforts to] rebuild it should be begun immediately throughout the day and night lest times become difficult and it remain destroyed.4Bava Batra 3b relates that Rav Ashi saw a dangerous flaw in the synagogue of Mata Machsia. He ordered the building destroyed and then took his bed into the ruins to make sure that the community would rebuild it quickly. He did not remove his bed until the final fixtures of the building were completed.
It is permitted to transform a synagogue into a house of study.1Megillah 27a describes a house of study as "a great house," "a house where Torah is developed." However, it is forbidden to transform a house of study into a synagogue because the sanctity of a house of study exceeds that of a synagogue2since Torah study takes precedence over the performance of all other mitzvot (See Hilchot Talmud Torah 3:3). See also Chapter 8, Halachah 3; Hilchot Talmud Torah 4:9. and one must proceed to a higher rung of holiness,3Our translation is based on the opinion of Rabbenu Nissim who maintains that it is forbidden to exchange a sacred article for another of an equal level of holiness. There are other opinions who maintain that it is permitted to do so. The Mishnah Berurah 153:11 states that even according to those opinions, the permission to do so is after the fact (בדיעבד), but not a priori. but not descend to a lower rung.4This principle applies in a number of different halachic contexts, for example, the practice of adding a new Chanukah candle each night (Shabbat 21a).Similarly, the inhabitants of a city5Megillah 26b explains that this only applies to a synagogue in a village as explained in Halachah 16. who sold a synagogue6The Rambam's use of the past tense appears to imply that this is a only question בדיעבד. TheMishnah Berurah 153:3, however, presents as להתחילה (a priori), the possibility of selling an article of lesser sanctity in order to purchase an article of greater sanctity.The sale of a synagogue is a complicated matter. See Halachot 16-20 and also the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 153:7 and commentaries. may purchase an ark7See Halachah 3. with the proceeds.8The Lechem Mishneh emphasizes that a synagogue may only be sold for such a purchase if there is another synagogue in the city. If they sold an ark, they may purchase a mantle9In Ashkenazic communities, it is customary to hold a Torah scroll in a mantle. or a case10as is customary in Sephardic communities. Hilchot Sefer Torah 10:4 describes the sanctity of these ritual articles. for a Torah scroll with the proceeds. If they sold a mantle or a case, they may buy chumashim11In Talmudic times, the expression chumash referred to a scroll on which only one of the five books of Moses was written. Since it contained only one book, its holiness was on a lower level than that of a complete Torah scroll. with the proceeds. If they sold chumashim, they may buy a Torah scroll with the proceeds. If they sold a Torah scroll, the proceeds may only be used to purchase another Torah scroll,12There is a some difficulty with the Rambam's statements when compared to Hilchot Sefer Torah 10:2, where the Rambam writes:It is forbidden for a person to sell a Torah scroll even if he has nothing to eat. [It is even forbidden] to sell an old scroll in order to purchase a new one. A Torah scroll should never be sold except for [one of] two purposes, so that one can use the money to study Torah or in order to marry.Perhaps here the Rambam is speaking about a question that arose after the fact, once the Torah scroll has already been sold, while in Hilchot Sefer Torah, he is describing an a priori condition. Alternatively, he may be referring to circumstances where the new Torah scroll has already been written and all that is necessary is to pay for it. In such a case, one may sell an old Torah scroll (Rabbenu Manoach, Hilchot Sefer Torah). for there is no level of holiness above that of a Torah scroll.13In Hilchot Sefer Torah (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes, "A kosher Torah scroll should be treated with special holiness and great honor."The same [laws apply] to [any money] which remains.14i.e., if one sold many chumashim to purchase a Torah scroll and some of the proceeds from the sale remained, those monies should not be used to purchase anything on a lower level of holiness.
Similar [principles apply] if a congregation collected money to build a house of study or a synagogue or to purchase an ark, a mantle or a case [for a Torah scroll], or a Torah scroll, and desired to change [the purpose for which] all the [funds] had been [originally] collected.1Just as it is forbidden to sell sacred articles in order to purchase articles of lesser sanctity...It is forbidden to change [the purpose for which the funds will be used]2Hilchot Matnot Aniyim 8:11 mentions an exception to this principle:If the inhabitants of a city collected money for the construction of a synagogue and a matter involving a mitzvah arises, they may use the money for it. If they already bought stones and beams, they should not sell them for the sake of another mitzvah, except for the redemption of captives.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 153:6) states that a synagogue - and even a Torah scroll - may be sold for the purpose of supporting Torah studies or for other needs associated with mitzvot. Nevertheless, this measure should only be taken when there is no other way to cover these expenses (Mishnah Berurah 153:24). See also Siftei Cohen (Yoreh De'ah 252:1) which explains that one is only allowed to sell a synagogue for such purposes if the buyer will continue to have it used as a synagogue. except from a matter of lesser sanctity to one of greater sanctity.3Rav Moshe Cohen questions the Rambam's decision, asking why it is forbidden to make a change of this nature. Even bricks intended for use in constructing a synagogue can be used for other purposes as long as they have not been actually built into the synagogue (See Megillah 26b).The Turei Zahav (Orach Chayim 153:2) explains that money collected for the purchase of religious articles does not possess the sanctity of those articles. However, since the donors intended that the money be used to purchase religious articles, its use is constrained by the terms of an implicit vow that it be used for this purpose. Despite this limitation, the congregation may use these funds for another purpose associated with a mitzvah and substitute other funds to accomplish the purpose for which these funds were originally collected. (Note the Magen Avraham 153:5, who does not accept the latter conclusion.)The Be'ur Halachah (153) supports the Turei Zahav's position based on Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 1:20, which states that a sacred utensil made with the intent that it be used in the Temple is not considered as "sacred" until it has actually been used for its intended purpose. However, if [the congregation] accomplished the purpose for which they had [originally] collected [the funds],4e.g., they collected funds to purchase a Torah scroll and were able to purchase it for less money than they had collected. they may use the remainder for whatever they desire.5Megillah 27a mentions this leniency based on the principle that the money itself does not have the sanctity of the religious articles for whose purchase it was donated, but is merely designated to be used for their purchase.6Once the religious articles have been purchased, the Mishnah Berurah (153:14) states that these funds can be used for any purpose of benefit to the community, even if it has no association with a sacred article. However, there are authorities who require the money to be used to purchase an article which has some degree of sanctity. All the components of a synagogue7e.g., the platform from which the Torah is read or its benches (Jerusalem Talmud, Megillah 3:1) are considered8to be on the same level of holiness like the synagogue itself.9and can only be sold for similar purposes.Our Sages placed certain restrictions on the sale of the components of a synagogue. In Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 8:6, the Rambam writes:If someone donates a light or a candle to a synagogue, it is forbidden to exchange it [for something else]. If [the sale] concerns a matter which is a mitzvah, it may be exchanged.... If the name of the donor has been forgotten, it is permitted to exchange [the object] even for a mundane matter.In Hilchot Sefer Torah 10:4, the Rambam states that the platform "has no sanctity at all." However, this statement should be interpreted to mean that the platform is not considered a "sacred article" like the others mentioned in that halachah. The curtain hanging before the ark10it is not clear whether the Rambam is referring to the tevah (the movable ark) or the heichal (the fixed ark). Rabbenu Nissim interprets the reference as to be to the tevah. is considered like the mantle of a Torah scroll.11since from time to time, it is placed under the Torah scroll (Megillah 26b). If a condition12allowing the use of the curtains for mundane purposes was made concerning them,13when they were originally purchased the terms of the condition are binding.14and there is no prohibition against using them for such purposes.
When do the above statements permitting the sale of a synagogue apply? In regard to a synagogue in a village. Since it was constructed for the sake of the inhabitants of that village alone,1even if the money for its construction was donated by people from outside the city (Ramah, Orach Chayim 153:7). so that they can pray inside it,2Based on this statement, the Mishnah Berurah 153:25 explains that the main determinant is not the size of the village, but whether the synagogue is also frequented by people from the outside. According to this understanding, a synagogue in a small village where large trade fairs are held is bound by the same laws as the synagogues of a large city. By the same token, a synagogue used by a private group of people in a large city may be comparable to a village synagogue. An example of such a case, cited by the Mishnah Berurah, is the custom once common that craftsmen of different professions would build synagogues for themselves. they are permitted to sell it if they all desire to do so.3The Ramban states that the consent of the majority of the village's inhabitants is sufficient. His opinion is accepted as halachah by the Mishnah Berurah 153:24.In contrast, a synagogue in a metropolis, since it was constructed for the sake of all the people in the world, [i.e.,] so that anyone who comes to that country can come and pray in it,4For this reason, even if the money to build the synagogue was donated by the inhabitants of the city alone, they do not have the authority to sell the synagogue (Rabbenu Asher, Megillah 26a). it is considered as [the property] of [the entire] Jewish people and it can never be sold.5Halachah 19 mentions an exception to this principle. Also, the Magen Avraham 153:12 relates that if a synagogue in a city is no longer used for prayer, it may be sold. Based on this decision, the Rabbis (See Iggeret Moshe, Orach Chayim, Vol. I, 50) have permitted the sale of synagogues located in neighborhoods no longer inhabited by Jews.
The inhabitants of a village1See the previous Halachah. who desire to sell their synagogue in order to build another synagogue with the money, or to buy an ark or Torah scroll with the money,2in keeping with Halachah 15 must establish as a condition [of the sale] that the purchaser not use the building for a bathhouse, a leatherworks, a mikveh, or a laundry.3The translation of the Hebrew, בית המים, is based on Rashi's commentary to Megillah 27b. He also offers an alternate translation, "a latrine." The Kessef Mishneh favors the translation "laundry" since the prohibition against using the synagogue as a latrine is self-evident. Nevertheless, in his Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 153:9), Rav Yosef Karo mentions a latrine, but not a laundry.The sanctity of the synagogue is transferred to the money received from its sale and the building itself is no longer considered as "holy." Nonetheless, using the premises for such purposes is considered degrading.As support for the prohibition against using premises that had previously served as a synagogue for such purposes, the Or Sameach cites II Chronicles 8:11: "I will not have a woman dwelling in the house of David... for the [places] where the ark of God has come are holy." Although the ark had already been placed in the Temple, it was not becoming to the ark for Pharaoh's daughter to be allowed to live in a place where it had been kept.If, at the time of the sale, the seven officials of the community4In a responsum, the Rambam explains that there is no obligation to appoint seven officials to lead the community. Our Sages' use of that term merely implies that the governing communal body should not be a small group. Since the number seven is often used in the Bible, our sages employed it in this context.In the same responsum, the Rambam defines the expression 18יבוט ריעה to mean "sages, men of Torah and good deeds, [people of whom it can be said] 'pleasant are the words spoken by those who fulfill them.' made a condition in the presence of the entire community5The Ramah (Orach Chayim 153:7) states that a public announcement of the sale is sufficient for it to be considered as if all the inhabitants of the city were present. that the purchaser be allowed to use the building for the above purposes, he may.6Megillah 26a,b states that the restriction against selling a synagogue for an unbecoming purpose does not apply when the building was sold by the communal officials in the presence of the community. When it is sold in this manner, it can be "used even as a tavern."The Meiri explains the rationale for this decision as follows: Even if an explicit statement was not made to the effect that the synagogue could be used for an unbecoming purpose, it is understood that the village's inhabitants consecrated the synagogue with the understanding that it be subject to the decisions of the community's officials. Therefore, they have the right to sell the synagogue for whatever purposes they wish.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's decision and maintains that the license granted by Megillah (loc. cit.) only applies to the money received from the sale, while the building that was used as a synagogue can never be used for a purpose which is unbecoming. Though the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.) quotes the Rambam's view, the Be'ur Halachah suggests following the Ra'avad's decision, quoting the law (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 21:2), which forbids using a tallit for an unbecoming purpose even after its tzitzit have been removed.Rav Moshe Feinstein (Responsa, Orach Chayim, Vol. II, 45) mentions this halachah in regard to the sale of synagogues in neighborhoods where Jews no longer live. Unfortunately, the natural clients for the purchase of an abandoned synagogue are churches. Rav Moshe states that selling a synagogue for use as a church is definitely forbidden. Using a synagogue for such purposes is more demeaning than using it for the purposes mentioned by the Talmud. He maintains that even according to the Rambam, selling a synagogue for this purpose could not be permitted.
Similarly, if the seven officials of the community made a condition in the presence of the entire community that [after the community accomplished the purpose for which they sold the synagogue], the remainder of the funds could be used for mundane purposes, they may be used for such purposes.1The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 153:7) accepts the opinion of Rashi, the Ra'avad, and Rabbenu Asher, who differ with the Rambam and maintain that the entire proceeds from the sale of a synagogue can be used for mundane purposes if the sale was carried out in the above manner.In his Kessef Mishnah, Rav Yosef Karo explains the difference between these positions as follows. These authorities do not accept the Rambam's interpretation of Megillah 26a-b mentioned in the previous Halachah, and maintain that a certain measure of sanctity always remains in the synagogue. The Rambam maintains that the sanctity is transferred to the money received for the synagogue. Therefore, the condition made by the city officials can never effect the entire sum of money. Rather, the major portion must always be used for a sacred object.[Interestingly, in his Kessef Mishnah, Rav Yosef Karo points out the advantages of the Rambam's position. However, in hisShulchan Aruch, he accepts the decisions of the other authorities.] Thus, after the money has been used for building another synagogue, for purchasing an ark, a mantle or case [for a Torah scroll], chumashim, or a Torah scroll,2as mentioned in Halachah 14. the remainder may be used for mundane purposes in accordance with their condition, and may be used for whatever they please.3Megillah 27a describes such a situation and states that the remainder of the funds may be used even to hire a messenger for the city.
Similarly, if all the inhabitants of a city - or a majority of them1accept [the authority of] a single individual, - Note the Mishnah Berurah 153:35 which states that this applies only when the inhabitants of the city donated the money for the synagogue's construction themselves and accepted the authority of the person involved from the beginning of the synagogue's construction. - accept [the authority of] a single individual, whatever actions he takes [in regard to a synagogue] are binding.2Megillah 26a relates:Rav Ashi said: "Even though people from all over the world come into the synagogue of Mata Machsia to pray, since the people donated the money for its construction subject to my decisions, allowing me to do what I want, I am permitted to sell it if I so desire."He may sell [the synagogue] - as mentioned in the previous halachot He may sell [the synagogue] or give [it as a gift]3as mentioned in the following Halachah. alone,4This expression appears to indicate that the sale may be conducted even without a public announcement as is required of the city officials in the previous halachot. Rabbenu Nissim (and the Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit.) disagree, stating that the sale must be made with the consent of the community. as he sees fit, and establish whatever conditions he desires.5in regard to the use of the premises or the proceeds from the sale.
Just as it is permitted to sell a synagogue,1in a village, and afterwards, use the premises for mundane purposes it is permitted to give it away as a present.2to an individual to use as he sees fit. The Magen Avraham 153:26 states that the gift must be made by the community officials in the presence of the inhabitants of the village. However, the Pri Megadim does not require these conditions. Since the Rambam equates giving the synagogue as a present to a sale, it is not likely that he would make such limitations.Megillah 26b states, "a gift is like a sale," because If the community had not received any benefit from giving it as a gift, it would not have given it.3This principle is also reflected in questions of business law, e.g., Hilchot Gezeilah 9:9.The Ritbah states that even when the community has not yet received any benefit from a person, it may give him a synagogue in the expectation of receiving such benefit. However, it cannot be rented or given as security.4In the Talmudic era, when property was given as security, the person who received the property would have the right to use it throughout the term of the loan. [This practice raises questions in regard to the prohibition against taking interest. See Hilchot Malveh U'Loveh, Chapters 6 and 7.]When a synagogue is sold, its sanctity is transferred to the money received for it and does not remain within the building itself. However, if a synagogue was rented or given as security, there is nothing to which the sanctity is transferred. Hence, it remains within the building and the person who rents it or receives it as security is forbidden to use it for his own purposes.Note the Ramah (Orach Chayim 153:11) who states that the prohibition only applies when the person who receives the synagogue wants to use it for mundane purposes. If he continues to use it as a synagogue there is no difficulty.Similarly, when a synagogue is being torn down so that it can be rebuilt, - Note Halachah 12 which states that the new synagogue must be built before the old one is torn down.Similarly, when a synagogue is being torn down so that it can be rebuilt, it is permitted to sell the bricks, timber, and soil, exchange them,5even if the articles given in return are received later (Mishnah Berurah 153:68) or give them as gifts.6in return for benefit, as explained above. However, it is forbidden to lend them,7The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 153:11) states that this prohibition applies even when the loan is made by the community officials in the presence of the community.Though the community officials have the power to nullify the sanctity of a synagogue as mentioned in Halachot 17 and 18, that provision only applies when they do so completely. In this instance, since the building materials have to be returned, their sanctity is not nullified. Hence, no one has the right to lend them to anyone for mundane use. since their sanctity only departs in return for money or benefit which is equivalent to money.8Similar principles apply in regard to the redemption of other articles endowed with sanctity, e.g., Ma'aser Sheni (the second tithe) or articles dedicated to the Temple (הקדש).
Although the people pray in a city's main street on fast days1Hilchot Ta'anit 4:1 states:On each of the seven days of fasting for rain... the ark is taken out to the main street of the city and the entire populace gather together wearing sackcloth. Ashes are placed on the ark and the Torah scroll... and each person places [ashes] on his head.and ma'amadot, - The mention of ma'amadot in this context in Megillah 26a (the source for this halachah), and here, in the Mishneh Torah, has raised questions. In Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 6:1-2, the Rambam describes the ma'amadot as follows:The early prophets ordained that honest people who fear sin should be chosen to stand over the sacrifices. They are called anshei ma'amad. They were divided into 24 different watches....Each week, the anshei ma'amad of that watch would gather together. Those who lived in Jerusalem or close to it would come to the Temple.... Those who lived far away... would gather together in the synagogues of their locale.In no source other than Megillah (loc. cit.) is it mentioned that the anshei ma'amad would pray in the street. and ma'amadot, because too many people gather to fit within a synagogue,2Note Ta'anit 16a which states that the people would pray in the street as an expression of shame and embarrassment; alternatively, because leaving one's normal place of prayer is a form of exile which brings atonement. Interestingly, the Rambam ignores both these reasons and offers a reason which is not mentioned in previous sources. [the street] does not possess any quality of sanctity, because [praying there is only a temporary measure] and it is not established as a place of prayer.3[the street] does not possess any quality of sanctity, because [praying there is only a temporary measure] and it is not established as a place of prayer. Similarly, buildings and courtyards where people gather to pray4even for communal prayer, e.g., a room in an office building where people gather for prayer. do not possess any measure of sanctity,5Thus, it is also permitted to perform mundane activities (those mentioned in Halachah 6) in these buildings. because they were not designated for prayer alone. Rather, [people] pray within them as a temporary measure, as a person prays within his home.6The Shulchan Aruch 153:8 mentions a situation in which a building is designated as a synagogue temporarily, for merely a limited period. During that time, it has the holiness of a synagogue. However, once it is no longer used as a synagogue, it has no holiness.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
Moses, our teacher, ordained that the Jews should read the Torah publicly on the Sabbath1See also Chapter 13, Halachah 8. and on Monday and Thursday2Tosafot, Bava Kama 82a relates that these days are days of Divine favor. mornings,3The Mishnah Berurah 135:1 states that, although ideally the Torah should be read in the morning service, if one fails to do so, it may be read the entire day. so the [people] would never have three days pass without hearing the Torah.4Bava Kama 82b quotes Exodus 15:22: "And they travelled three days without finding water," and explains:Water refers to the Torah, as [implied by Isaiah 55:1]: "May all the thirsty go to the water." Since they travelled three days without Torah, they complained. The prophets among them arose and ordained that they read [Torah] on the Sabbath, refrain [from reading] on Sunday, read on Monday, refrain [from reading] on Tuesday and Wednesday, read on Thursday, and refrain from reading on Friday, so that they will not spend three days without [reading from] the Torah.Ezra ordained that [the Torah] should be read during the Minchah service on the Sabbath, because of the shopkeepers.5The Hebrew, יושבי קרנות, literally means "those who sit on the street corners." Our translation is based on Rashi's commentary (Bava Kama, loc. cit.). He explains that during the week, these people were involved with their businesses and could not attend the Torah reading. Therefore, Ezra instituted a special Torah reading for them on the Sabbath, when work is prohibited.Rav David Arameah interprets the phrase literally, explaining that on the Sabbath, since work is prohibited, people would gather in the afternoon in the marketplace, and spend their time in idle conversation. Therefore, Ezra ordained the public Torah reading to draw them into the synagogue. He also ordained that on Mondays and Thursdays, three6Megillah 21b relates that the number three reflects the three divisions among the Jewish people: priests, Levites, and Israelites; alternatively, the three divisions in the Written Law (the Torah, Prophets, and Holy Writings). people should read7In Talmudic times, the person called to the Torah would read from the Torah himself. Our custom of having one reader is discussed in the commentary on Halachah 17. [from the Torah]8Bava Kama (loc. cit.) explains that originally either one person would read three verses, or three people would read three verses., and that they should read no fewer than ten verses.9Megillah (loc. cit.) states that the ten verses allude to the ten commandments and the ten utterances of creation; alternatively, they represent the ten people who attend a synagogue at all times. (See Halachah 3.)
These are the days when the Torah is read publicly: Sabbaths, festivals,1including Chol Hamo'ed, the intermediate days of the festival. (See Chapter 13, Halachot 8-16.) Rashei Chadashim,2Soferim 10:1 attributes the introduction of the practice of reading the Torah on all the abovementioned days to Moses. (See Chapter 13, Halachah 4, regarding the Rosh Chodesh Torah reading.) fast days,3See Chapter 13, Halachah 18. Chanukah, Purim,4See Chapter 13, Halachah 17. and Mondays and Thursdays each week.5and Mondays and Thursdays each week.The haftarah6The Pardes states that the reading of the haftarah was instituted on the days when work is forbidden because the people had more time then and were able to devote themselves to Torah study. The Avudraham relates that the reading of the haftarah was instituted when the Greeks forbade the public reading of the Torah. To compensate, the Jews instituted the reading of parallel portions from the prophets. Even after the decree was nullified, the custom remained. is read only7In Hilchot Ta'aniot 1:17, the Rambam states that on fast days declared because of communal distress, the haftarah is read in the afternoon service. However, the Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 574) explains that the laws concerning the reading of the Torah and the haftarah are discussed primarily in this and the following chapter of the Mishneh Torah. Hence, the decision here should be followed and the haftarah should not be recited. on Sabbaths, festivals,8when work is not permitted and Tish'ah B'Av.9Although work is permitted on Tish'ah B'Av, as mentioned in Hilchot Ta'aniot 5:10, Torah Sages have accepted the custom not to work on that day, and our Sages declared that no one will see a sign of blessing from work done on tAlthough work is permitted on Tish'ah B'Av, as mentioned in Hilchot Ta'aniot 5:10, Torah Sages have accepted the custom not to work on that day, and our Sages declared that no one will see a sign of blessing from work done on that day. Hence, there is no difficulty in reading the haftarah in the morning. (See Chapter 13, Halachah 18.)In Ashkenazic communities, it is also customary to read the haftarah on fast days in the Minchah service (Ramah, Orach Chayim 566:1).hat day. Hence, there is no difficulty in reading the haftarah in the morning. (See Chapter 13, Halachah 18.)In Ashkenazic communities, it is also customary to read the haftarah on fast days in the Minchah service (Ramah, Orach Chayim 566:1).
The Torah is never read in public in the presence of fewer than ten adult free men.1See Chapter 8, Halachot 4-6. No fewer than ten verses are read.2See Halachah 1. Hagahot Maimoniot notes that the reading for Purim contains only nine verses, but explains that since this passage discusses a complete subject, an exception is made. (See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 137:1.) Vayedaber3i.e., a verse beginning "And God said to Moses:...." Although it is merely an introductory phrase, it... is counted as one of them.4i.e., one of the required ten verses. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 137:4) states that, after the fact, if only nine verses were read, it is sufficient. No fewer than three men should read.5See Halachah 1.[When] beginning a passage6In addition to the 54 weekly Torah portions, the Torah is divided into 290 smaller passages (parshiot). (See Hilchot Sefer Torah, Chapter 8.) from the Torah, [one should read] at least three verses,7A person who begins a new passage in the midst of his aliyah should read at least three verses, lest another person enter when he begins that passage and think that he has read fewer than three verses (Megillah 22a).The 14Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim, loc. cit.) states that if a person read only two verses, they must be read again. and one should not conclude less than three verses from the conclusion of a passage.8lest someone who leaves before the next person reads from the Torah come to the mistaken conclusion that he has read fewer than three verses (Megillah, loc. cit.). (See Chapter 13, Halachah 4. See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim, 138.) Each reader should not read fewer than three verses.9The three verses allude to the threefold division of the written law (Megillah 24a). Even when an entire passage has only two verses, the reader must add at least three more verses from another passage.From this halachah, it appears that the custom of reading the first aliyah of the portion to be read on the following Sabbath on Mondays and Thursdays was not fixed in the Rambam's time. Hence, these ground rules were necessary. (See Mishnah Berurah 137:4.)
[When] three people read ten verses: Two read three [verses each] and one, four [verses]. It is praiseworthy regardless of whether the one who read four [verses] is first,1for the most important person is called to the Torah first (Megillah 21b). last,2based on the principle to "always proceed higher in holy matters" (loc. cit.). or in the middle.3regarding the Menorah, the middle branch was most important (loc. cit.).
Each one of the readers opens the Torah scroll and looks at the place from which he is to read.1Megillah 32a mentions a difference of opinion between Rabbi Yehudah, who maintains that the blessings for the Torah should be recited while the Torah scroll is open (as quoted by the Rambam), and Rabbi Meir, who maintains that the Torah scroll should be closed, lest the people err and think that the blessings are written in the Torah.Although the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 139:4) quotes the Rambam's decision, the Be'ur Halachah explains that Rabbi Yehudah maintains that one is not obligated to close the Torah scroll before reciting the blessing. However, there is nothing wrong in doing so. Therefore, in many communities the custom is to roll the Torah closed before reciting the blessing.Note the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit., 140:3) regarding the ruling when one looks at the wrong passage in the Torah before reciting the blessing. Afterwards, he declares,2The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit., 139:6) emphasizes how Barchu and the blessings for the Torah should be recited in a loud voice. Barchu et Ado-nai hamevorach, and all the people3the person reciting the blessing also joins in reciting the following phrase (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit.:7) answer: Baruch Ado-nai hamevorach le'olam va'ed.4See Chapter 9, Halachah 1. He then recites the blessing:Blessed5Note the description of Ezra's reading of the Torah, in Nechemiah, Chapter 8, which relates how "Ezra opened the scroll... and blessed God." are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has chosen us from among all the nations and given us His Torah. Blessed are You, God, the Giver of the Torah.6This is the third of the blessings of the Torah mentioned in Chapter 7, Halachah 10. Even someone who had just recited the blessings before the Torah as part of his individual prayers recites this blessing as a gesture of respect for the community.As mentioned in the commentary on that halachah, the Ramban considers the obligation to recite the blessings before the Torah as one of the 613 mitzvot. Some later commentaries explain that this refers only to the blessings recited before reading the Torah in public.All the people respond: "Amen."7Note Rashi's commentary, Berachot 21a. Note also the comments of the Hagahot Maimoniot, Chapter 7, Halachah 15, that a person can fulfill his requirement of reciting one hundred blessings on the Sabbath by answering "Amen" to these blessings. Afterwards, he reads until he completes the reading, rolls the scroll [closed]8The Kessef Mishneh states that this is done in deference to Rabbi Meir's opinion mentioned above. The Lechem Yehudah explains that it is a gesture of respect for the Torah. and recites the blessing:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has given us His Torah, the Torah of truth,9This is the text usually recited in Sephardic communities. In Ashkenazic communities, the word, תורתו (His Torah), is not included in the blessing. Interestingly, the Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah also omit this word. and implanted eternal life10Our translation follows the printed text of the Mishneh Torah. Note the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit. 139:10), which follows the text - חיי העולם (adding a ה as a modifier) - "the life of the world (to come)." in our midst.11It is proper to recite this phrase only once the Torah has been read. Only after it has been studied, does the Torah serve as a source of life (Avudraham). Blessed are You, God, the Giver of the Torah.
The person reading the Torah is not allowed to begin reading until the congregation ceases responding "Amen."1so that their recitation of "Amen" will not drown out the Torah reading. Today, in communities where the Torah is read by a person other than the one reciting the blessings, it is customary for the reader to prolong his recitation of "Amen" slightly, so that everyone will know when the Torah reading begins (Mishnah Berurah 141:17). If one erred while reading, even regarding the careful pronunciation of one letter,2Rabbenu Manoach explains that this law reflects a fundamental philosophical principle. Sanhedrin 99a states that anyone who says that even one letter of the Torah was not given by God is considered as "one who scorned the word of God." Therefore, every letter in the Torah must be pronounced correctly. [the reader] is forced to repeat [the reading] until he reads it correctly.3This applies even if one has already read other verses or even recited the blessing over the verse which was read incorrectly (Mishnah Berurah 142:2).Two people should not read at the same time. Rather, one should read alone.4for the voice of two people cannot be heard at the same time. Note the Rambam's decision, Hilchot Shofar 3:6. See also a contrasting decision in Hilchot Megillah 2:7.In communities where the Torah is read by a person other than the one who recites the blessings, the person reciting the blessings should be careful not to read out loud (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 141:2). If one was reading and lost the ability to speak, another should replace him. He should begin from the place where the one who lost the ability to speak began,5In his responsa, the Rambam cites the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 5:3) to explain why this law differs from the law mentioned in Chapter 10, Halachah 4, which states that if a chazan cannot continue the recitation of the Shemoneh Esreh, the person who replaces him begins from the point where he left off. The Rambam explains that it is necessary for the second person reading the Torah to repeat the verses, because otherwise, the verses read by the initial reader will not be included in the concluding blessing. and recite the blessing after concluding.6Nevertheless, according to the Rambam, the second reader need not recite the blessing before the Torah reading. Rabbenu Asher (whose opinion is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit., 140:1) does not accept this decision, and requires the person who continues reading to recite the first blessing before he begins reading the Torah.The difference between the two opinions is that the Rambam considers the blessings to be associated with the Torah portion and not with the reader. In contrast, Rabbenu Asher considers the blessings as the personal responsibility of the reader in preparation for reading from the Torah.Rabbenu Asher's opinion is accepted by the later authorities. Even in communities where a person other than the one who recites the blessings reads from the Torah, this law applies (Ramah).
The reader is not permitted to [begin] reading until the person of greatest stature within the community1the Rabbi or spiritual leader. tells him to [begin] reading.2Though this law is apparent from the Tosefta referred to below, no explicit source is mentioned by the commentaries. Even the chazan or the gabbai3Our translation is based on Rashi's commentary (Yoma 68b), which describes the rosh hak'nesset as the one who appoints the leader of prayer and gives out the aliyot. should not begin reading on their own initiative until the community [as a whole] or the person of greatest stature begins to read.4This law is quoted from the Tosefta, Megillah 3:21, which explains that this restriction was instituted to prevent the synagogue functionaries from taking advantage of their position, and thus create a rift between them and the other congregants.[When the chazan reads from the Torah,]5As discussed in the commentary on Halachah 17, the Rambam requires the person who receives an aliyah to read from the Torah himself. Thus, the chazan would read only when he, himself, received an aliyah. another person should stand with him while he reads, just as the chazan stands together with the other readers.6The Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 4:1) explains the source for this practice. Just as an intermediary was involved with the giving of the Torah - as Deuteronomy 5:5 states: "I stood between you and God, your Lord" - so, too, another person should stand together with the reader at the reading of the Torah.Note Soferim 14:14 (quoted by the Mishnah Berurah 141:16), which mentions the custom that two other people stand by the reader while the Torah is read, one on his right and one on his left.
The reader may skip from place1from one passage in the Torah to place2to a different passage in the Torah in one subject3However, skipping from one subject to another subject is forbidden, because it may confuse the listeners. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 144:1.) - for example,4The Rambam chooses as his example the passages read by the High Priest in the Temple on Yom Kippur. However, as explained in the Mishnah (Yoma 7:1), the High Priest, himself, would not skip from passage to passage in the Torah. from Acharei mot...5Leviticus, Chapter 16, which describes in detail the Yom Kippur offerings. to Ach be'asor, in the portion Emor el Hacohanim6Leviticus 23:26-32, which describes the mitzvah to fast and the prohibition of work on Yom Kippur. - provided he does not read by heart. It is forbidden [for a reader] to say even one word [without looking at the text].7Rav Kapach cites the Midrash Tanchuma, Va'era 5, which states:A reader is forbidden to take his eyes off the Torah scroll, for the Torah was given only in writing, as [Exodus 34:2] states: "And I will write the words on the tablets."Note also Gittin 60b, which mentions a general prohibition against reciting verses from the written Torah by heart. [When] skipping [in this fashion, the reader] should not wait longer than it takes for the translator8See Halachah 10. to translate one verse.9because waiting any longer would be an affront to the congregation (Yoma 69b).At present, it is customary to skip from passage to passage in the reading of the Torah on public fast days alone. (See Chapter 13, Halachah 18.) Even then, the transition is made between the first and second aliyot, so that it will not be noticeable to the listeners.
Once the reader begins reading the Torah, it is forbidden [for the congregants] to talk,1The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 146:1) states that the prohibition applies even between aliyot. even regarding matters of Torah law.2The Mishnah Berurah 146:5 mentions that if it is necessary to prevent a person from committing a sin, one may speak even while the Torah is being read. Rather, everyone should listen, remain silent, and pay attention to what is being read, as [Nechemiah 8:3] states: "The ears of all the people were [attentive] to the Torah scroll."It3This describes Ezra's reading of the Torah to the people who returned to Zion on Rosh HaShanah. is forbidden to leave the synagogue while the reader is reading from the Torah.4This prohibition applies even though one has already heard the Torah reading oneself and there are ten other people listening to the Torah reading (Mishnah Berurah 146:1).Berachot 8a interprets Isaiah 1:28, "Those who turn away from God will be destroyed," as a reference to a person who leaves the synagogue when the Torah scroll is open. However, one is permitted to leave between aliyot.5provided there are ten others who will remain to hear the Torah reading, and one has fulfilled (or will be able to fulfill) one's obligation to hear the Torah. Even under these circumstances, leaving the synagogue is not desirable (Mishnah Berurah 146:2-3). A person who is constantly involved in Torah study, and Torah is his occupation,6The license for such a person to ignore the Torah reading in order to concentrate on his studies is taken from Berachot (loc. cit.), which relates that while the Torah was being taken out, Rav Sheshet would turn his back and occupy himself in his studies, saying, "Let them be occupied in what concerns them, while we will be occupied in what concerns us."See Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:4, which states that the mitzvah of Torah study takes precedence over all other commandments. Based on this principle, Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai and his disciples would not interrupt their studies even for prayer (Shabbat 11a - see Chapter 6, Halachah 8). However, the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit. 106:3) states that this applies only to scholars like Rabbi Shimon, who never interrupt their studies at all. However, at present, even scholars whose occupation is Torah must interrupt their studies for prayer, for they make other interruptions as well.The Rabbis question whether the law under discussion applies only to scholars of Rabbi Shimon's level, or whether it is also relevant to scholars of the present day. The Kessef Mishneh notes that the citation of the behavior of Rav Sheshet as a source for this halachah appears to support the latter opinion. Rav Sheshet, like the other Amoraim of the Talmudic period, was not considered to be on the same level as Rabbi Shimon. In contrast, the Mishnah Berurah 146:9 maintains that, at present, we have no scholars who have the level of devotion to Torah study that would permit such a leniency. is permitted to involve himself in Torah study while the Torah is being read.7The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit. 146:2) and the Mishnah Berurah 146:8-10 place various restrictions on this license. There must be ten others listening to the Torah, the person must study quietly, and he should turn away and begin his studies before the Torah reading is begun.
From the time of Ezra,1when the Jews who returned from the Babylonian exile did not speak Hebrew fluently. (See Chapter 1, Halachah 4.) it was customary that a translator would translate to the people the [passages] read by the reader from the Torah, so that they would understand the subject matter.2The Book of Nechemiah, Chapter 8, describes Ezra's reading of the Torah to the people on Rosh HaShanah. Verses 7 and 8 explain that "they caused the people to understand the reading." Megillah 3a explains that this refers to the translation of the Torah.The reader should read one verse alone and remain silent while the translator translates it.3For the two voices will prevent the people from hearing either of them. Afterwards, he should read a second verse. The reader is not permitted to read to the translator more than one verse [at a time].4lest the translator become confused.The Tur (Orach Chayim 145) writes that even in Talmudic times, it was not customary to translate the Torah in all communities. He explains that, in his age, the custom of translating the Torah had already been ceased because the people did not understand the Aramaic translation traditionally used. The rabbis did not want to translate the Torah into the languages which the people did understand, because of the possibility of error and misinterpretation. Such fears had not existed in regard to the Aramaic translation, since it had been composed with Ruach Hakodesh (Divine inspiration).[The Tur, however, also mentions the opinion of Rav Natrunai Gaon, who maintains that the translation should be done freely, so that the people can understand, without referring to the traditional text.]The Tur's opinion is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 145:3) and in nearly all contemporary Jewish communities, the custom of using a translator during the Torah reading is no longer practiced. For this reason, rather than present a running commentary on Halachot 11 and 12, we have limited our comments to short footnotes.1. Berachot 45a states that this principle is derived from the giving of the Torah on Mount Sinai. God, "the Reader," did not lift his voice over that of Moses, "the translator."It was also customary to use a מתורגמן in teaching the oral law. Hence, parallels to many of the laws mentioned in this halachah can also be found in Hilchot Talmud Torah 4:3.2. The Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 4:1) mentions that we should approach the Torah reading with awe, reflecting the awe experienced by the Jews at Mount Sinai.3. Rabbenu Nissim maintains that this prohibition only applied before Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi permitted the oral tradition to be recorded. Afterwards, it was permitted for the translator to use a written text. Rabbenu Nissim's position is somewhat difficult to accept, since the Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah, loc. cit.), the source for this law, was written several hundred years after Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi granted this leniency. Nevertheless, Rabbenu Nissim's view was widely accepted.4. The Tosefta, Megillah 3:21, cites the example of Aharon, who served as a spokesman for Moses. See also Kessef Mishneh.5. Genesis 35:22. The direct translation of this verse would be unbecoming to both Reuven and Jacob (Rashi, Megillah 25a).6. The third of the priestly blessings states: "May God turn His countenance to you...." This appears to be a direct contradiction to the description of God (Deuteronomy 10:17  as "not turning His face...." Though our Sages resolved that difficulty (Berachot 20b), a problem might come up in a simple translation of the verse.Rav Kapach notes that the Yemenite texts of Targum Onkelos lack a translation for the three verses of the priestly benediction.7. Were the common people given the opportunity of hearing the full story of the golden calf, they might believe that it had spiritual power (Rashi, loc. cit.). Alternatively, the narrative places a major burden of responsibility on Aharon (Tosafot, Megillah, loc. cit.).8. The commentaries note that this passage is not read as a haftarah at present. Rav Kapach states that the need to make this statement indicates that in Talmudic times, the passages that were read as haftarot were not fixed and there was some room for choice.9. Verses from the Torah cannot be skipped in a public Torah reading. However, it is permitted to skip verses from the prophets while reading the haftarah (Tos'fot Yom Tov, Megillah 10:3).
The reader is not permitted to raise his voice above that of the translator, nor should the translator raise his voice above that of the reader. The translator is not permitted to [begin] translating until the reader completes reading the verse, nor may the reader [begin] reading another verse until the translator has completed the translation.The translator should not lean on a beam or on a pillar. Rather, he should stand with awe and fear. He should not translate from a written text, but rather should recite the translation by heart.The reader is not permitted to assist the translator, lest people say: "The translation is written in the Torah scroll." A person of lesser stature may serve as a translator for a person of greater stature. However, it is not befitting the honor of a person of greater stature to serve as a translator for a person of lesser stature. Two people should not serve as translators simultaneously; rather, one person should read and one should translate.
Not all passages from the Torah are translated in public. All [of the following passages] should be read, but not translated: the incident involving Reuven, the priestly benediction, [the passage describing the sin] of the golden calf from "And Moses told Aharon" (Exodus 32:21  until "And Moses saw the people" (Exodus 32:25  and one other verse, "And God set a plague upon the people" (Exodus 32:35 .In the [description of] the incident concerning Amnon (II Samuel, Chapter 13), the verse which states, "Amnon, the son of David" (13:1) should be neither read nor translated.
The person who reads the haftarah1See the commentary on Halachah 2 for a description of the origin of the custom of reading the haftarah. must read from the Torah first.2This was instituted as a token of respect for the Torah reading. Reading from the prophets without reading from the Torah would imply an equivalence between the seven people who read from the Torah and the one who reads from the prophets (Megillah 23a). Even three verses [are sufficient].3As mentioned in Halachah 3, each person called to the Torah must read at least three verses. He should read again the passage that had been read previously.4i.e., the concluding three lines of the Torah reading.Note Tosafot, Megillah 23a, which states that in Talmudic times, the person who recited the haftarah would read a separate portion from the Torah. It is our custom that on festivals and in the special circumstances described in Chapter 13, Halachot 20-24, that the person who reads the haftarah reads a separate Torah portion.He should not [begin] reading the haftarah until the Torah scroll has been rolled closed. - Rashi, Sotah 39b, states that the person reading the haftarah should wait to allow the person who rolled the Torah closed also to hear the haftarah. Others explain that it is not respectful to the Torah for it be open while the haftarah is being read.He should not [begin] reading the haftarah until the Torah scroll has been rolled closed. He should not read fewer than twenty-one verses [as the haftarah].5Since an aliyah has a minimum of three verses, the twenty-one verses of the haftarah will parallel the seven aliyot of the Torah reading (Megillah 23a). However, if a concept is completed in fewer [verses] than that, he need not add more.6Megillah (loc. cit.) cites the eight concluding verses from Jeremiah, Chapter 7, which were read as the haftarah for Parashat Tzav. (At present, it is customary to add a number of other verses to that haftarah. The haftarah read for Parashat Ki Tetzey has only ten verses.) If he read only ten verses, but the haftarah is translated, it is sufficient even if the concept is not completed.7Rabbenu Nissim explains that after the final verse is translated, one should repeat the verse in its original to conclude with the words of the prophet. Thus, the ten verses, the ten translations, and the repetition of the verse will reach the sum of twenty-one.[When reading] from the prophets, one reads and even two may translate.8Though Halachah 11 prohibits two people to serve as translators for the Torah simultaneously, this restriction is not enforced regarding the haftarah. Rashi, Megillah 21b, explains that the prohibition was instituted to prevent confusion. However, since the haftarot are concerned more with ethics than halachic concepts, the Sages did worry that much about the possibility of confusion arising. One may skip from one concept to another.9Here, the same principle is involved. Though skipping in this manner in a Torah reading is forbidden (Halachah 8), there is no such restriction for the haftarah. Indeed, in many of the haftarot read at present, it is customary to skip certain verses. However, one should not skip from one prophet to another,10for this would be too confusing (Megillah 24a). except among the twelve prophets.11for they are considered to be a single book. Furthermore, [even within a book from a single prophet,] one should not skip from the conclusion of the book until its beginning.12for it is improper to reverse the order of the verses as they are mentioned in the Bible. Whenever one skips, one should not wait longer than it takes the translator to complete his translation.13Megillah (loc. cit.) explains that this is a practice of respect for the congregation, to prevent them from being forced to wait in silence.
A person reading from the prophets may read three verses to the translator at one time,1Though verses from the Torah should be read to a translator one at one time (see Halachah 10), as mentioned in the previous halachah, more leniency is taken regarding verses from the haftarah. and the translator translates them one after another. If the three verses are three separate passages,2Megillah 24a cites the verses from Isaiah 52:3-5 (included in the haftarah of Parshat Shoftim) as an example of such a phenomenon. [It must be noted that these verses are included in two passages (and not three as stated by the Rambam) in all texts of the Bible. Note the commentary of Rabbenu Nissim, who explains two passages as "two different concepts."] [the reader] should read them to the translator only one at a time.3to prevent confusion.
The person who reads the haftarah recites one blessing before [beginning his reading]: Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who chose prophets....1The full text of this blessing is found in the Order of Prayers for the Entire Year. This blessing is considered to be one long blessing, which begins with Baruch and concludes with Baruch (Rav David Arameah).After [completing the reading], he recites four blessings.2Thus, he recites a total of seven blessings, corresponding to the seven people called to the Torah (Soferim 14:1). He concludes the first blessing:3which begins: "Blessed are You..."; the entire prayer is considered to be one blessing. "the God who is faithful in all of His words."4The Avudraham explains that since the object of most of the prophecies is "Zion, Elijah, and David" (i.e., the Messianic redemption), after praising God as faithful to fulfill His prophecies, we begin the second blessing, which centers on the return to Jerusalem. He concludes the second blessing: "who builds Jerusalem."5as in the grace after meals. This text is also found in the siddurim of Rav Amram Gaon and Rav Sa'adiah Gaon. Soferim 13:12 concludes the blessing "who causes Zion to rejoice in her children." The Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh suggest concluding the blessing in this fashion. This is the commonly accepted practice today. He concludes the third blessing: "the Shield of David."6Pesachim 117b compares this to the conclusion of the first blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh, "the Shield of Abraham." He concludes the fourth blessing7which centers on the Sabbath or festival celebrated with the mention of the sacred aspect of the day, as he does in the8fourth blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh.9See Chapter 2, Halachot 5 and 7. Similarly, if Rosh Chodesh falls on the Sabbath, the one who reads the haftarah mentions Rosh Chodesh in10the middle of this blessing, as he does in the11middle of the fourth blessing of the Musaf Shemoneh Esreh.12However, he does not conclude the blessing with the mention of Rosh Chodesh, as he would in the Musaf prayer. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 11.)Shabbat 24b questions whether Rosh Chodesh should be mentioned in this blessing. On one hand, when Rosh Chodesh falls during the week, the haftarah is not read. Hence, one might assume that there is no connection between the two and, hence, there is no need to mention Rosh Chodesh in the blessings. However, on the other hand, we find that when Yom Kippur falls on the Sabbath, the Sabbath is mentioned in the Ne'ilah service, despite the fact that the Ne'ilah service would otherwise not be recited on the Sabbath.Though Rashi and Rav Yitzchok Alfasi interpret the passage in the same manner as the Rambam, Rabbenu Asher and Rabbenu Nissim rule that no mention should be made of Rosh Chodesh in this blessing. The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 284:2 follows the latter position.[The siddurim of Rav Amram Gaon and Rav Sa'adiah Gaon include mention of Rosh Chodesh in the conclusion of the blessing as well. The text of the authoritative Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah also accept this view.]
How many readers [are called to the Torah]? On Sabbath morning, seven; on Yom Kippur, six; on festivals, five.1This reflects a descending order of holiness. Working on the Sabbath is punishable by execution; working on Yom Kippur by כרת (premature death by the hand of heaven); and on festivals, certain labors are permitted. This number may not be reduced.2In order to distinguish each day with the measure of holiness which it is due. However, it may be increased.3This statement is quoted from the Mishnah (Megillah 3:2). Rabbenu Nissim explains that the license to increase the number of people called to the Torah applies only on the Sabbath, in order to clearly differentiate between the different holy days. However, Rashi (like the Rambam, here) explains that it refers to all three occasions. Since working at one's occupation is prohibited on all three occasions, there is no difficulty in adding to the number of people called to the Torah.The Ramah (Orach Chayim 282:1) states that it is customary to follow Rabbenu Nissim's opinion.On Rashei Chadashim and on Chol Hamo'ed, four people [are called to read [from the Torah].4These days are put in a category of their own, because although they are distinguished by the recitation of the Musaf service, work (albeit with restrictions on Chol Hamo'ed) is permitted On the Sabbath and Yom Kippur during the Minchah service, on Mondays and Thursdays throughout the entire year, on Chanukah and Purim in the morning service, and on fast days in the morning and Minchah services5See Chapter 13, Halachah 18. three people [are called to] read [from the Torah]. This number6three or four, respectively may not be reduced,7since, as stated in Halachot 1 and 3, a minimum of three people must be called to the Torah, and a distinction must be made between the days when Musaf is recited and when it is not recited. nor may it may be increased.8On all these occasions, with the exception of the Minchah services of the Sabbath and Yom Kippur, work is permitted, and the Rabbis did not want to have people lose time from work by calling extra people to the Torah. On the Sabbath no additions were made, since it was customary to hold study sessions during the afternoon. Since the reading on Yom Kippur afternoon was instituted as parallel to that of the Sabbath afternoon, no additions are made then.
A woman should not read the Torah publicly, as a token of respect for the community.1This decision (quoted from Megillah 23) implies that a woman could receive an aliyah and recite the blessings over the Torah. However, as a gesture of respect to the community, women were not given this privilege.Note the comments of the Magen Avraham 282:6, who states that women are obligated to hear the weekly Torah reading. A minor2i.e., a male under thirteen who knows how to read3since, as stated below, according to the Rambam, only a person who knows how to read can be called to the Torah. and is aware of the One who is being blessed4i.e., understands that reciting the blessings and reading the Torah is part of the service of God. See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Berachot 7:2. may be counted as one of the required number [of people5There is a question among the commentaries if this refers only to the number of seven readers who must be called to the Torah on the Sabbath, or if this also refers to the three readers whom Ezra established as the minimum required to read from the Torah at all times. Rav Kapach relates that in the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Megillah 4:6), he originally accepted a child as one of the seven, but not as one of the three. However, afterwards, he amended the text so that it appears that he accepts a child even as one of the three. called to the Torah].Similarly, the one who recites the haftarah is counted as one of the required number [of people called to the Torah], because he also reads from the Torah. [However,] if the leader of the congregation interrupted [by reciting] Kaddish between the conclusion of the Torah reading and the reading of the person who recites the haftarah,6See Halachah 20. [the latter] is not included as one of the required number [of people called to the Torah]7because the Kaddish marks the conclusion of the required Torah reading. In such an instance, since the required number of people were not called to the Torah, the entire Torah reading must be repeated (Rav David Arameah)..If there is only one person in the community who knows how to read [from the Torah], he should be called to the Torah,8However, the Magen Avraham (ibid.) states that a child should be called only for maftir and even that custom is not practiced in most communities at present.Similarly, the one who recites the haftarah is counted as one of the required number [of people called to the Torah], because he also reads from the Torah - although, as mentioned in Halachah 13, he reads a portion that has already been read. read, descend9to distinguish between aliyot [from the platform],10The Torah was read on a platform in the center of the synagogue. See Chapter 11, Halachah 3. return and read again a second and a third time until he completes the number of aliyot designated for that day.11TheTur (Orach Chayim 141) explains that, at present, the custom is to have the chazan read for everyone. If only those who knew how to read from the Torah were given aliyot, two problems would arise:a) Many people who do not know how to read from the Torah would be embarrassed;b) People who do not know how to read correctly would claim that they do know how to read, and arguments might crop up between them and the synagogue officials.Nevertheless, since there is a question whether it is acceptable for a person to recite the blessings when he does not actually read from the Torah, it is desirable that the person who recites the blessings read along with the chazan in an undertone. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 141:2, and commentaries.) Yemenite custom, even at present, is that each person called to the Torah reads himself.
In all of these [Torah] readings, a priest reads first;1Though our practice has its origins in the decrees of the Sages as explained below, there is also a Torah command (see Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive Commandment 32) to give precedence to a priest regarding the Torah reading. However, according to the Torah, this commandment applies only when the two are equal in wisdom (as mentioned below). after him, a Levite; and after him, an Israelite.2Gittin 5:8 states that this practice was instituted by the Sages to establish peace among the people. Originally, the first aliyah would be given to the sage of greatest stature in the community. However, strife and contention would frequently break out concerning the designation of the person deserving of that honor. It is common custom at present3However, in Talmudic times, if a sage was obviously of a higher stature than the priests who were present, he was called first. Thus, Megillah 22a relates that Rav would receive the first aliyah in the presence of Shmuel, although Shmuel was a priest and Rav was not. that even a priest who is a common person is given precedence and allowed to read before a wise man of great stature in Israel.4In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Gittin, loc. cit.), the Rambam writes:Know that the practice which is widely accepted everywhere, that a priest reads first in the synagogue regardless of whether he is a sage or a commoner, regardless of whether there is someone of greater stature there or not, is a matter which has no basis in the Talmud.... I wonder where this blemish came from....The Rambam continues to explain that even at present, it is proper to call a sage of greater stature to the Torah before a priest of lower stature. Though the Rambam's opinion has been supported by many commentaries, in practice the commonly accepted custom has been allowed to be continued. The reason for this is quite clear. The strife and contention that existed in Talmudic times would surely return (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 135).Whoever is greater than his colleague in wisdom is given precedence regarding the reading [of the Torah].5Gittin 60a states that after the priest and the Levite, the aliyot should be given to "Torah sages who serve as community leaders, the sons of Torah sages who serve as community leaders, the heads of the community, and then all people." The last person who rolls the Torah scroll closed receives a reward equivalent to that of all the others.6Megillah 32b states that the gollel - the one who rolls the Torah closed - receives a reward equivalent to that of all the others who read from the Torah.Apparently, the Rambam interprets this statement as referring to the person who receives the final aliyah, or on Sabbath and festivals, the one who reads the haftarah. He should also roll the Torah closed. The Mishnah Berurah (147:5-6) quotes a different view, explaining that the term גולל refers to the person who lifts the Torah up (what we refer to as Magbiah). It is customary that the person who receives this honor need not read from the Torah beforehand. Therefore, even the person of the greatest stature in the community can receive the concluding aliyah.7Because of the principles mentioned above, one might think that the sage of greatest stature should receive the third (or the first) aliyah. However, since the reward received by the גולל is greater, the sage may be given this honor.
When there are no priests present,1or the priest is at a point in prayer where he is forbidden to make an interruption (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 135:5). an Israelite is called to the Torah2Our translation follows the statements of Rav Sa'adiah Gaon, who writes that the honor should be given to an Israelite and should not be given to a Levite. However, the Ramah (Orach Chayim 135:6) states that the honor may also be given to a Levite. and a Levite should not be called after him at all.3lest one think that the person called to the Torah before him is a priest (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 135).Note the statements of Rav Sa'adiah Gaon, who maintains that in such circumstances, the Levite may be given one of the later aliyot. His opinion is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.:10). However, the Ramah maintains that a second priest or Levite should not be given one of the first seven aliyot.When there are no Levites present, the priest who received the first aliyah returns and reads [from the Torah] a second time in place of the Levite. - An Israelite should not be called, for this would create the impression that the first person called to the Torah was not a priest (Mishnah Berurah 135:28).When there are no Levites present, the priest who received the first aliyah returns and reads [from the Torah] a second time in place of the Levite. Another priest should not read [from the Torah] after him, lest others say that there is a blemish in the first's lineage,4even if his father was known to be a priest, it is possible that his mother was unfit to marry a priest. and, therefore, another priest was given the aliyah.5In contrast to the situation involving two Levites mentioned below, the second priest's lineage would not be doubted, for were he not a priest, he would not be given this aliyah either (Mishnah Berurah 135:28).Similarly, one Levite should not read [from the Torah] after another Levite, lest others say that there is a blemish in the lineage of one of them - i.e., even if his father was a Levite, it is possible that he married a women who is a ממזרת, and thus their children are also ממזרים (Mishnah Berurah 135:30).Similarly, one Levite should not read [from the Torah] after another Levite, lest others say that there is a blemish in the lineage of one of them.
What is the order [of the service] when the Torah is read after prayer?1Having outlined the halachic principles governing the reading of the Torah, the Rambam turns to explaining the order of the prayer service on the days when the Torah is read. Thus, this and the following two halachot complete the description of the order of communal prayer begun in Chapter 9. On a day when there is a Musaf service,2but when the haftarah is not recited - i.e., Rosh Chodesh or Chol Hamo'ed after the leader of the congregation completes the morning service, he recites Kaddish3full Kaddish, to indicate the completion of the morning service and takes out the Torah scroll.4The Mishnah Berurah 141:25 states that the Torah scroll should always be taken to the platform on the right side, as the reader faces the platform. He calls the members of the community, one by one, and they ascend5to the platform on which the Torah is read. Hence, the name aliyah (ascent) is used to refer to a person called to the Torah. and read from the Torah. When they have completed the reading, he returns the Torah scroll to its place,6as mentioned in Chapter 9, Halachah 14, here the congregation recite Tehillah l'David and U'va l'Tzion. recites Kaddish,7half-Kaddish. The Rambam's statements are based on Soferim 21:6. It is our practice to recite Kaddish after the Torah reading and then, again, as an introduction to the Musaf prayers. and then the [congregation] recites the Musaf service.8and then the [congregation] recites the Musaf service. On days when the haftarah is read and there is a Musaf service,9i.e., Sabbaths and festivals it is customary to recite Kaddish before the person who reads the haftarah ascends [for his aliyah].10Thus, the Kaddish differentiates between the Torah reading, which is obligatory, and the portion read by the person who recites the haftarah, which was instituted only as a token of respect for the Torah (Soferim, loc. cit.).The Rambam does not state whether the Torah scroll should be returned before the morning service or afterwards. In one of his responsa, he writes that there is no advantage to one practice over the other, and everything depends on local custom. There are places where it is customary to recite Kaddish after the person who reads the haftarah [completes his Torah reading].11Halachah 17 describes the consequences that result from this difference in custom.
During the Minchah service on the Sabbath and on Yom Kippur, after the leader of the congregation completes Tehillah l'David and the order of Kedushah,1i.e., U'va l'Tzion. See Chapter 9, Halachah 13. On Yom Kippur, it is our custom to recite these prayers before the Ne'ilah service, and not before Minchah. he recites the Kaddish,2a half-Kaddish and takes out a Torah scroll.3The congregation should stand while the Torah scroll is being taken from the ark (Kiddushin 33b). Soferim 14:14 states that the congregation should walk after the Torah scroll while it is being taken from the ark to the reading platform and when it is returned.The Ramah (Orach Chayim 149:1) mentions the custom of training children to kiss the Torah scroll as it is taken out. [Those called to the Torah] ascend and read and then, [the Torah scroll] is returned [to its place.4The congregation should rise and accompany it back to the ark (Shulchan Aruch and Ramah, Orach Chayim 149:1). The leader of the congregation] recites Kaddish,5half-Kaddish and the [congregation] recites the Minchah service.6and the [congregation] recites the Minchah service. Similarly, on a fast day,7after the recitation ofTehillah l'David and half-Kaddish the Torah is read [before] the Minchah service.8See Chapter 13, Halachah 18. Afterwards, Kaddish is recited,9a half-Kaddish and the Minchah service is recited. On festivals, it is not customary to read [the Torah] in the Minchah service.10As explained in Halachah 1, the Torah reading on Sabbath afternoons was instituted for יושבי קרנות. According to the interpretation that this refers to idle people who sit on the street corners, Rabbenu Manoach explains that this reason would not apply on the festivals, when the people are involved in the preparation of their festive meals. Even according to the interpretation of the term as "shopkeepers," it is possible that in consideration of the time spent preparing the festive meals, the Rabbis did not institute the reading of the Torah in the Minchah service.
[When the Torah is read on] a day when Musaf is not recited,1i.e., on Mondays and Thursdays, Purim, Chanukah, and fast days after the morning Shemoneh Esreh is completed,2and the supplicatory prayers have been recited [the leader of the congregation] recites the Kaddish3half-Kaddish and takes out a Torah scroll. [After the portion is] read from it, [the Torah scroll] is returned [to its place.4Interestingly, this is the custom in some Ashkenazic communities. However, in Sephardic communities, it is customary to return the Torah scroll to the ark after the recitation of the full Kaddish mentioned below (Shulchan Aruch and Ramah, Orach Chayim 25:13). The leader of the congregation] recites Tehillah l'David and the order of Kedushah,5U'va l'Tzion as is the practice every day.6See Chapter 9, Halachah 13. [Afterwards,] he recites the Kaddish7the full Kaddish, to indicate the completion of the service. and the people depart.
It is not proper to read from chumashim in synagogues, as a token of respect for the community.1i.e., it is proper that a community possess a complete Torah scroll. The Jerusalem Talmud (Megillah 3:1) states that this prohibition was instituted so that the community would be upset that they were prevented from hearing the Torah readings, and therefore buy a Torah scroll. (See also Chapter 11, Halachah 1.)A Torah scroll should not be rolled [from one portion to another portion] in the presence of the community, because of the difficulty it would cause the people, forcing them to remain standing while the Torah scroll is being rolled.2Rashi, Yoma 70a, offers another reason: because the congregation is forced to stand idly while the scroll is being rolled. Therefore, if it is necessary to read two separate concepts, two Torah scrolls are taken out.3See Chapter 18, Halachot 22-24. [However,] one person should not read one concept from two Torah scrolls,4See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 3:10, which describes the portions read by the High Priest in the Temple on Yom Kippur. He would read one passage by heart, rather than roll the Torah scroll.The Merkevat HaMishneh explains that if the passages read from the two scrolls deal with two different subjects, one person may read from two scrolls. See Chapter 13, Halachah 4. lest people say that the first scroll was invalid and, therefore, they read from the second.5Interestingly, the Rambam does not mention at all the laws which apply when a Torah scroll is found invalid. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 143.)
When a person rolls a Torah scroll [closed],1Apparently, in Talmudic times, one person would both lift the Torah up and roll it closed. (This practice is followed today among Chabad Chassidim.) he should roll it from the outside.2The Ramah (Orach Chayim 147:4) interprets this statement (a quote from Megillah 32b) to mean that when a Torah scroll is rolled closed, the blank side of the parchment should face the outside, and the writing should face the person holding the Torah scroll. When he ties it, he should tie it from the inside.3Tosafot (Megillah, loc. cit.) explains that if the knot is on the outside, when the Torah scroll is opened it would have to be turned over to be untied. He should leave the stitching4between the different columns of the Torah scroll [in the center], so that it will not rip.5i.e., if the Torah scroll is torn because one person pulled one etz chayim (one of the rods on which the Torah scroll is mounted) from the other, the scroll will tear on the stitching and not on the text.In a place where a Torah scroll is taken [from the synagogue] to another room where it is kept, the congregation6The Ramah (Orach Chayim 149:1) interprets the following prohibition to apply only to the community as a whole. One or two individuals are allowed to leave. is not allowed to leave until the Torah scroll is taken.7The Tur, Orach Chayim 149, interprets Sotah 39b, the source for this prohibition, as forbidding one to leave from the same exit through which the Torah will be taken, but allowing one to leave through another exit, because it is improper for a person to walk in front of the Torah scroll.The Rambam does not allow this leniency, since abandoning the Torah does not show respect. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 149:1) quotes the Tur's opinion. They should accompany it, following it to the place where it is kept.8Sotah 39b derives this law from Deuteronomy 13:5: "Follow after God, your Lord." The Ramah (loc. cit.) states that similar practices should be followed when the Torah is kept in the ark, as is customary today. (See also the commentary on Halachah 21.)

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
The common custom throughout all Israel is to complete the [reading of] the Torah in one year. [The cycle] is begun on the Sabbath after the Sukkot festival, reading the sidrah, Bereshit. On the following Sabbath, [the sidrah,] Eleh toldot [is read]; on the third, [the sidrah,] Vayomer Ado-nai el Avram. We continue reading according to this order until the Torah is completed, during the Sukkot festival.There are those who finish the Torah reading in a three-year cycle. However, this is not a widely accepted custom.
Ezra instituted the practice of having the Jews read the "curses" found in the Book of Leviticus before Shavuot, and those found in the Book of Deuteronomy before Rosh HaShanah.It is common custom to read [the sidrah,] Bemidbar Sinai before Shavuot, [the sidrah,] Va'etchanan after Tish'ah B'Av, [the sidrah,] Attem nitzavim before Rosh HaShanah, and [the sidrah,] Tzav et Aharon before Pesach in an ordinary year.Therefore, there are Sabbaths on which two sedarim are read: for example, [the sidrah,] Ishah ki tazria and [the sidrah,] Vezot tih'yeh torat hametzora [are often combined. Similarly, the sidrah,] Im bechukotai [is often combined] with [the sidrah,] Behar Sinai, so that [the reading of the Torah] will be completed in a year, and the sedarim will be read at the appropriate times.
At the point [in the Torah] where the Sabbath morning [reading] was completed, the reading [is begun] on the Sabbath afternoon, on Monday, on Thursday, and on the following Sabbath.What is implied? On the first Sabbath, we read [the sidrah,] Bereshit in the morning. In the afternoon, ten or more verses from [the sidrah,] Eleh toldot Noach are read. The same practice [is followed] on Monday and Thursday. On the coming Sabbath, we begin from Eleh toldot Noach, and read until the conclusion of the sidrah. This pattern is followed throughout the year.On each Sabbath, a haftarah is recited that reflects the Torah reading.
On Rosh Chodesh, the first reader reads three verses from the passage (Numbers 28:1-15) Tzav. The second reader reads the third verse which was read by the first reader, and the following two verses, so that three verses will remain in the passage. The third reader reads the three verses that were left [unread] by the second reader, and the passage "And on the Sabbath day...." The fourth reader reads [the passage] "And on your new months...."If Rosh Chodesh falls on the Sabbath, two Torah scrolls are taken out in the morning. The sidrah of that particular Sabbath is read from one, and the person who concludes the reading reads [the passage] "And on your new months...."The person who reads the haftarah reads the passage concerning Rosh Chodesh, and then reads [the passage (Isaiah 66:1-24) that concludes:] "And it will be from month to month..." as the haftarah.If Rosh Chodesh Av falls on the Sabbath [the passage, Isaiah 1:14-31, beginning:] "My soul hates your new moons and your festivals" is read as the haftarah.If Rosh Chodesh falls on Sunday, on the preceding Sabbath [the passage (I Samuel 20:18-42), beginning:] "And Jonathan told him: 'Tomorrow is the new month...'” is read as the haftarah.
Whoever is called to read from the Torah should begin [his reading] with a positive matter and conclude with a positive matter.However, in Parashat Ha'azinu, the first [person called to the Torah] reads until Z'chor y'mot olam (Deuteronomy 32:7 . The second begins from Z'chor y'mot olam [and continues] until Yarkivehu (ibid.:13). The third [reads] from Yarkivehu until Vayar Ado-nai vayin'atz (ibid.:19). The fourth [reads] from Vayar Ado-nai vayin'atz until Lu chachmu (ibid.:29). The fifth [reads] from Lu chachmu until Ki essa el shamayim yadi (ibid.:40). The sixth [reads] from Ki essa el shamayim yadi until the conclusion of the song (ibid.:43).Why is the Torah reading ceased at these points? Because these are [verses of] rebuke, [and the intent is that] that they motivate the people to repent.
The eight verses at the conclusion of the Torah may be read in a synagogue when fewer than ten people are present. They are indeed all Torah and were related by Moses from the Almighty. However, since, on the surface, they appear to have been recited after Moses' death, the [rules governing them] are different. Therefore, it is permissible for an individual to read them.
The "curses" in Leviticus should not be interrupted. Rather, a single person should read them [in their entirety]. He should begin with the verse preceding them and conclude with the verse following them.The "curses" in Deuteronomy may be interrupted if one desires. However, the people have already adopted the custom of not interrupting [this reading]. Rather, a single person reads them [in their entirety].
[The cycle of Torah readings] is interrupted for the festivals and Yom Kippur. [On these occasions,] we read [a passage that] concerns the festival and not the sidrah of [that] Sabbath.Moses instituted [the practice that], on each festival, the Jews should read [a passage] appropriate to it. Also, it [is proper] on each festival to ask about and explain the subjects [pertinent] to that festival.Which [passages] are read? On Pesach, [we read] the passage concerning the festivals in Leviticus  23:4-44). [However,] the people have already adopted the custom of reading Mishchu uk'chu lachem (Exodus 12:21-51) on the first day. The haftarah is [the description] of the Pesach celebrated in Gilgal (Joshua 5:2-15).On the second day, we read Shor o kesev (Leviticus 22:26-23:44). The haftarah is [the description] of the Pesach celebrated by Josaiah (II Kings 1-9, 21-25). On the third day, we read Kadesh li kol b'chor (Exodus 13:1-16); on the fourth day, Im kessef talveh (Exodus 22:24-23:19); on the fifth day, P'sol lecha (Exodus 34:1-26); on the sixth day, Vaya'asu Bnei Yisrael et hapesach b'mo'ado (Numbers 9:1-14).On the final festival, [we read] from Vay'hi beshalach until the conclusion of the song [sung at Red Sea] until [the verse,] Ani Ado-nai rof'echa (Exodus 13:17-15:26). The haftarah is Vayedaber David (II Samuel 22:1-51).On the eighth day, [we read], Kol hab'chor (Deuteronomy 15:19-16:17). The haftarah is Od hayom (Isaiah 10:32-4, 11:1-16, 12:1-6).
On Shavuot, we read [the passage, containing the reading] Shiv'ah shavuot (Deuteronomy 16:9 . However, it is common custom to read [the passage,] Bachodesh hash'lishi (Exodus 19:1-20:23) on the first day of the festival. [The vision of God's] chariot (Ezekiel 1:1-28) is read as the haftarah.On the second day, the passage describing the festivals, Kol hab'chor (Deuteronomy 15:19-16:17) is read, and [a passage from] Chabbakuk (3:1-19) is read as the haftarah.
On Rosh HaShanah, we read [the passage including the verse]: Uvachodesh hash'vi'i b'echad lachodesh (Numbers 29:1 . However, it is common custom to read [the passage,] VAdo-nai pakad et Sarah (Genesis 21:1-33). [The passage,] Vay'hi ish echad min haramatayim (I Samuel 1:1-2:10) is read as the haftarah.On the second day, [the passage,] V'HaElo-him nisah et Avraham (Genesis 22:1-24) is read, and [the passage including the verse] Haven yakir li Efrayim (Jeremiah 31:1-19) is read as the haftarah.
On Yom Kippur, in the morning, we read [the passage,] Acharei mot (Leviticus 16:1-34) and read [the passage,] Ki koh amar ram v'nisa (Isaiah 57:14-58:14) as the haftarah.In the afternoon, [we read the passage] in Acharei mot that is concerned with forbidden sexual relations, in order that anyone who has violated one of these sins will remember, become embarrassed, and repent. The third person [who] reads from the Torah recites [the Book of] Yonah as the haftarah.
On Sukkot, on the first two days, we read the passage that concerns the festivals: Shor o kesev o eyz (Leviticus 22:26-23:44). The haftarah read on the first day is [the passage,] Hiney yom ba l'Ado-nai (Zechariah 14). On the second day, [the haftarah is the passage,] Vayikahalu el hamelech Shlomo (I Kings 8:2-21).On the final day of the festival, we read [the passage,] Kol hab'chor (Deuteronomy 15:19-16:17). For the haftarah, we read [the passage,] Vay'hi k'chalot Shlomo (I Kings 8:54-66).On the following day, we read [the sidrah,] Vezot haberachah (Deuteronomy 33-34). For the haftarah, we read [the passage,] Vaya'amod Shlomo (I Kings 8:22-53). There are those who read [the passage,] Vay'hi acharei mot Moshe (Joshua 1) as the haftarah.On the other days of Sukkot, we read [the passages that describe] the sacrifices [offered] on the festival.
What is implied? On each of the days of Chol Hamo'ed, we read two passages. [For example,] on the third day [of the festival], which is [the first day of] Chol Hamo'ed, the priest reads [the passage,] Uvayom hasheni. The Levite reads [the passage,] Uvayom hash'lishi. The Israelite repeats [the passage,] Uvayom hash'lishi, and the person called for the fourthaliyah repeats [both passages:] Uvayom hasheni and Uvayom hash'lishi.Similarly, on the fourth day [of the festival], which is the second day of Chol Hamo'ed, we read the passages Uvayom hash'lishi and Uvayom harevi'i. The same pattern is followed on all the [other] days.
In the morning [service] on each and every one of the festivals, on Yom Kippur, and during the seven days of Pesach, two [Torah] scrolls are taken out. We read the passages mentioned above from the first scroll, and from the second scroll we read the description of the sacrifices [offered on] that day, in the Book of Numbers. The person who reads the description of the sacrifices recites the haftarah from the prophets.
On any day when two or three [Torah] scrolls are taken out: if they are taken out one after the other, when the first scroll is returned, Kaddish is recited and the second scroll is taken out. When the second scroll is returned, Kaddish is also recited.We have mentioned above that the common custom is to recite Kaddish after the reader concludes the reading at all times, and then to recite the haftarah from the prophets.
When the Sabbath falls during Chol Hamo'ed - whether during Pesach or during Sukkot - [the passage,] R'ey Attah omer elai (Exodus 33:12-34:26) is read on that Sabbath. On Pesach, [the passage describing Ezekiel's vision of] the dry bones (Chapter 37) is read as the haftarah. When [the Sabbath] falls in the midst of Sukkot, [the passage,] B'yom bo Gog (Ezekiel 38:18-39:16) is read as the haftarah.
On Chanukah, [the following passages are read:] On the first day, we read from the Priestly Blessing (Numbers 6:38-42) until the conclusion of the sacrifice offered on the first day (Numbers 7:17 . On the second day, we read [the passage describing] the sacrifices of the Nasi who brought the offering on the second day. This practice is continued until the eighth day. On the eighth day, we read [the descriptions of] all the [remaining] sacrifices until the end of the portion.On the Sabbath of Chanukah, the haftarah is Zechariah's [vision of the Menorah (2:14-4:7)]. If two Sabbaths are celebrated during Chanukah, on the first Sabbath, Zechariah's [vision of the Menorah] is read as the haftarah; on the second, [the description of] Solomon's [Menorah is read as the haftarah (I Kings 7:40-50)]. The one who reads the [passage designated for] Chanukah is the one who recites the haftarah from the prophets.On Purim, [the passage,] Vayavo Amalek (Exodus 17:8-16) [is read].
On Tish'ah B'Av, in the morning, [the passage,] Ki tolid banim (Deuteronomy 4:25-40) is read, and [the passage,] Asof asifem, n'um Ado-nai (Jeremiah 8:13-9:23) is read as the haftarah. During the Minchah service, we read [the passage,] Vay'chal Moshe (Exodus 32:11-14, 34:1-10), as on other fast days.On the other days when we fast [to commemorate the bitter events] that occurred to our ancestors, we read the [above-mentioned passage,] in the morning and Minchah services [in the following manner]: The first person called to the Torah reads four verses, [beginning] Vay'chal Moshe. The second and the third read from P'sol lecha until asher ani oseh imach.On the fasts that are declared by the community because of difficulties like famine or plague, we read blessings and curses, so that the people will repent and humble their hearts when they hear them.
It is customary on the three Sabbaths before Tish'ah B'Av to read haftarot of rebuke. On the first Sabbath, we read [the passage,] Divrei Yirmiyahu (Jeremiah 1:1-2:3) as the haftarah. On the second [Sabbath], we read [the passage,] Chazon Yishayahu (Isaiah 1:1-27). On the third [Sabbath], we read [the passage,] Eichah hay'ta l'zonah (Isaiah 1:21 .Similarly, on the Sabbath after Tish'ah B'Av we read [the passage Nachamu, nachamu, ami (Isaiah 40:1-26) as the haftarah. It is the common custom in our cities to read the comforting prophecies of Isaiah as the haftarot from Tish'ah B'Av until Rosh HaShanah.On the Sabbath between Rosh HaShanah and Yom Kippur, we read [the passage,] Shuvah Yisrael as the haftarah.
When Rosh Chodesh Adar falls on the Sabbath, we read Parashat Shekalim (Exodus 30:11-16), and read as the haftarah [the passage concerning] Yehoyada, the priest (II Kings 11:17-20, 12:1-17). If Rosh Chodesh Adar falls in the middle of the week - even if it falls on Friday - Parashat Shekalim is read on the previous Sabbath.On the "second Sabbath," we read Parashat Zachor (Deuteronomy 25:17-19), and read as the haftarah, [the passage,] Pakad'ti et asher asah Amalek (I Samuel 15:1-34). What is meant by the "second Sabbath"? The Sabbath before the week in which Purim falls - even if Purim falls on Friday.On the "third Sabbath," we read [the passage describing] "the red heifer" (Numbers 19:1-22), and read as the haftarah [the passage,] V'zarakti aleichem (Ezekiel 36:16-38). Which is the "third Sabbath"? The one preceding the fourth.On the fourth Sabbath, we read [the passage,] Hachodesh hazeh lachem (Exodus 12:1-20), and read as the haftarah [the passage,] Barishon b'echad lachodesh (Ezekiel 45:16-25, 46:1-18). Which is the "fourth Sabbath"? The Sabbath of the week when Rosh Chodesh Nisan falls - even if it falls on Friday.
Thus, there will be times when there is an interruption between the first [of these] Sabbaths and the second, or between the second and the third. At times, there will be two interruptions - between the first and the second and between the second and third. However, an interruption is never made between the third and fourth [Sabbaths].
Each one of these four passages should be read from another Torah scroll, after reading the sidrah of that Sabbath from the scroll that was taken out first.If Rosh Chodesh Adar fell on the Sabbath and the sidrah to be read that week was V'attah tetzaveh, six people read from V'attah tetzaveh until V'asita kiyor nechoshet.The seventh person reads from the second scroll and repeats the reading of Ki tissa until V'asita kiyor nechoshet.If the sidrah to be read that week was Ki tissa itself, six people read from Ki tissa until Vayakhel. The seventh person reads from the second scroll and repeats the reading of Ki tissa until V'asita kiyor nechoshet.
[When] Rosh Chodesh Adar falls on the Sabbath, three Torah scrolls are taken out. The sidrah of the day is read from the first scroll. The passage concerning Rosh Chodesh is read from the second scroll, and Ki tissa is read from the third scroll. Similarly, [when] Rosh Chodesh Nisan falls on the Sabbath, three Torah scrolls are taken out. The sidrah of the day is read from the first scroll, the passage concerning Rosh Chodesh is read from the second scroll, and Hachodesh hazeh is read from the third scroll.
[Similarly, when] Rosh Chodesh Tevet falls on the Sabbath, three Torah scrolls are taken out. The sidrah of the day is read from the first scroll. The passage concerning Rosh Chodesh is read from the second scroll, and the passage for Chanukah is read from the third scroll.[When Rosh Chodesh Tevet] falls during the middle of the week, three people read from the passage concerning Rosh Chodesh, and the fourth person reads the passage for Chanukah.
Although a person hears the entire Torah [portion] each Sabbath [when it is read] communally, he is obligated to study on his own each week the sidrah of that week, reading it twice in the original and once in the Aramaic translation. [When] there is no Aramaic translation for a verse, one should read the verse three times in the original, so that one completes [the study of] one's [Torah] portions with the community.

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
In the morning, Musaf, and Ne'ilah services,1In Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 26), the Rambam writes that the mitzvah is for the priests to bless the people "every day." The Sages extended the scope of the requirement and obligated the priests to bless the people in all the above services (Ta'anit 26b).The Ramah (Orach Chayim 128:44) writes:It is customary in these countries to recite the priestly blessing only on holidays, when people are in festive and joyous spirits...In contrast, on other days - even on Sabbaths - [the priests] are disturbed, worrying about earning a livelihood and the delay of work.Even on holidays, the priestly blessing is recited only in the Musaf service, directly before the people leave the synagogue and rejoice in the holiday festivities.The Ramah's decision is based on the view that the priestly blessings must be recited with feelings of joy and goodwill, and if those feelings cannot be aroused (see Zohar III 147a), it is proper that the blessing not be recited. Though the Ashkenazic community follows his view, in Egypt and in Eretz Yisrael the priests have always fulfilled the mitzvah of blessing the people every day. Many Ashkenazic authorities, among them Rav Shneur Zalman of Liadi and Rav Shlomo Kluger, desired to introduce this practice in the Ashkenazic community. However, they were not successful in doing so. the priests2The Minchat Chinuch states, in the name of the Sefer HaCharedim, that just as it is a mitzvah for the priests to bless the people, it is a mitzvah for the people to be blessed. The Hafla'ah (Ketubot 24b) draws a parallel to the mitzvah of Yibbum which is incumbent on both the man and woman involved. recite3Sefer HaMitzvot (loc. cit.) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 278) include this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. the priestly blessing.4Our translation of Nesiat Kapayim as "recite the priestly blessing" is not literal. The words actually mean "raise their hands," referring to the way the priests hold their hands while reciting these blessings, as mentioned in Halachah 3. They do not recite the priestly blessing in the Minchah service, because, by the time of the Minchah service, all the people have eaten.5Here, we see an example of how a Rabbinic decree can prevent the fulfillment of a Torah commandment. The possibility exists that the priests would have drunken wine, and it is forbidden to recite the priestly blessing while intoxicated.6Deuteronomy 10:8 describes how God designated the tribe of Levi "to stand before God, to serve Him and offer blessing in His name," establishing a equation between service in the Temple and the recitation of the priestly blessing. Accordingly, just as a priest is forbidden to serve in the Temple while intoxicated (Leviticus 10:9), he is also forbidden to recite the priestly blessings in such a state (Ta'anit, loc. cit.).Even on a fast day,7when there is no suspicion that the priests are drunk the priestly blessings are not recited during the Minchah service.8See the following halachah for clarification. This decree [was instituted,] lest [people fail to differentiate between] the Minchah service of a fast day and the Minchah service of an ordinary day.9Ta'anit (loc. cit.) records a difference of opinion on this question among the Sages. All the Sages agree that the priestly blessing is not recited during an ordinary Minchah. However, Rabbi Meir requires the priestly blessing to be recited on a fast day. On the other hand, Rabbi Yosse follows the view quoted by the Rambam. His position is accepted by the other Halachic authorities as well.
When does the above apply? On fast days when both Minchah and Ne'ilah are recited - i.e., Yom Kippur and communal fasts [declared because of distress].1See Ta'anit 1:4-7 and Hilchot Ta'aniot, Chapter 2, which describe the situations which warrant the declaration of a communal fast. However, on a fast day on which Ne'ilah is not recited2e.g., Tish'ah B'Av or the seventeenth of Tammuz - i.e., fasts instituted to commemorate tragic events in our national history. These days are associated primarily with mourning. In contrast, the other fasts are days when we increase our supplication in an effort to evoke Divine mercy. For this reason, the Sages instituted the Ne'ilah prayer on these days alone (Beit Yosef, Orach Chayim 579). - e.g., Tish'ah B'Av or the seventeenth of Tammuz - since the Minchah service is recited close to sunset, it resembles Ne'ilah3See Chapter 3, Halachah 6, which states: "The proper time of the Ne'ilah prayer is such that one completes it close to sunset." and will not be confused with an ordinary Minchah service.4which is generally recited in the early afternoon, to afford people the opportunity to eat afterwards, since it is forbidden to eat a meal in the afternoon before reciting Minchah (Tosafot, Ta'anit, loc. cit.). Therefore, the priestly blessing is recited during it.5Similarly, in Ashkenazic communities, when the priests do not recite the priestly blessings every day, the chazan should recite the blessing in his repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh.If a priest transgressed and ascended to the platform during the Minchah service of Yom Kippur, since it is known that there is no possibility of drunkenness on that day, he may recite the priestly blessing,6Because of this decision, in Ashkenazic communities the chazan recites the priestly blessings in his repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh during these days (Hagahot Ma'amoniot). and he is not required to descend because of the suspicion [that might be aroused], so that people do not say, "He is of blemished lineage. Therefore, they forced him to descend."7i.e., it is feared that the people will suspect that his mother was a divorcee, and he is thus not able to serve as a priest.
How is the priestly blessing recited outside the Temple?1i.e., in the synagogue prayer services. The recitation of the priestly blessing in the Temple is discussed in Halachah 9. When the leader of the congregation reaches the blessing R'tzey, when he recites the word R'tzey all the priests in the synagogue leave their places,2Sotah 38b states: "Any priest who does not ascend during the blessing R'tzey may not ascend afterwards. Later, the Talmud qualifies this statement to mean that a priest must leave his place in the synagogue during the blessing R'tzey. proceed forward,3reciting the short prayer mentioned in Halachah 12. and ascend the duchan.4The term duchan refers to the steps before the heichal. (See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Berachot 5:4.) This term has become associated with the recitation of the priestly blessing to the extent that reciting the blessing is often popularly referred to as duchaning.In a synagogue where there are no steps before the ark, the priests still recite the blessings while standing before the ark.They stand there, facing the heichal,5the permanent ark; Chapter 11, Halachah 2. with their backs to the congregation. They hold their fingers closed, against their palms,6The Mishnah Berurah explains that the priests are not required to close their hands. The Rambam is merely clarifying that, at this point, they are not obligated to spread their hands, as they do when they bless the people. until the leader of the congregation completes the blessing Modim.7The priestly blessing is recited at this point in the repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh, as the preface to the blessing praising God for granting peace to our people. [Then,]8they recite the blessing mentioned in Halachah 12, and they turn9turning to the right (see Halachah 13). their faces to the people,10so the blessing will be recited face to face, as required by Halachah 11. spread out their fingers,11On the verse (Song of Songs 2:9), "peeking through the windows," Shir HaShirim Rabbah comments that the Divine Presence peeks through the windows between the priests' fingers. In particular, the Sages note that the word "the windows" (החרכים) can be broken up as follows: ה חרכים - "five windows," alluding to the unique manner in which the priests hold their hands while reciting the priestly blessing. lift up their hands12Sotah 38a derives the obligation of the priests to raise their hands from Leviticus 9:22: "Aharon lifted his hands toward the people and blessed them." shoulder high,13Compare to the practice in the Temple mentioned in Halachah 9. and begin reciting, Y'varechecha....14This statement has raised questions among the commentaries. The Kiryat Sefer explains that the priests recite Y'varechecha - the first word of the priestly blessings - directly after concluding the blessing (see Halachah 12) recited before blessing the people, without being prompted by the reader. They take the initiative, so that an interruption is not made between the recitation of the blessing before the performance of a mitzvah and its actual performance.Study of the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Berachot, loc. cit.) shows that the Rambam himself had questions about this matter. In the first manuscripts, the Rambam writes that "the leader of the congregation recites Y'varechecha, and the priests read after him." This is also the reading in the popularly published edition of that text. However, in the later manuscripts of the Commentary on the Mishnah (see Rav Kapach's edition of that text), the Rambam changes his mind and states that the priests begin reciting y'varechecha.In his Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 128), Rav Yosef Karo mentions these different views, and in his Shulchan Aruch (128:13) rules that the priests begin on their own initiative. The Ramah differs and states that it is Ashkenazic practice that this word is also recited in response to the chazan.The leader of the congregation reads [the blessing] to them, word for word, and they respond after him [as can be inferred15See the Sifre on the verse below. from Numbers 6:23: "This is how you should bless the children of Israel:] 'Say to them...;’” [i.e., the priests do not bless until one] "says to16The fact that the priests merely repeat the blessing emphasizes the concept (Chapter 14, Halachah 7) that the blessing is God's, and the priests do no more than convey that blessing to the people (Kinat Eliyahu).When [the priests] conclude the first verse, all the people answer "Amen." - The Kiryat Sefer states that responding "Amen" to the priestly blessings is an obligation from the Torah.Note the difference between this law and the ruling when the chazan recites the priestly blessings in the absence of any priests (Chapter 15, Halachah 10). Note also the contrast to the people's response to the priestly blessings in the Temple, (Halachah 9).The leader of the congregation reads [the priests] the second verse, word for word, and they respond after him until they complete the second verse. - The Ramah (loc. cit.:45) mentions the custom of the priests chanting during the recitation of the blessings. This practice is followed only on holidays. In Eretz Yisrael, the priests do not chant when the priestly blessing is recited on other days.The people respond "Amen." The same applies regarding the third verse. - Berachot 55b states that a person who has a dream which requires explanation should stand before the priests when they bless the people. Accordingly, it is customary to recite a prayer regarding dreams during the priestly blessing. (See Shulchan Aruch loc. cit.; 130:1 and commentaries.) them."When [the priests] conclude the first verse, all the people answer "Amen." The leader of the congregation reads [the priests] the second verse, word for word, and they respond after him until they complete the second verse. The people respond "Amen." The same applies regarding the third verse.
When the priests conclude the recitation of [these] three verses, the leader of the congregation begins the final blessing of the Shemoneh Esreh, Sim shalom.1After the priests promise that God will bless the people, it is appropriate that the chazan begin the blessing requesting peace, alluding to Psalms 29:11: "God will bless His people with peace" (Megillah 18a). The priests turn2to the right (see Halachah 13), turning their faces to the ark3See Halachah 6. and close their fingers.4The priests are not allowed to close their fingers until they turn to face the ark (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 128:16). At this time, they recite a short prayer, as mentioned in Halachah 12. They remain standing on the duchan until the leader of the congregation concludes the blessing, [and then] return to their places.5See Halachah 6.
The person who calls the priests1As mentioned in Halachah 3, based on Numbers 6:23: "This is how you should bless the children of Israel: 'Say to them...,'” our Sages explained that before the priests bless the people, someone must "Say to them" - i.e., invite them to recite the blessing.The Tur (Orach Chayim 128) states that the obligation to bless the people is not incumbent upon the priests until someone requests that they do so. is not permitted to call to the priests until the Amen of the community is no longer heard.2Our translation follows the standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah, which reads לכהנים. Other texts read כהנים. This version translates as "The person who calls the priests is not permitted to call out, 'Kohanim'..."These textual differences reflect a difference of interpretation. The standard text relates that the chazan should not begin reading the blessing to the priests until one no longer hears the Amen which the congregation recited in response to the blessing recited by the priests (Halachah 12) before blessing the people.According to the texts which read כהנים, the halachah teaches us that the chazan should not call the priests until the Amen recited by the congregation in response to the blessing Modim can no longer be heard. Both opinions are accepted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch and commentaries (Orach Chayim 128:18). The priests are not permitted to begin reciting the blessing3either the blessing recited before blessing the people, or the priestly blessing itself, depending on the above interpretations. until the statement of the person who calls the priests4either Y'varechecha or Kohanim, according to the respective interpretations. is no longer heard.5In order that each of the statements and blessings can be clearly heard.The congregation should not respond "Amen" until the blessing of the priests - This refers to the blessing recited before blessing the people, and also each of the priestly blessings.The congregation should not respond "Amen" until the blessing of the priests is no longer heard. The priests may not begin another6one of the three priestly... blessing7s - until the Amen of the community - recited in response to the previous blessing... until the Amen of the community is no longer heard.8However, if a few individuals extend their pronunciation of "Amen" exceedingly, the recitation of the priestly blessings need not be delayed.The leader of the congregation is not allowed to recite Amen to the priests' blessings like the rest of the people, lest he become confused and not realize which blessing to recite to them, whether the second blessing or the third blessing.9The recitation of "Amen" is not considered to be an interruption of his recitation of the Shemoneh Esreh. Nevertheless, he should not recite "Amen," because he may become confused and begin reading the wrong blessing to the priests.Note that in Chapter 15, Halachah 10, the Rambam writes that if the chazan is the only priest present in a community, he should not bless the people, lest he become confused and err in his prayers. However, if he is sure that he will not make a mistake, he may bless the people. In the present halachah, the Rambam does not make such an allowance.Perhaps the difference is that in Chapter 15, there is the possibility that the recitation of the priestly blessing will be nullified entirely. Hence, greater leniency is shown. In this halachah, the congregation as a whole will not suffer if the chazan does not respond "Amen" to the priests' blessings. Though the Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit. 128:19) quotes the Rambam's decision, Shulchan Aruch HaRav (128:31) and the Mishnah Berurah (128:71) state that particularly at present, when the blessings are recited from a siddur, the chazan should respond Amen.
The priests are not permitted to turn their faces away from the congregation until the leader of the congregation begins [the blessing] Sim shalom. Neither may the priests leave their places1in front of the heichaluntil the leader of the congregation concludes [the blessing] Sim shalom - nor should the priests speak among themselves. until the leader of the congregation concludes [the blessing] Sim shalom, nor may they close their fingers2from the outstretched position in which they are held while the priestly blessings are being recited. until they turn their faces from the community.3All these three statements are quoted from Sotah 39b. However, the Rambam changes from the order in which these statements are found in the Talmud. Interestingly, the three statements are also quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:16) in still a different order.One of the measures ordained by Ezra4This version is found in the standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah. The commentaries maintain that the text is in error, noting that Sotah 40a ascribes this decree to Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai. is that the priests should not ascend to the duchan wearing sandals.5This decree was instituted lest the sandal strap of one of the priests snap and he descend to fix it. Someone watching them might think that he was forced to descend because someone exposed a blemish in his lineage that prevented him from serving as a priest (Sotah, loc. cit.). Rather, they should stand barefoot.6This statement is not included in Sotah (loc. cit.), and appears to have been added to negate the view of certain authorities, who allow a priest to recite the priestly blessings wearing boots. Nevertheless, even the Rambam allows the priests to wear socks (Rav Kapach). (See Shulchan Aruch and Ramah, loc. cit. and 128:5.)
When the priests bless the people, they should not look at them1individually. A priest must concentrate his thoughts on blessing the people. Looking at any individual (or group) face to face might cause him to divert his thoughts from that intent. or divert their attention.2by thinking of other matters. See also Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:21), which states that the priests should not sing different chants while reciting the blessings for this same reason. Rather, their eyes should be directed towards the earth like one standing in prayer.3See Chapter 5, Halachah 4.The Levush develops this concept, explaining that implicit in the priests' recitation of the blessing is the prayer that God will truly bless the people.A person should not look at the priests' faces while they are blessing the people, lest they divert their attention.4The Rambam's statements are based on the Jerusalem Talmud, Megillah 4:8. The Babylonian Talmud (Chaggigah 16a) states that a person who looks at the priests while they are reciting the priestly blessing in the Temple will lose his eyesight from gazing at the Divine Presence, which rests between the priests' fingers. Rather, all the people should listen attentively to the blessing;5Hence, while the priests are reciting the blessing, the people should not recite any Biblical verses or prayers (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit. 128:25). See Sotah 40a, which states, "Is there a servant who will not listen while he is being blessed?" Nevertheless, the Ramah allows verses to be recited while the priests are chanting. they should [stand] face to face with the priests,6See Halachah 11. without looking at their faces.7See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:36, which explains that, at present, it is customary for both the priests and the congregation to pull their tallitot over their heads so that their attention will not be disturbed while the blessing is being recited. Nevertheless, the priests should extend their hands beyond their tallitot, so that there will be no separation between them and the people.
If only one priest is blessing the people, he should begin reciting the blessing alone.1As mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 5, based on Numbers 6:23: "This is how you should bless the children of Israel: 'Say to them...,'” our Sages explained that before the priests bless the people, someone must "Say to them" - i.e., invite them to recite the blessing. However, since the verse mentions "them," Sotah 38a teaches that this invitation is not extended to a single priest. [Afterwards,] the leader of the congregation reads [the blessings] to him, word for word, as mentioned.2in Halachah 3.If there are two or more [priests blessing the people],3Then the teaching mentioned above applies and they do not begin reciting the blessing until the leader of the congregation4Rabbenu Tam protests against this statement, explaining that since the leader of the congregation is in the middle of the recitation of the Shemoneh Esreh, calling the priests - but not reading the blessings to them - would be considered an interruption, and therefore forbidden. Rather, another member of the congregation should call the priests.The Rambam addresses himself to this question in one of his responsa and explains that there is nothing wrong with another member of the congregation calling the priests. However, there is no obligation to have this done. Since calling the priests is a necessary element of the repetition of the Shemoneh Esreh, it is not considered an interruption to the chazan's prayers. TheShulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:10) quotes the Rambam's view. Nevertheless, the Ramah suggests that the chazan should recite silently the paragraph beginning Elo-heinu, v'Elo-hei avoteinu, and in that way ensure that his call to the priests is not an interruption. calls them, saying "Kohanim."5Ashkenazic custom is that the chazan then continues, Am Kedoshecha ka'amur - "Your consecrated people, as it is said:...," and then recites the blessing, word for word, for the priests (Ramah). They answer and respond Y'varechecha,6This follows the opinion mentioned in Halachah 3, that the chazan does not read the word Y'varechecha to the priests. and then he reads [the blessings] to them, word for word, in the manner described above.7in Halachah 3.
How is the priestly blessing recited in the Temple? The priests ascend to the duchan1This is a slightly problematic statement. The Mishnah (Middot 2:6) and the Rambam (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:3) describe the duchan as three steps separating the Courtyard of the Israelites from the Priestly Courtyard. There, the Levites would stand and accompany the Temple service with songs and music. No mention is made of the priests standing there. Also, in Halachah 14, the Rambam mentions that the priests would bless the people while standing on the steps of the Temple building.The Radbaz (Vol. II, Leshonot HaRambam) offers a resolution to this difficulty, noting that priests with disqualifying physical deformities may not stand on the Temple steps (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:20). Thus, the majority of priests would stand on the Temple steps, and those with deformities would stand on the duchan.The Tiferet Yisrael (Middot 2:4) states that most of the priests would stand on the Temple steps. If there was no room there, they would stand on the duchan. after the priests have completed the service associated with the morning sacrifice offered daily.2Following the pattern established by Aharon, who blessed the people after completing the sacrificial offerings (Leviticus, Chapter 9). They lift their hands above their heads3as an act of deference to the Shechinah, which rests between their fingers (Rashi, Sotah 38a). Note the contrast to the practice outside the Temple, as described in Halachah 3. with their fingers extended,4holding them in the same manner as described in Halachah 3. except the High Priest. He does not lift his hands above the tzitz.5The tzitz refers to the golden plate worn by the High Priest on his forehead on which God's name is written (Exodus 28:37 . Accordingly, it is not proper for the High Priest to lift his hands above it (Rashi, loc. cit.).One person reads [the blessings] to them, word for word, in the same manner as outside the Temple,6See Halachah 3. until they complete the three verses. The people do not respond ["Amen"] after each verse.7as is done outside the Temple. Instead, in the Temple, [the priestly blessings] are read as a single blessing.8Since it is improper to recite "Amen" in the Temple, there is no need to make an interruption between verses (Sotah 40b). When [the priests] conclude,9the recitation of the entire blessing all the people respond, "Blessed be God, the Lord, the Lord of Israel to all eternity."10Based on Nechemiah 9:5, this refrain was recited after each blessing recited in the Temple (Sotah, loc. cit.). The Ma'aseh Rokeach emphasizes that usually the person who recites a blessing in the Temple would add this refrain himself, and the listeners would respond: "Blessed be the name of His glorious kingdom forever and ever." However, since the priests themselves are forbidden to add to the priestly blessings (see Halachah 12), "Blessed be God..." would be recited by the people, and not by the priests.Alternatively, because the people had already responded "Blessed be the name..." in response to each of the three recitations of God's name in the priestly blessings, then, when the blessings are concluded, they recite "Blessed be God..." (Rishon Letzion, Berachot).
They1the priests, when reciting the priestly blessing recite [God's] name2i.e., the name י-ה-ו-ה - as it is written. This is what is referred to as the "explicit name" in all sources. - As mentioned in Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 6:2, there are seven names of God which must be treated with reverence. However, the name י-ה-ו-ה is granted a greater degree of respect than the six others.In the Guide to the Perplexed (Vol. I, Chapter 61), the Rambam explains that all the other names for God, refer to Him as He manifests Himself in a particular quality and thus, have parallels in human terms. In contrast, the name, י-ה-ו-ה, refers to Him, as He stands above any relation to human terms. - i.e., the name י-ה-ו-ה , as it is written. This is what is referred to as the "explicit name" in all sources. In the country,3i.e., any place outside the Temple premises. In certain contexts - see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 4:1 - this refers to any place outside Jerusalem. it4the name י-ה-ו-ה is read [using another one of God's names]:5Kiddushin 71a states: "I am not referred to as [My name] is written. My name is written י-ה-ו-ה and it is pronounced אדני."Exodus 3:15 states: "This is My name forever." The word "forever" (לעולם) can be interpreted as לעלם - "to hide." God's essential name is to remain hidden from man. אדני, for only in the Temple is this name [of God] recited as it is written.6Sotah 38a offers the following interpretation of Exodus 20:21: "Wherever I allow My name to be mentioned, I will come to you and bless you": "In the place where I will come and bless you," - i.e., the Temple, the source of Divine blessing for the entire world - "I will allow My name to be mentioned" - the name י-ה-ו-ה, may be pronounced.In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sotah 7:4), the Rambam writes: "It is forbidden...to recite God's explicit name or to speak about it at all..., except in the Temple."After Shimon HaTzaddik7Shimon HaTzaddik was the last surviving member of the Anshei HaK'nesset HaGedolah, the body of Sages who, under the direction of Ezra, laid the spiritual foundation for the return to Zion after the Babylonian exile. died,8Yoma 39b relates that Shimon HaTzaddik's death represented a turning point in the history of the second Temple. After his passing, five miracles that had reflected the manifestation of God's presence in the Temple ceased. the priests ceased reciting the [priestly] blessing using God's explicit name even in the Temple,9and would recite a twelve-letter name of God instead (The Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. I, Chapter 62). lest it be learned by a person lacking proper stature and moral conduct.10In the Guide to the Perplexed (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that knowledge of this name would destroy these individuals' faith.Rashi (Kiddushin 71a) and Rabbenu Manoach state that these individuals would use the mystic power of the name for improper purposes. The Sages of the early generations would teach [this name]11In the Guide to the Perplexed (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes:[The name, י-ה-ו-ה]: It was not known to all men how to pronounce it, and which way each of the letters should be vocalized, whether any of the letters would be pronounced with a dagesh, and which one would be...I think that when it says that the Sages would teach the four-letter name to their sons and disciples, this does not mean the pronunciation of the name alone..., but also its uniqueness and Divine secret. once in seven years,12Kiddushin (loc. cit.) mentions another opinion, which states that this name would be taught twice in two years, but favors the opinion quoted by the Rambam, since ultimate discretion is appropriate for this great mystic secret. only to their students and sons13Our text of Kiddushin (loc. cit.) does not mention "sons." However, it is possible that the Rambam had a different text of that Talmudic passage. [who had proven] their moral conduct. All this is in reverence for His great and awesome name.
Wherever the priestly blessing is recited, it is recited only in the holy tongue,1quoting the blessing as it is recorded in the Torah as [implied by Numbers 6:23]: "This is how you should bless the children of Israel."We have learned the following [instructions]2The Mishnah Berurah (128:50) states that all these instructions are absolute requirements. A priest who cannot fulfill them - e.g., an aged priest who cannot stand unsupported - should leave the synagogue before the priests are called to recite the blessings. from the tradition [passed on] from Moses, our teacher, may he rest in peace:3Generally, the Rambam's use of the term mipi hashmu’ah, refers to Halachah LeMoshe MiSinai - laws learned as part of the oral tradition given to Moses on Mount Sinai (Yad Malachi).This definition is somewhat difficult to accept in the present instance. A halachah LeMoshe MiSinai is not based on any specific verse in the Torah, while all the instructions in this halachah are derived by Sotah 38a based on different verses."This is how you should bless" - while standing.4Sotah loc. cit., explains that the recitation of the priestly blessing is considered to be equivalent to service in the Temple. Just as the Temple service was conducted while standing, the priestly blessing should also be recited while standing.The Eshkol states that the congregation should also stand. Though this is the common custom, it is not an absolute requirement (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:23, Mishnah Berurah 51)."This is how you should bless" - raising your hands.5as Aharon did when he blessed the people (Leviticus 9:23)."This is how you should bless" - in the holy tongue.6The expression "This is how" implies that the priests should recite the exact words mentioned in the verse (Sotah, loc. cit.)."This is how you should bless" - face to face.7as a sign of closeness and affection."This is how you should bless" - in a loud voice.8From the words "Speak to them" (Numbers, loc. cit.), Sotah, loc. cit., derives the law that the priestly blessing should be recited in a conversational tone, as a person speaks to a colleague. From this statement, the Sifre states that the blessing should be recited in a tone which is audible to the entire congregation. However, Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:23 and the Mishnah Berurah 128:53 emphasize that the priests should not shout or chant in an overly loud tone."This is how you should bless" - mentioning [God's] explicit name;9the name י-ה-ו-ה the latter10Our translation is based on the responsum of the Nodah BiYhudah (Orach Chayim, Vol. I, 5). Note the Sh'vut Ya'akov (Vol. II, 1), who maintains that all these instructions are obligatory only in the Temple. [applying only] when one is in the Temple, as explained.11in the previous halachah.
Wherever [they recite the blessing],1whether in the Temple or outside its premises the priests are not permitted to add other blessings2e.g., "May God, Lord of your fathers, increase your numbers a thousandfold" (Deuteronomy 11:11) - in addition to the three verses [of the priestly blessing]. - Rosh HaShanah 28b states that a priest should not think: "Since the Torah has given me permission to bless Israel, I will add a blessing of my own." - e.g., "May God, Lord of your fathers, increase your numbers a thousandfold" (Deuteronomy 11:11)  - in addition to the three verses [of the priestly blessing]. [These additions may not be made] either silently or out loud, as [Deuteronomy 4:2] states: "Do not add to the matter."While3This is a general commandment, prohibiting making additions to any of the mitzvot of the Torah. a priest is ascending to the duchan, he recites [the following prayer]4This prayer, the blessing recited before blessing the people, and the prayer recited afterwards, are quoted (with minimal differences) from Sotah 39a-b. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:9) states that the priests should prolong the recitation of this prayer until the congregation concludes the recitation of "Amen" after the blessing Modim. The Magen Avraham states that the priests should conclude their prayer at the same time the chazan completes the blessing, so that the response "Amen" will also apply to their prayer. when he leaves his place to5The Ramah (Orach Chayim 128:9) states that Ashkenazic custom is to begin reciting this prayer when one stands before the heichal. ascend:May it be Your will, God, our Lord and Lord of our fathers, that this blessing which You have commanded us to bless Your people, Israel, be a perfect blessing, that it not be marred by obstacles or iniquity,6i.e., the priests pray that their lack of proper intention should not spoil the blessing. from now until eternity.7These words are not found in our text of Sotah, loc. cit.Before he turns to bless the community,8The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit., 128:11) and most later halachic authorities require the blessing to be recited after the priests turn to the people. [a priest] should recite the blessing:Blessed9Since blessing the people fulfills a positive commandment, it is proper to recite a blessing beforehand, as we do before fulfilling most mitzvot. are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with the holiness of Aharon,10Since this mitzvah can be fulfilled only by the priests, the blessing differs from the blessing recited before fulfilling other mitzvot. and commanded us to bless His people Israel with love.11The addition of the words "with love" is associated with the Zohar's (Vol. III, 147b) teaching: "Any priest who does not love [God's] people or is not beloved by His people should not bless the people."Afterwards, he turns his face to the community and begins reciting the priestly blessings.12as explained in Halachah 3. When he turns his face from the community after completing [the recitation] of the blessings,13as explained in Halachah 4. he recites [the following]:We14The Ramah, Orach Chayim 128:15, states that the priests should prolong their recitation of this prayer so that they will conclude together with thechazan's conclusion of the blessing. have carried out that which You have decreed upon us.15Since the blessing is dependent on God (see Chapter 12, Halachah 7), the priests' actions are considered to be the fulfillment of a Divine decree (Maharsha, Sotah 39a). Deal with us as You have promised us:16i.e.,..Look down from Your abode, from the heavens, and bless Your people, Israel - Deuteronomy 26:15. In many communities, it is customary to add the last words of that verse, "a land flowing with milk and honey."The recitation of this prayer is not considered to be an addition to the priestly blessings, because the priests have already lowered their hands from the position in which the blessing is recited (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:40). Look down from Your abode, from the heavens, and bless Your people, Israel.
When the priests turn their faces to the community to bless them,1See Halachah 3. and when they turn their faces from the community after blessing [them],2See Halachah 4. they should turn only to the right.3i.e., if the synagogue faces east, the priests should turn to the south and then to the west, and then recite the blessing. Afterwards, they should turn to the north and back to the west (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:26, Mishnah Berurah 128:61). Similarly, any turns which a person makes4in the Temple or prayer service should always be to the right.
In the Temple, the priestly blessing would be recited once a day, after the [offering of] the morning sacrifice. [The priests] come and stand on the steps to the Ulam1The Ulam refers to the Entrance Hall to the Temple building. There were twelve steps leading to it. (See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:4.)Note the apparent contradiction between the Rambam's statements in this halachah and in Halachah 9, as explained in the commentary on Halachah 9. In Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 6:5, the Rambam also states that the priestly blessing was recited on the steps to the Ulam. and recite the blessing, as mentioned above.2in Halachah 9. However, outside the Temple, it is recited after every prayer service, except Minchah, as explained.3in Halachah 1.In all places,4whether in the Temple or outside its premises an effort is made5Although the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 5:4) states: "The chazan should be an Israelite," the Rambam does not consider this to be a binding obligation. that the person who reads the blessing to the priests6See Halachah 3, which relates that the priests recite the words of the blessing after someone else who reads them. should be an Israelite, as [implied by Numbers 6:23]: "Say to them." This implies that the one who reads the blessing to them is not one of them.7The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:22) states that if there is no alternative and a priest serves as the chazan, an Israelite should read the blessings to the priests, and the chazan should remain silent in his place or recite the priestly blessings, as explained in Chapter 15, Halachah 10.If there is no Israelite who can read the blessings to the priests, some authorities maintain that the priests should recite the blessings without having another person read them to them. However, other opinions maintain that the chazan should read the blessings to the priests even though he is himself a priest (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:34).

=== 15 | chapter 15 ===
There are six factors that prevent [a priest] from reciting the priestly blessings: [an inability] to pronounce [the blessings properly],1as explained in this halachah physical deformities,2as explained in Halachah 2 transgressions,3as explained in Halachah 3 [lack of] maturity,4as explained in Halachah 4 intoxication,5as explained in Halachah 4 and the ritual impurity of [the priest's] hands.6as explained in Halachah 5[An inability] to pronounce [the blessings properly]:7Note the discussion of this difficulty with regard to the choice of a chazan, Chapter 8, Halachah 12. What is implied? Those who cannot articulate the letters properly8e.g., those who read an aleph as an ayin and an ayin as an aleph - if the first word of the second priestly blessing, יאר is read with an ע instead of an א, the phrase את פניו אליך יאר ה' becomes a curse rather than a blessing. - e.g., those who read an aleph as an ayin and an ayin as an aleph, or who pronounce shibbolet as sibbolet9i.e., reading a shin as a sin. See Judges 12:6. and the like10e.g., who read a chet like a hayshould not recite the priestly blessings. - The later authorities explain that, if, as in many communities of the present day, the overwhelming majority of the people do not know how to differentiate between an ע and an א, a priest should not be disqualified because of this factor, since the meaning of the blessing is not changed (Magen Avraham 128:46). The Turei Zahav (128:90) states that even if a speech fault is common, but not overwhelmingly common - e.g., the substitution of a sin for a shin - a priest should not be disqualified, because such an error will not arouse the attention of the listeners. Nevertheless, this position is not accepted by all authorities. - should not recite the priestly blessings.Similarly, a stutterer or one who speaks unclearly, whose words cannot be understood by everyone,11included in the category are people with other speech defects - e.g., a person who lisps should not recite the priestly blessing.
Physical deformities: What is implied? A priest should not recite the priestly blessings if he has blemishes on his face, hands, or feet1for all of these can be seen be the people while the priests recite the blessings. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:30-31) states that in places where the priests cover their faces and hands with their tallitot and wear socks while reciting the blessings, even these blemishes do not disqualify a priest from reciting the blessings. - for example, his fingers are bent over, crooked, or covered with white spots2for they will attract the people's attention - and distract their concentration on the blessings.A person whose spittle always dribbles when he speaks, and also a person who is blind in one eye should not recite the priestly blessings - for the same reasons as mentioned above. In places where the priests cover their faces, a priest with such a difficulty may also bless the people. - for they will attract the people's attention.A person whose spittle always dribbles when he speaks, and also a person who is blind in one eye should not recite the priestly blessings. However, if such a person was well known in his city and everyone was familiar3Generally, this refers to a person who lives within a city for at least thirty days (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit. 128:30). with the person who was blind in one eye or whose spittle dribbled, he may recite the priestly blessing, for he will not attract their attention.4with the person who was blind in one eye or whose spittle dribbled, he may recite the priestly blessing, for he will not attract their attention. Similarly,5i.e., for the same reasons a person whose hands were colored purple or scarlet should not recite the priestly blessings. If the majority of the city's population is involved in such a profession,6or if the people of the city are familiar with him (Shulchan Aruch, loc. cit., 128:32). he is permitted, for this does not attract the people's attention.
Transgressions: What is implied? A priest who killed someone should never recite the priestly blessings, even if he repents,1The Ramah (Orach Chayim 128:35) allows a priest who repents after committing such a sin to bless the people, so that "the door will not be closed to those who repent." as [implied by Isaiah 1:15 which] states: "Your hands are full of blood,"2the killing of a colleague and states:3The order of these phrases in the Bible is the opposite of the order in which they are quoted by the Rambam."When you spread out your hands, I will hide My eyes from you." - Once a person has taken a life, God will not let him serve as a medium to convey blessing on the people.A priest who served false gods, even if he was compelled to do so - See Hilchot Yesodei HaTorah 5:2-4, which states that a person should sacrifice his life rather than submit to pressure to worship false gods. Nevertheless, if he fails to make this sacrifice, he is not punished by an earthly court for his sin. "When you spread out your hands, I will hide My eyes from you."A priest who served false gods, even if he was compelled to do so or did so inadvertently4or without knowing that the worship of this god was forbidden - though he has repented5may never recite the priestly blessing, as [can be inferred from II Kings 23:9, which] states: "However, the priests of the high places shall not ascend [to God's altar in Jerusalem]." - This verse describes the efforts of King Josaiah to cleanse Judah from the pagan practices introduced by his father and grandfather. - may never recite the priestly blessing, as [can be inferred from II Kings 23:9, which] states: "However, the priests of the high places shall not ascend [to God's altar in Jerusalem]." [The recitation of the priestly] blessings is equated to service [in the Temple],6Note the Rambam's comments, Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 9:13:Any priest who served false gods, whether willingly or inadvertently - even though he sincerely repents - should never serve in the Temple.... If he transgressed and offered a sacrifice, his sacrifice is not a "pleasing fragrance." as [Deuteronomy 10:8] states: "to serve Him and to bless in His7Many of the later authorities maintain that this association is only a point of Rabbinic Law, and the mention of Biblical verses is only an asmachta (allusion). However, there is no indication of such a concept in the Rambam's words. name."Similarly, a priest who converted8without actually serving the false gods to the worship of false gods9The Magen Avraham 128:54 states that even someone who converts to Islam - which does not involve idol worship - is not allowed to recite the priestly blessings. - even though he repents10In this instance, as well, the Ramah (loc. cit.:37) allows a priest to bless the people if he repents. - may never recite the priestly blessing. Other transgressions11The Mishnah Berurah 128:26 notes that a person who desecrates the sanctity of the Sabbath is considered as one who adopted paganism, and, therefore, should not be allowed to recite the priestly blessing.Rav Moshe Feinstein (Iggerot Moshe, Orach Chayim I, 33) states that present circumstances differ from those during the Mishnah Berurah's era, and, at present, priests who violate the Sabbath laws are not judged as severely and may bless the people. Nevertheless, he agrees that if restricting such individuals from reciting the priestly blessings may motivate them to increase their Sabbath observance, they may be prevented from blessing the people. do not prevent [a priest from blessing the people].12See Halachot 6 and 7.
[Lack of] maturity: What is implied? A young priest should not recite the priestly blessings until he grows a full beard.1As mentioned in the commentary on Chapter 8, Halachah 11, the expression "grows a full beard" is a primarily measure of age, whether the person actually grows a beard or not.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:34), based on Tosafot, Chulin 24b, states:A minor who has not manifested signs of physical maturity should not recite the priestly blessing alone. However, he may recite the blessing together with his brethren, the priests, to learn and become educated.If he has manifested signs of physical maturity, he may recite the priestly blessing even while alone. However, he should do so only as a temporary measure, and not as a fixed practice, until he grows a full beard.Intoxication: - The Hebrew יין literally means wine. The Magen Avraham 128:55 notes that the Rambam speaks only about wine and does not mention other alcoholic beverages. Accordingly, he explains that a person who becomes drunk from other alcoholic beverages may recite the priestly blessing, unless he is so drunk that he has no control of himself.It is significant that in Chapter 4, Halachah 17, when speaking about the prohibition against an intoxicated person praying, the Rambam states: "A person who is drunk should not pray.... When is a person considered drunk? When he cannot speak before a king." See also Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:1-2, where the Rambam describes the prohibition against serving in the Temple while intoxicated and mentions, albeit with differences between them, both a person who drank wine and one who became intoxicated from other alcoholic beverages.The Magen Avraham's decision is not accepted by all authorities. (See Mishnah Berurah 128:141.)Intoxication: What is implied? A [priest] who drank a revi'it of wine2This is the minimum measure of wine that is considered to be able to influence a person's behavior. at one time should not recite the priestly blessings until the effects of the wine wear off.3Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:5 states that if a person drank only a revi'it of wine, it is assumed that the wine's effects have worn off if he sleeps a little or walks a mil. [This restriction was imposed] because an association was established between [reciting the priestly] blessing and service [in the Temple].4as mentioned in the previous halachah.Should [a priest] drink5only a revi'it of wine on two different occasions6i.e., interrupting slightly between drinking the entire revi'it or mix a small amount of water in it, he is permitted [to recite the priestly blessings].7and serve in the Temple (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:1). If he drank more than a revi'it, even though it was mixed with water or even though he drank it intermittently, he should not recite the priestly blessings until the effects of the wine wear off.8In this instance, Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:5 states that sleeping or walking a mil is not sufficient to remove the effects of the wine, and one must wait until no signs of intoxication remain.Because of the prohibition against reciting the priestly blessing while intoxicated, it is customary on Simchat Torah in Ashkenazic communities to recite the priestly blessing in the morning service and not during Musaf.How much is a revi'it?9Interestingly, although the Rambam also mentions a revi'it in Chapter 2, Halachah 17, he chooses to define its volume here. [The volume of an area] two fingerbreadths by two fingerbreadths and two and seven tenths of a fingerbreadth high.10In modern measure, a revi'it is 86.4 milliliters according to Shiurei Torah, and 149.3 milliliters according to the Chazon Ish. Whenever the term "finger" is mentioned as a measure throughout the entire Torah, it refers to a thumbbreadth.11See Hilchot Sefer Torah 9:9. In modern measure, a thumbbreadth is 2 centimeters according to Shiurei Torah, and 2.4 centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. The thumb is called bohen yad [in the Torah].12See Leviticus 8:23, 14:14.
The ritual impurity of [the priest's] hands: What is implied? A priest who did not wash his hands should not recite the priestly blessing.1In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Karo notes that in contrast to Chapter 4, Halachah 2, which mentions "the purification of the hands," here, the Rambam refers to "ritual impurity." He maintains that this choice of language was intended to imply that if a priest washed his hands in the morning, he need not wash them a second time unless they have become ritually impure. He also quotes a responsum of Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, who explicitly states that a priest may rely on his morning washing.Nevertheless, in his Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:6), Rav Yosef Karo quotes the opinion of Rashi and Tosafot (Sotah 39a), who require the priests to have their hands washed a second time as an additional measure of holiness. Rather, he should wash his hands2The Zohar (Vol. III, 146b) states that the Levites should wash the priests' hands. Since the Levites are themselves holy (Numbers 8:18), it is proper that they be the ones who convey this added holiness upon the priests. The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.) also mentions this practice. to the wrist,3Note our commentary Chapter 4, Halachah 2. as is done when sanctifying the hands for the service in the Temple,4See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, Chapter 5. as [Psalms 134:2] states: "Raise up your hands [in] holiness and bless God."A5The Targum to this verse also stresses its connection to the recitation of the priestly blessing. challal6a person born from relations between a priesta person born from relations between a priest and a divorcee or any other woman who he may not marry (see Leviticus 21:7), and, according to Rabbinic Law, a person born from a marriage between a priest and a woman who has undergone chalitzah. and a divorcee or any other woman who he may not marry (see Leviticus 21:7), and, according to Rabbinic Law, a person born from a marriage between a priest and a woman who has undergone chalitzah. does not recite the priestly blessing, for he is not a priest.7See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 19:14, where the Rambam says: "A challal is just like any other non-priest." The Pri Chadash writes that if a challal ascends to bless the people, he should be forced to descend.
A priest who does not have any of the factors which hinder the recitation of the priestly blessings mentioned above1in the previous five halachot. should recite the priestly blessing, even though he is not a wise man or careful in his observance of the mitzvot. [This applies] even though the people spread unwholesome gossip about him,2i.e., he is suspected of sinning. or his business dealings are not ethical.3Based on Bechorot 45a, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:40,41) adds that a priest who violates the specific mitzvot associated with the priesthood (the forbidden sexual relations mentioned in Leviticus 21:7 and the prohibitions against contracting impurity stemming from a corpse) may not recite the priestly blessings.He should not be prevented from [reciting the priestly blessings] - even though he has not repented for his transgressionsHe should not be prevented from [reciting the priestly blessings] because [reciting these blessings] is a positive mitzvah incumbent on each priest who is fit to recite them.4From the Rambam's statements, it appears that the disqualifying factors mentioned above remove the mitzvah entirely from a priest. We do not tell a wicked person: Increase your wickedness [by] failing to perform mitzvot.5In other places, as well, we see the Rambam urging people to encourage the nonobservant to perform mitzvot. Note the conclusion of Iggeret HaShmad:It is not fitting to push away or despise those who violate the Sabbath. Rather one should draw them close and encourage them to perform mitzvot.... Even if a person willingly sins, when he comes to the synagogue to pray, he should be accepted and not treated with disrespect.The Rabbis have based [this approach on the interpretation of] Solomon's words (Proverbs 6:30  "Do not scorn the thief when he steals" - i.e., do not scorn the sinners of Israel when they come discreetly to steal mitzvot.
Do not wonder: "What good will come from the blessing of this simple person?" for the reception of the blessings is not dependent on the priests, but on the Holy One, blessed be He,1The Jerusalem Talmud, Gittin 5:9 relates:Do not say: "So and so is an adulterer... how can he bless me?"God replies: "Is it he that is blessing you? I'm the one who is blessing you." as [Numbers 6:27] states: "And they shall set My name upon the children of Israel, and I shall bless them."2In his commentary on the Torah, the Rashbam emphasizes that the text of priestly blessing itself express this point, stating, "May God bless you..., May God shine..., May God turn..." The priests perform the mitzvah with which they were commanded,3reciting the blessings and God, in His mercies, will bless Israel as He desires.
The people standing behind the priests are not included in the blessing.1By standing behind the priests, they show that the blessing is not important to them. Hence, they are not included (Rashi, Sotah 38b). Also, as mentioned in Chapter 14, Halachah 11, the priestly blessing must be recited while the priests are standing face to face with those being blessed (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:37). Those standing at their sides2even those who are standing parallel to the place of the priests are included in the blessing. [Even] if there is a partition3even an iron wall - Sotah (loc. cit.) states: "Even an iron divider cannot separate between Israel and their Father in heaven." - even an iron wall - between the priests and the people who are being blessed, since they are facing the priests,4The Be'ur Halachah explains that the people who are standing to the sides of the priests, but before them, should face the heichal. In principle, those who are standing parallel to the priests should turn to the side and face the priests. However, since it is not proper that people standing next to each other in the synagogue should face different directions, they need not shift the positions of their feet. It is sufficient for them to tilt their heads slightly towards the priests. they are included in the blessing.5As the Rambam mentions in the following halachah, even people who do not attend the synagogue can be included in the priestly blessing.
The priestly blessing is recited [only] when ten people [are present].1The priestly blessing is included among "the holy matters" that require a minyan. See Chapter 8, Halachot 4-6. The priests can be included in that number.2i.e., even if there will not be ten people to respond "Amen," the priestly blessing can be recited.If [the congregation in a particular] synagogue are all priests, they should all3Even though there will no one to read the words of the blessings to them, as mentioned in Chapter 14, Halachah 3. The question of whether the chazan should also recite the priestly blessing is discussed in the following halachah. recite the priestly blessing.4Unless there are a minyan of priests to respond "Amen," it is preferable that they all recite the blessings and none respond.Who should they bless? Their brethren in the north and the south - i.e., those outside the synagogue. Even though they were unable to attend the synagogue, since they were prevented by forces beyond their control, they are included within the blessing.The Rambam's statements are taken from Sotah 38b and the Jerusalem Talmud, Berachot 5:4. However, the Rambam's choice of phraseology is more restrictive, mentioning only "the people in the north and the south," while these sources state, "their brethren in the fields."According to his grandson, Rav Yitzchak HaNagid, this restriction was intentional. Since in the Rambam's time the Jews lived mostly to the east or west of Jerusalem, in most synagogues the heichal would be pointed in that direction, and thus, depending on the location of the synagogue, the people standing in one of these directions would be standing behind the priests. Therefore, they would not be included in the blessing.Other authorities (e.g., the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 128:25) quote the text in the Babylonian Talmud without making any restrictions. Who should they bless? Their brethren in the north and the south. Who will respond "Amen" to their [blessings]? The women and the children.5The Mishnah Berurah 128:99 states that even if there are no women or children present to answer "Amen," the blessing may be recited. If more than ten priests remain besides those who ascend to the duchan, these ten [priests] respond "Amen"6i.e., if there are twelve priests, two recite the blessings and ten respond "Amen," so that there will be a minyan responding "Amen." and the remainder of the priests recite the blessings.7The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:33 states that in such an instance, the chazan should not call out "Kohanim," since, according to many opinions, if the priests are not called to recite the blessings, they are not obligated to do so. Thus, the priests who did not recite the blessings will not be considered negligent in their fulfillment of the mitzvah.
When there is no priest in the community other than the leader of the congregation,1The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 128:20, states that if other priests are present, a priest serving as the chazan should never recite the priestly blessing. The Pri Chadash takes issue with this decision, and allows him to recite the priestly blessings if he is confident that he will not err. he should not recite the priestly blessings.2lest he become confused after completing the priestly blessing and be unable to complete the Shemoneh Esreh (Berachot 34b). If he is sure that he can recite the priestly blessings and return to his prayers [without becoming confused],3Note Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:32 and the Mishnah Berurah 128:76, which state that at present, since the chazan prays from a siddur, he need not worry about being confused and may recite the priestly blessing. he may [recite the priestly blessing].4The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.) states that in such a case, the chazan should move from his place slightly during the blessing R'tzey (see the following halachah) and after concluding the blessing Modim, ascend to the duchan and recite the priestly blessing.If there are no priests present at all - or according to Ashkenazic custom, in all services when the priestly blessing would be recited other than the Musaf service of the festivals.If there are no priests present at all, when the leader of the congregation reaches [the blessing] Sim shalom,5See the Commentary on Chapter 14, Halachah 4, for an explanation of the connection between the blessing Sim shalom and the priestly blessings. he recites [the following prayer]:Our6to commemorate the recitation of these blessings. God and God of our fathers, bless us with the threefold blessing written in the Torah by Moses, Your servant, and recited by Aharon and his sons, the priests, Your consecrated people,7Our translation is based on the Mishnah Berurah 127:8, which explains that the intent is that the priests themselves are a "consecrated people." as it is8Numbers 6:24-27 said:May God bless you and keep you.9May God bless you and keep you. May God shine His countenance upon you and be gracious to you. May God turn His countenance to you and grant you peace.May God shine His countenance upon you and be gracious to you.May God turn His countenance to you and grant you peace.And they shall set My name upon the children of Israel and I will bless them.10The Hagahot Maimoniot explain that the recitation of this verse parallels the prayer recited by the priests after completing the blessings (Chapter 14, Halachah 12). It is Ashkenazic custom not to recite this final verse (Magen Avraham 127:2).The people do not respond "Amen" to these blessings.11for it is proper to recite "Amen" only after the blessings recited by the priests themselves. The Shulchan Aruch 127:2 suggests reciting ken yehi ratzon - "So may it be Your will." Nevertheless, there are some communities which recite "Amen," based on the Tanya Rabbati 334 and a letter from Rav Hai Gaon. He [resumes his recitation of the Shemoneh Esreh], beginning the recitation of [the blessing] Sim shalom.
A priest who recited the priestly blessings and went to another synagogue and found the congregation in the midst of prayer, before the [recitation of] the priestly blessings, should bless them.1The Magen Avraham emphasizes that reciting the priestly blessings a second time is not considered to be a transgression of the prohibition of adding to the Torah's commandments. That prohibition is violated when one adds to the blessings themselves (see Chapter 14, Halachah 12), but not when one fulfills the mitzvah a number of times. [He may recite the priestly blessings] several times during the day.2This statement has raised questions among the commentaries. The Kiryat Sefer explains that the priests recite Y'varechecha - the first word of the priestly blessings - directly after concluding the blessing (see Halachah 12) recited before blessing the people, without being prompted by the reader. They take the initiative, so that an interruption is not made between the recitation of the blessing before the performance of a mitzvah and its actual performance.Study of the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Berachot, loc. cit.) shows that the Rambam himself had questions about this matter. In the first manuscripts, the Rambam writes that "the leader of the congregation recites Y'varechecha, and the priests read after him." This is also the reading in the popularly published edition of that text. However, in the later manuscripts of the Commentary on the Mishnah (see Rav Kapach's edition of that text), the Rambam changes his mind and states that the priests begin reciting y'varechecha.In his Beit Yosef (Orach Chayim 128), Rav Yosef Karo mentions these different views, and in his Shulchan Aruch (128:13) rules that the priests begin on their own initiative. The Ramah differs and states that it is Ashkenazic practice that this word is also recited in response to the chazan.A priest who does not move from his place to ascend to the duchan when the leader of the congregation recites [the blessing] R'tzey3See Chapter 14, Halachah 3. should not ascend [to the duchan] during that prayer service.4This applies even if he was prevented from leaving his place by forces beyond his control (Radbaz, Magen Avraham). However, if he moved [from his place], even though he did not reach the duchan until after the [conclusion of the blessing R'tzey],5Shulchan Aruch HaRav 128:13 and the Mishnah Berurah 128:27 state that even if he reaches the duchan after the chazan completes R'tzey, as long as he reaches there before the priests begin reciting the blessing, he may join them. he may6but he is not obligated to (Mishnah Berurah 128:106). ascend [the duchan] and bless [the people].
Any priest who does not ascend to the duchan1even though he neglects [the performance] of [only] one commandment - is considered as if he violated three positive commandments, as Numbers 6:23-27 states: “This is how you shall bless the children of Israel,” “Say to them,” “And you shall set My name...” - The Rambam's statements are based on Sotah 38b. There, the Talmud states that one “violates three positive commandments.” The Rambam amends that statement, explaining that although there is only one commandment for the priests to bless the people, the Torah mentioned the commandment in three different ways to emphasize the importance of its fulfillment. Thus, the failure to bless the people is considered as nullifying the observance of three commands.In Sefer HaMitzvot (Shoresh 9), the Rambam cites this teaching as a classic example of a fundamental principle regarding the reckoning of the 613 mitzvot. Though the Talmud often states that many mitzvot are involved in the performance or transgression of a particular commandment, this does not mean that the mitzvah should be counted as more than one mitzvah when calculating the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Rather, the Talmud means to say that the performance of this mitzvah is considered as important as if many mitzvot were involved. - even though he neglects [the performance] of [only] one commandment - is considered as if he violated three positive commandments, as [Numbers 6:23-27] states: "This is how you shall bless the children of Israel," "Say to them," "And you shall set My name..."Any priest who does not recite the priestly blessing will not be blessed, and any priest who blesses [the people] will be blessed, as [Genesis 12:3] states: "And I will bless those who bless you."2Chulin 49a quotes a difference of opinion between Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yishmael. Rabbi Akiva's statements are quoted by the Rambam, while Rabbi Yishmael explains that the blessing for the priests is derived from Numbers 6:27: “And you will set My name upon the children of Israel and I will bless them.” “The priests bless the Jews and God blesses the priests,... together with the Jews” (Rashi).By quoting the verse from Genesis, “and I will bless those who bless you,” Rabbi Akiva emphasizes that the blessings bestowed upon the priests - as well as the blessing conveyed by the priests - stem from God's infinite goodness (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 10).Blessed be the Merciful One who grants assistance.
