=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
A nazirite vow is one of the types of vows involving prohibitions,1Thus it is governed by the laws mentioned in the previous set of halachot. As mentioned in the beginning of Hilchot Nedarim, there are two types of vows: vows involving prohibitions and vows taking on an obligation to bring sacrifices. A nazirite vow also involves bringing sacrifices, as will be explained. Nevertheless, it is considered primarily a vow involving prohibitions (Radbaz).as [Numbers 6:2] states: "When one will take a nazirite vow...." It is a positive commandment for [a nazirite] to let the hair of his head grow,2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 92) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 374) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [ibid.:5] states: "He shall let the mane of the hair of his head grow." If he cuts [his hair] in the midst of the days of his nazirite vow, he violates a negative commandment,3Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 209) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 373) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [ibid.] states: "A razor shall not pass over his head." Similarly, he is forbidden to contract ritual impurity from a corpse4Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandments 207-208) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvot 375-376) include two prohibitions involving this matter among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. See Chapter 5 which describes this prohibition. or eat those products of a grape vine which the Torah forbids him from eating5This includes prohibitions against drinking wine and eating fresh grapes, raisins, grape seeds, and grape peels. Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 202-206) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvot 368-372) include five prohibitions against partaking of these grape products among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. throughout the entire span of his nazirite vow.6The Radbaz explains that the Rambam does not mention these prohibitions in the order that they are mentioned in the Torah, not in the order that they are mentioned in the Mishnah. The rationale is that the mitzvah of letting one's hair grow is mentioned first because it involves both a positive and a negative commandment.
When [a nazirite] transgressed and cut his hair, became impure [due to contact with a corpse], or partook of wine grapes, he receives two sets of lashes:7For with his deed, he has violated two of the Torah's prohibitions.one because of the prohibition "He shall not desecrate his word,"8Which applies with regard to the violation of all vows, as stated in Hilchot Nedarim 1:5. and one because of the prohibition that he transgressed from the unique prohibitions that apply to a nazirite.9If he violates his nazirite vow in several ways, e.g., he eats grapes and becomes impure, he receives lashes according to the number of violations involved (Radbaz).
When a person takes a nazirite vow and fulfills his vow according to the mitzvah, he has performed three positive commandments: a) "He shall act in accordance with all that he uttered with his mouth,"10I.e., the commandment to observe the vows one takes. See Hilchot Nedarim 1:4. and he has acted [accordingly], b) "He shall let the mane of the hair of his head grow," and he has let it grow, and c) shaving and bringing his sacrifices,11Which is done at the fulfillment of one's nazirite vow. Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 93) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 377) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. See Chapter 8 which describes this procedure. as [ibid.:18] states: "And the nazirite shall shave at the entrance to the Tent of Meeting."
When a person says: "I will not depart from the world until I become a nazirite," he becomes a nazirite immediately, lest he die at that time. If he delays [implementing] his nazirite vow, he transgresses the prohibition:12Deuteronomy 23:22. As the Rambam states in Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim 1:1, this prohibition applies to any person who delays keeping the vows and pledges he makes. He does not, however, list this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot in these halachot, but instead, in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot (in the introduction to those halachot and in Chapter 14, Halachah 13).See also Hilchot Arachin 6:33 which uses this law as support for the principle that a pledge to perform a mitzvah is considered as a vow. "Do not delay in paying it." Lashes are not given for the violation of this prohibition.13For as stated in Hilchot Sanhedrin 18:2, lashes are not given for the violation of a prohibition that does not involve a deed. Note, however, Chapter 5, Halachah 21.
With regard to a nazirite vow, we do not say: [The vow does not take effect] until he makes a statement that every person would be able to understand [that] in his heart [he desired to take a nazirite vow]. Instead, since he made a decision in his heart to take a nazirite vow and verbally expressed concepts that suggest this intent, he is a nazirite although these concepts are distant and [their simple meaning] does not communicate the concept of a nazirite vow.14This concept, which the Rambam illustrates in the following halachot, expresses the principle (see Nedarim 5b) that yadot nedarim, literally "handles of vows," are considered equivalent to vows themselves.
What is implied? A nazirite was passing in front of a person and he said: "I will be," he is a nazirite. Since in his heart, he intended to say that he will be like that person, [it is considered as if he made such a statement] even though he did not explicitly say: "I will be like him." Similarly, if he took hold of his hair15According to the Rambam, when he makes such statements while holding his hair, it is not necessary that a nazirite pass in front of him for his statement to be binding. and said: "I will become attractive," "I will grow my hair," "I will cultivate my hair,"16The Hebrew uses two expressions to communicate this and the previous concept. Our translations for these terms are taken from Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 1:1). "I will let my hair grow long," he is a nazirite, provided he made such a decision in his heart.
If he says: "I am obligated to bring doves [as offerings],17The offering a nazirite would bring if he became impure (see Numbers 6:10 . he is not a nazirite even if a nazirite is passing in front of him and even if he had the intent of becoming a nazirite. It is as if he did not say anything.18I.e., with regard to a nazirite vow. Since it is possible that his statement meant that he intended to offer the doves as a sacrifice, it is not considered as implying a nazirite vow. From the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), it appears that the person is liable to bring these doves as a voluntary offering. It is questionable if here the Rambam is negating that implication.
All nicknames for a nazirite vow are considered like a nazirite vow.What is implied? In places where people mispronounce the words they use, if one says: "I am a nazik, a naziach, a paziach,19In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that gentiles who lived among the Jewish people would mispronounce the word nazir in this manner. As such, there would be some Jews who would make similar mistakes. See parallel concepts in Hilchot Sh'vuot 2:5, Hilchot Nedarim 1:16. he is a nazirite."
If a person says: "I am a nazirite only with regard to grape seeds" or "...with regard to grape peels," "I am a nazirite with regard to shaving," or "I am a nazirite only with regard to impurity," he is a nazir in the complete sense and he must keep all the particular laws incumbent on nazirites even though his intent was to forbid himself only with regard to the particular he mentioned. Since the matter concerning which he took the nazirite vow is forbidden to nazirites, he is a nazirite in the full sense of the term.20I.e., since he used the term "nazirite" and the object which he mentioned is forbidden to nazirites, the nazirite restrictions all take effect. Note the contrast to the following halachah.
If, however, one says: "I am a nazirite from dried figs," "...from cakes of dried figs," or the like, he is forbidden [to partake of] the article specified, but he is not a nazirite.21Because the term nazirite does not apply with regard to those objects.
When a cup of wine was mixed22I.e., in the Talmudic era, the wine was very strong. Hence it was customary to mix water into wine before serving it. for a person and given to him to drink and he said: "I am a nazirite from it," he is a nazirite in the complete sense.23I.e., the situation is comparable to those described in Halachah 9. If he was a morose person, angry, or in mourning and the others were trying to have him drink to release his burden and he said: "I am a nazirite from this [cup]," he is forbidden to drink only that cup, but he is not a nazirite. [The rationale is that] his intent was only that he would not drink that cup.
Similarly, if a drunken man was given a cup to make him totally inebriated and he said: "I am a nazirite from it," he is forbidden to drink only that cup, but he is not a nazirite. [The rationale is that his intent was] only that they should not have him become overly drunk. If he was as drunk as Lot24Who became so drunk that he lost all consciousness of his actions. See Genesis, ch. 19. his statements are of no consequence and he is not liable for any transgression that he performs. For when he reaches a state of inebriation equivalent to Lot's, he is not liable at all.25I.e., he is considered like a mentally and emotionally incapable person (a shoteh). See Hilchot Ishut 4:18, Hilchot Mechirah 29:18.
When a person says: "I am a nazirite on the condition that I can drink wine," "...become impure because of contact with the dead," or "...cut my hair,"26I.e., he seeks to avoid keeping one or more of the obligations of the nazirite vow although he will keep the others. he is a nazirite and is forbidden to perform all of the above. [The rationale is that] he made a stipulation against what is written in the Torah and whenever one makes a stipulation against what is written in the Torah, the stipulation is nullified.27This is a general principle applying in many aspects of Torah law, e.g., Hilchot Ishut 16:9.
When a person takes a nazirite vow and [afterwards] says: "I did not know that a nazirite was forbidden to partake of wine..., "...to become impure," or "...to cut hair. Had I known this, I would not have take the vow," he is a nazirite and is obligated in all these prohibitions. [The rationale is that] he knows that he is obligated in at least one of these [prohibitions] and as we explained,28In the previous halachah. even if one took a [nazirite] vow, forbidding only one of these acts, he is forbidden in all of them.29The Ra'avad states that if a person would approach a sage and ask him to absolve his nazirite vow on these grounds, the sage would certainly consent. We are speaking about an instance when the person seeks to have the vow nullified without consulting a sage because it was taken in error. The Radbaz states that the Rambam would also accept this ruling. The Kessef Mishneh, however, does not accept this explanation.
If the person says: "I know that a nazirite is forbidden in all of the above, but I thought that it would be permitted for me to drink wine, because I cannot live without wine," or "[I thought that I would be permitted to become impure,] because I bury the dead," he is not a nazirite,30He need not observe any of the nazirite prohibitions, even the ones he had intended to observe. because his vow is included in the category of vows made in error31The Ra'avad considers this as a vow which a person is prevented from keeping by forces beyond his control, citing Nazir 11b which appears to support this interpretation. The Kessef Mishneh and the Radbaz state that while the actual wording of the Talmud fits the Ra'avad's interpretation, the Rambam's explanation can be justified. [Significantly, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 2:4), the Rambam uses the wording suggested by the Ra'avad.] which need not be absolved by a sage, as we explained.32Hilchot Sh'vuot 3:6; Hilchot Nedarim 4:1.
When a person says: "My hand is a nazirite" or "My foot is a nazirite," his words are of no consequence. If, however, he says: "My head is a nazirite" or "My liver is a nazirite," he is a nazarite." This is the general principle: Whenever a person designates as a nazirite an organ upon whose removal33The Or Sameach notes that the Rambam changes slightly the wording of his source, Nazir 21b, based on his ruling in Hilchot Shechitah 8:16. There the Rambam writes that if an animal is born without a liver it may live, but if it was born with a liver and then the liver was removed, it is treifah. from a living person would cause him to die, he is a nazirite.34For it is considered as if he took the vow upon his entire person. Compare to Hilchot Arachin 2:1; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 15:2; Hilchot Mechirah 27:8.
When a person says: "I will be a nazirite when a ben is born to me," if a son is born to him, he is a nazirite. If, however, a daughter, a tumtum,35A person whose genital area is covered by a piece of flesh and it is impossible to detect his gender. or an androgynus36A person with both male and female sexual organs (Hilchot Ishut 2:24-25). is born to him, he is not a nazirite.37Although the term ben can be translated as "offspring," its specific meaning is "son." Hence the Rambam rules in this manner.If he says: "I will be a nazirite when offspring is born to me," even if a daughter, a tumtum, or an androgynus is born to him, he is a nazirite. If his wife miscarries, he is not a nazirite. If she becomes pregnant again and gives birth, he is a nazirite.38The fact that his wife miscarried in the interim does not negate the vow.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
When a person takes a nazirite vow inadvertently,1E.g., he said: "I will be nazirite if I ate today," and he was under the impression that he had not eaten, but in fact he had eaten (Nedarim 25b). See Hilchot Nedarim 8:3 and Chapter 1, Halachah 15. is compelled to take one by forces beyond his control,2I.e., people compelled him to take the nazirite vows. See Hilchot Nedarim 4:1. takes one in order to encourage a colleague,3He said: "I will be a nazirite if you do not eat at my home." See Hilchot Nedarim 4:3. or takes one while making exaggerated statements,4He said: "I will be a nazirite if I did not see an army as numerous as the Jewish people when they left Egypt." See Hilchot Nedarim 4:1; Hilchot Sh'vuot 3:5. he is exempt as is the law concerning other vows.When a person takes a nazirite vow and regrets having taking it, he may approach a sage and ask him [to absolve it]. He may release his nazirite vow in the same way he releases other vows.5See Hilchot Nedarim 4:5.
[The following rules apply when a person] took a nazirite vow and went to brings his sacrifices for that vow with the intent that he will bring them on the completion of the days of his vow, but discovered that either all of the animals or one of them were stolen. If he took the nazirite vow before the animal was stolen, he is a nazirite.6We do not automatically say: Had he known that the animal would have been stolen he would not have taken the vow. If, however, he asks a sage to absolve the vow on this account, it is absolved. See Hilchot Nedarim 8:5; Hilchot Sh'vuot 6:12. If he took the nazirite vow after [an animal] was stolen, lost, or died, he is not a nazirite. It is as if he took a nazirite vow in error.7I.e., his vow was taken on a false assumption, for he believed that he possessed these animals. See Hilchot Nedarim 8:3.
When a person extends a nazirite vow,8I.e., as illustrated in the following halachah, he states that a nazirite vow taken by a colleague should also apply to him. he is a nazirite, as we explained with regard to the laws concerning the extension of other vows.9Hilchot Nedarim 3:3.
If a nazirite was passing before him and he said: "I am like him," he is a nazirite.10See Chapter 1, Halachah 5. If a colleague of his took a nazirite vow and he said: "My mouth is like his mouth with regard to wine"11I.e., "just as he is forbidden to drink wine, so am I." or "My hair is like his hair with regard to cutting it,"12I.e., "just as he is forbidden to cut his hair, so am I." he is a nazirite. Similarly, if he heard him [take a nazirite vow] and said: "And also I" immediately thereafter,13This term refers to a specific span of time, the time it takes to say: Shalom Elecha Rebbi (Hilchot Sh'vuot 2:17). [he is a nazirite]. And if a third person said: "And also I" immediately after the second person's statement - even if this continues for 100 individuals14I.e., each one speaking immediately thereafter his colleague. - they are all nazirites.
If a person says: "I will be a nazirite when a son will be born to me," and his colleague says: "And also I," his colleague becomes a nazirite immediately.15In contrast to the person who took the vow who does not become a nazirite until the child is born (Chapter 1, Halachah 17). This is the conclusion the Rambam derives from the discussion of the issue in Nazir 13a. The Ra'avad offers a different interpretation of the passage. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's understanding.
When a person tells a colleague: "I will be a nazirite when a son will be born to you," and his colleague says: "And also I," [his colleague does not become] a nazirite. [The rationale is that] the latter person only had the desire to say that he would love for a son to be born to him to the same degree as the first does. For he is embarrassed in his presence.16I.e., were he not to make such a statement, it would appear that he does not have genuine love for him. Because of the above, we say that his vow was not made sincerely and he never intended to become a nazirite.
When a person says: "I will be a nazirite when a son will be born to so-and so,"17In contrast to the situation described in the previous halachah, in this instance, the person mentioned in the nazirite vow was not present when the vow was taken. and his colleague heard his statement and said: "And also I," there is an unresolved question concerning the matter. Perhaps his colleague's intent was to become a nazirite like him18Since the person was not present, we feel that it is less likely that his statements were made merely to make an impression (see Nazir 13a). or perhaps he wanted to say that he loved him like the other person did. When there is a question whether a nazirite vow takes effect, we rule leniently.19The rationale is that at the time of the completion of the vow, the person is required to offer sacrifices. Were his vow not to have taken effect, he would be slaughtering non-sacrificial animals in the Temple courtyard which is forbidden (Rabbenu Nissim).
[A nazirite vow can take effect in the following situation.] Two people were walking on the road and saw another person approaching them. One of them said: "The person approaching us is Shimon." The other said: "He is Reuven." The first replied: "I will become a nazirite if it is Reuven" and the second responded: "I will become a nazirite if it is Shimon." If he reaches them and he is Reuven, [the first] is a nazirite. If it is Shimon, the second is a nazirite as per the vows. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations. If the person did not reach them, but instead turned backward and disappeared from their sight and they did not discover his identity, neither of them are nazirites.20Because as stated at the conclusion of the previous halachah, if there is a doubt where a nazirite vow is binding, we rule leniently.
Similarly, when a person says: "I will be a nazirite if there will be 100 kor21A dry measure used in the Talmudic period equivalent to 30 se'ah (Hilchot Arachin 4:4). in this grainheap," if when he goes to measure it, he discovers that [some of the produce] was stolen or lost, he is not a nazirite.22For he desired the nazirite vow to take effect only if there was the said amount of grain in the grain heap. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations. [The rationale is that] When there is a question about whether a nazirite vow takes effect, we rule leniently.
All [of the people who took nazirite vow in the following situation] are nazirites. Several people] were walking on the road and saw a ko'i23A ko'i is a hybrid born from breeding a deer and a goat. There is an unresolved question among our Sages if it is considered as a domesticated animal (behemah) or a wild beast {(chayah) the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Bikkurim 2:8}. In Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 1:13, he states that the term refers to any hybrid that comes from mating a domesticated animal with a wild beast. from a distance. One said: "I will be a nazirite if that is a wild beast." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if that is a domesticated animal." Another said:24In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 5:6), the Rambam states that if one person made all these statements, he is obligated to fulfill an equivalent number of nazirite vows. "I will be a nazirite if that is not a wild beast." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if that is not a domesticated animal." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if that is neither a wild beast, nor a domesticated animal." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if that is both a wild beast and a domesticated animal." [The rationale is that] in certain matters,25See the following halachah where the Rambam elaborates on these points. a ko'i resembles a wild beast. In other matters, it resembles a domesticated animal. In still other matters, it resembles both a wild beast and a domesticated animal and in still other matters, it resembles neither a domesticated animal, nor a wild beast.Similar laws apply if they saw an androgynus and argued whether the person was a man or a woman and took vows similar to those mentioned with regard to a ko'i. They are all nazirities, because there are matters26See the following halachah where the Rambam elaborates on these points. in which an androgynus resembles a man, matters where the resemblance is to a woman, matters in which there is no resemblance to either a man or a woman, and matters in which there is a resemblance to both a man and a woman.
All of the above applies to the person's status with regard to the mitzvot and not with regard to his nature and physical characteristics. Similarly, the factors involving a ko'i apply with regard to the mitzvot and not with regard to its nature and physical characteristics.What is implied? [When] a ko'i [is slaughtered, its] blood must be covered as the blood of a wild beast must.27See Hilchot Shechitah 14:4. Its fat is forbidden as is the fat of a domesticated animal.28See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 1:13. It is considered a union of mixed species if it is mated with either a domesticated animal or a wild beast,29See Hilchot Kilayim 9:5. as if it were neither a wild beast or a domesticated animal. And it must be ritually slaughtered as is required for both a domesticated animal or a wild beast. Similarly, there are other halachic considerations that apply with regard to it and they will all be explained in their appropriate place.30See Hilchot Shechitah 12:8-9; Hilchot Bikkurim 9:5; 10:7; Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 1:6, et al.Similarly, an androgynus becomes impure because of a seminal emission like a man and because of uterine bleeding like a woman.31I.e., either semen or the secretion of a zav. See Hilchot Mita'amei Mishkav UMoshav 1:7; Hilchot Mechusarei Kapparah 3:7. He cannot be sold as a Hebrew servant, [differing in this way] from both a man and a woman.32See Hilchot Avadim 4:1. And a person who kills him is executed like one who kills either a man or a woman. There are also other laws applying to him. Each one will be stated in its place.33See Hilchot Tzitzit 3:9; Hilchot Yibbum VeChalitzah 6:8; Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 22:11, et al.
Similar [laws apply]34Note the Radbaz who offers an explanation why all three illustrations of the principle are necessary. if [several people] saw a group of men approaching them which contained sighted people and blind people. One said: "I will be a nazirite if they are sighted people." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if they are not sighted people." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if they are blind." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if they are not blind." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if among them are sighted people and blind people." Another said: "I will be a nazirite if among them are those who are not sighted people and those who are not blind." Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When a minor reaches the age when his vows are of consequence35I.e., twelve for a male and eleven for a female. He or she must also be aware of the One for whose sake they are taking vows (Hilchot Nedarim 11:1-4). and he takes a nazirite vow, he is a nazirite and must bring his sacrifices36The Ra'avad questions this ruling, noting that there are authorities who maintain that the obligation for a minor to keep his vow is Rabbinic in origin. According to their view, it would be forbidden for the minor to bring a sacrifice, for that would be bringing non-sacramental animals as offerings. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh maintain that those authorities follow a minority position. even though he has not manifested signs of physical maturity, as he [must uphold] his other vows.A father may administer a nazirite vow to his son who is underage even though he has not reached the age when his vows are of consequence. A woman, by contrast, may not administer a nazirite vow to her son.37The commentaries discuss this issue, noting that seemingly, the prophetess Chanah administered a nazirite vow to her son Samuel. They explain that although the inspiration for the vow came from Chanah, it was actually administered by Elkanah, Samuel's father. This is a concept conveyed by the Oral Tradition. It does not apply with regard to other vows.
What is implied? A father told his son who was a minor: "You are a nazirite"; he said: "My son, so-and-so, is a nazirite;" or he said, [pointing to his son,] "He is a nazirite," and the son remained silent,38I.e., his silence is considered as acceptance. If, however, he refuses to become a nazirite, he is not bound by his father's statements, as stated in the following halachah. the son is a nazirite. The father must have him conduct himself according to all the particulars of the nazirite laws.39See Chapter 6, Halachot 3, 11. If [the son] becomes impure, he must bring the sacrifices [associated with the termination] of impurity. When he completes his nazirite vow, he must bring the sacrifices [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity.40See Chapter 8, Halachah 1.
If the son did not desire this and objected to the matter,41The Kessef Mishneh and the Radbaz refer to the difference of opinion between Rashi and Tosafot (Nazir 28b) whether the objection must be made immediately or whether they can be made throughout the span of the nazirite vow. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 4:6), the Rambam espouses the view shared by Tosafot that once the son began observing the nazirite vow, he cannot object to it. his relatives objected,42The Minchat Chinuch (mitzvah 368) writes that if the child agrees to observe the nazirite vow, it is binding even if the relatives object. he cut off his hair, or his relatives cut off his hair - thus performing a deed that indicates that either he or his relatives did not desire the nazirite vow,43See the Or Sameach who debates whether drinking wine is also considered a deed which registers the son's objections. he is not a nazirite.44For his father's authority over him is not absolute. Until when may his father administer a nazirite vow to him? Until he attains majority,45Becomes thirteen years old and manifests signs of physical maturity (Hilchot Ishut 2:2; see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, loc. cit.). and becomes an adult.
The concept of a nazirite vow does not apply to gentiles, for [Numbers 6:2]46The verse which introduces the laws of a nazirite vow. By addressing the passage to Jews, the Torah indicates that it does not apply to gentiles. "Speak to the children of Israel."
The concept of a nazirite vow does apply to women and servants.47Numbers 6:2 specifically mentions a woman taking a nazirite vow. With regard to servants, Nazir 62b explains how this concept can be explained by Biblical exegesis. A father or a husband may nullify a nazirite vow taken by a woman if he so desires as is the case with regard to other vows.48See Hilchot Nedarim, chs. 11-13. With regard to a servant, [to nullify his nazirite vow,]49We are speaking about a Canaanite servant who is his master's property. Accordingly, vows he takes are dependent on his master's consent as indicated by the following halachah. his master must compel him to drink [wine] or become impure due to contact with the dead. If he does not compel him,50I.e., with regard to a servant, a verbal nullification of the nazirite vow is not sufficient. The master must physically compel him not to observe it. he must observe the nazirite vow.
When a servant takes other vows that involve personal aggravation or that prevent his performance of work or makes a valuation assessment,51See Hilchot Arachin 1:2. his master does not have to compel him [to act against the vow to nullify it].52I.e., as the Rambam continues to explain, the vow is void without the master having to take any action at all. [The rationale is that the servant] is not the owner of his self and he cannot cause a vow to take effect regarding his person. To what can the matter be compared? To a person who [takes a vow] forbidding produce belonging to another person to the owner of that produce.53According to the Rambam (based on Nazir 62b) , there are four different rulings with regard to vows or oaths a servant takes:a) All oaths and valuation assessments that a servant takes are nullified automatically. The rationale is that "his body is not his property so that the oath he takes will be effective. With regard to oaths, [Numbers 30:3] states: 'forbid something upon one's soul.' [Implied is that the verse applies to] someone whose soul is his property. It excludes a servant who is someone else's property" (Hilchot Sh'vuot 12:6).b) Vows other than a nazirite vow that are either aggravating or prevent the servant from working are automatically nullified. The rationale is that, with regard to an oath, Leviticus 5:4 states: "Whether he will do harm or do good." Implied is that he can take an oath - or a vow, because an association is established between vows and oaths - only when he has the choice of either doing good or doing harm to himself. This does not apply to these oaths. Since they harm his master, he has no right to take them.c) Nazirite vows are not automatically nullified, because the association with vows does not apply with regard to them. Nevertheless, since the servant belongs to his master, the master has the right to nullify his vow.d) Vows other than a nazirite vow that are neither aggravating nor prevent the servant from working must be fulfilled. The rationale is that in contrast to an oath in which the prohibition is incumbent on the servant (the gavra), for a vow, the prohibition falls upon the object (the cheftza). Since there is no harm to the master involved, such vows can take effect.If, however, a vow does not involve personal aggravation and it is not a matter which holds back work, [the master] cannot compel him [not to observe it].54Since the master does not suffer any loss, there is no reason that the vow should not take effect.If a servant took a nazirite vow and his master told him: "It is nullified for you," [when] he receives his freedom,55When a master desires to nullify a vow taken by his servant, he must physically compel him to break it, as mentioned above. If he does not do so, but instead, verbally nullifies it, he is indicating that he no longer considers his servant as having that status, but has freed him. See parallels in Hilchot Avadim 8:17.Based on a different version of Nazir 62b, the Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and does not agree that verbally nullifying a servant's vow is an indication that he must be freed. The commentaries support the Rambam's understanding. he is obligated to complete his nazirite vow.56For the verbal nullification made by his master is of no consequence. [The rationale is that] a servant must be compelled to nullify his vow. We do not nullify it verbally. If one nullifies it verbally, he is granted his freedom.
When a servant took a nazirite vow and fled from or abandoned his master,57Fleeing from his master is not equivalent to attaining his freedom (Radbaz). he is forbidden to drink wine. [This measure was enacted so that] he would suffer difficulty and return to his master's domain.58The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, noting that Nazir 9:1 mentions that this issue is the subject of a difference of opinion between Rabbi Meir and Rabbi Yossi. Generally, in such instances, the halachah follows Rabbi Yossi and yet the Rambam follows Rabbi Meir's view. The Radbaz explains that the fact that Nazir 61a concludes by mentioning Rabbi Meir's view indicates that the halachah follows his opinion. The Kessef Mishneh suggests (- this, however, is not borne out by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah -) that the Rambam's text of the mishnah read opposite to the standard version. Others support the Rambam's ruling, based on Tosafot who states that the halachah follows Rabbi Meir with regard to his decrees.If he took a nazirite vow, completed it, and shaved,59I.e., completed the process required of a nazirite at the conclusion of his vow. without his master knowing of this, and afterwards, was granted his freedom, he is considered to have satisfied the requirements of his nazirite vow.60We do not say that since the vow was fulfilled without the knowledge of his master, its fulfillment is of no consequence. Although his master could have nullified his vow, since in fact he did not do so, it is considered significant (Radbaz). If, however, he took a nazirite vow, but did not shave, and was granted his freedom, he is not considered to have fulfilled his nazirite vow.61I.e., he must begin counting the days of his nazirite vow anew as a free man, without counting the days during which he observed as a servant.The rationale why these days are not counted is that since he did not complete his vow (by shaving), the status of the vow is left open. For at any time, his master could compel him to drink wine and nullify his vow. As such, he is never considered to have completed a valid nazirite vow. Although the Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, the commentaries justify his approach. If he became impure and then was granted his freedom, he must begin reckoning [the days of his nazirite vow] from the time he became impure.62I.e., he does not bring a sacrifice as would a free man who became impure in the midst of his nazirite vow. Instead, he begins his nazirite vow anew when he becomes pure after he attains his freedom.
Nazirite vows must be observed both while the Temple is standing and while the Temple was not standing. Therefore when a person takes a nazirite vow in the present era, he must observe it forever,63See Chapter 3, Halachah 12, for a description of how this vow is observed. because we do not have a Temple where he can go and offer his sacrifices at the conclusion of his nazirite vow.
A nazirite vow may be observed only in Eretz Yisrael.64This is not a point of Scriptural Law. Instead, the rationale is that since our Sages decreed that the Diaspora - its earth and even its air - conveys ritual impurity, a nazirite cannot observe his vow there (Nazir 54a; see Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 11:1). When a person takes a nazirite vow in the Diaspora, he is penalized and obligated to ascend to Eretz Yisrael65So that he can observe his nazirite vow in purity. and observe his nazirite vow there for as long as he vowed.66Nazir 19b, 20a relates that Queen Heleni took a vow that if her son would return safe from a war, she would be a nazarite for seven years. She observed her vow and came to the Temple to offer her sacrifices. The School of Hillel ruled that she should remain in Eretz Yisrael and observe her vow for another seven years, for the time she observed it in the Diaspora was not counted. Accordingly, when a person takes a nazirite vow in the Diaspora in the present era, we compel him to ascend to Eretz Yisrael and observe his nazirite vow there67The Ra'avad questions what purpose will be served by ascending to Eretz Yisrael in the present era. We are all impure because of contact with a human corpse (or impurity that results from that) and there are no ashes from the red heifer to purify ourselves. If so, what difference is there between Eretz Yisrael and the Diaspora? In neither place, will one be able to complete his nazirite vow in purity. Hence, the Ra'avad concludes, it is forbidden to take a nazirite vow in the present age, whether in the Diaspora or in Eretz Yisrael.The Radbaz states that although we are ritually impure, abiding in the Diaspora increases that impurity. Hence, it is preferable for one who takes a nazirite vow to ascend to Eretz Yisrael. The Kessef Mishneh goes further and states that since a person can prevent himself from coming into contact with the ritual impurity associated with a corpse, there is no prohibition against taking a nazirite vow in the present age. until he dies or until the Temple is built and he brings his sacrifices there at the conclusion of the span of his vow.
Throughout the entire time he is in the Diaspora, he is forbidden to drink wine, to become impure due to contact with the dead, and to cut his hair.68See the parallel in Chapter 6, Halachah 7, for parallels. He must uphold all of the requirements stemming from a nazirite vow, despite the fact that the days are not counted for him. If he transgressed and drank [wine], cut his hair, or touched a corpse or the like,69For even though we are all ritually impure at present, a nazirite who is impure who comes in contact with a corpse is liable for lashes for each time he comes in contact (Chapter 5, Halachah 17). he is liable for lashes.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
If a specification is not made the term for a nazirite vow is 30 days. What is implied? If a person said: "I am a nazirite," [he must uphold his vow] for no less than 30 days.1Numbers 6:5 states that the nazir's hair "will be holy" קדוש יהיה. Nazir 5a notes that Yihiyeh יהיה is numerically equivalent to 30 and states that this is the span of an ordinary nazirite vow. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 1:3), the Rambam writes that the numerical equivalence is merely a support and that the concept was taught as as part of the Oral Tradition. Even if he said: "I will be a nazirite for an excessively long and protracted time," he must uphold the nazirite vows for [only] 30 days, for he did not specify a time.2And 30 days can be considered "an excessively long and protracted time."
If he specified a time span that was less than 30 days, e.g., he said: "I will be a nazirite for one day," "...for ten days," or "...for twenty days," he must observe the nazirite vow for 30 days. For there is no concept of a nazirite vow for less than 30 days. This concept was conveyed by the Oral Tradition.
If a person explicitly mentioned a time span greater than 30 days:, e.g., he mentioned 31 days, 40 days, 100 days, or 100 years, he is a nazirite for the time he specified, neither more nor less.
When a person says: "I will be a nazirite for one hour," he must uphold his nazirite vows for 30 days. If he said: "I will be a nazirite for 30 days and one hour," he must be a nazirite for 31 days. For there is no conception of a nazirite vow [only for] hours.3Hence if the time span he mentioned is less than 30 days, he is required to observe the vow for 30 days. When he says 30 days and an hour, the ruling is that since he mentioned more than 30 days, he is required to observe 31 days.
[The following rules apply when a person] says: "I will be a nazirite from here until this-and-this place." If he did not set out on the road, he must uphold his nazirite vow for only 30 days. For his intent was to make a vow for a long nazirite vow,4Which is 30 days as explained above. [as evident from the fact that] he did not specify a time.[Different rules apply if] he set out on the way. If it was less than a 30 day journey, he must uphold his nazirite vow for 30 days.5For as above, there is no conception of observing a nazirite vow for a shorter time. If it was more than a 30 day journey, he must observe one nazirite vow for the duration of the days of the journey.6I.e., he accepted the nazirite vow in the hope that its merit would arouse protective spiritual forces that would guard him over the course of the journey (Tosafot, Nazir 7a).
When a person says; "I will observe two terms of nazirite vows," or three or four, he must observe the number of nazirite vows he mentioned, each one lasting 30 days. At the end of each 30 day period, he must shave and bring his sacrifices and begin observing his second nazirite vow. Even if he said: "I will observe 100,000 nazirite vows" - and it is impossible for him to live that long - he should observe them one by one7I.e., he is not considered a nazirite for life as mentioned in Halachah 12. until he concludes the amount of nazirite vows he took.
When a person says: "I will observe nazirite vows as many days there are in a year," he must observe as many nazirite vows as there are days in a year. If he explicitly mentioned a solar year, he must observe 365 nazirite vows, with each one being 30 days long. If he mentioned a lunar year, he must observe 354 nazirite vows. If he did not explicitly state [a solar or a lunar year], he must observe 354 nazirite vows. [The rationale is that as] we already explained,8Hilchot Nedarim 9:1. with regard to vows, we follow the wording usually employed by people at large. Now, most of the solar years are 365 days long. Most of the lunar years are 354 days long. And when people at large use the term "year," they mean a lunar year.
When a person says: "I will observe one and a half nazirite vows," he is obligated to observe two nazirite vows.9Each one being 30 days. Since he spoke of nazirite vows, we understand that his intent was to observe more than one nazirite vow. Since there is no concept of observing half a nazirite vow, we require him to observe two. When one says: "I will be a nazir and one day," or "I will be a nazir and one hour," he must observe two nazirite vows.If he says: "I am a nazirite and one," he must observe two nazirite vows. If he says: "I am a nazirite, one, and more," he must observe three nazirite vows. If he says: "I am a nazirite, one, more, and again," he must observe four nazirite vows.10Each of the extra statements is considered as adding a nazirite vow.[If he says:] "I am a nazirite for 30 days and one day," he must observe one nazirite vow for 31 days.11For it is not clear that he wanted to observe two nazirite vows. The commentaries note that there is slight difficulty with the Rambam's statement based on the text of Nazir 7b. Nevertheless, they offer several possible resolutions to the issue.
[The following rules apply when] there are two pairs of witnesses who testify concerning a person. One testifies that he took two nazirite vows. The other testifies that he took five vows.12The person himself denies taking any nazirite vows or says that he forgot about the matter (Nazir 20a and commentaries). He is required to observe two vows. For included in the five are two and thus all testify that he took two vows.13I.e., there is no disagreement regarding that, so he is obligated to observe the two nazirite vows.
[The following rules apply when a person] took two nazirite vows, whether he took them both at the same time or took them one after the other, e.g., he said: "I am a nazirite for a day"14In which instance he is obligated to observe a nazirite vow for an entire month (Halachah 2). and "I am a nazirite for a day." If he counted the days of the first vow and set aside his sacrifices15See Chapter 8, Halachah 2. and then asked for the absolution of his vow and had it released, the days he observed the first vow can count for the second. He can bring the sacrifices that he set aside and complete his obligation.[Moreover,] even if he brought [the sacrifices for] his atonement and even if he shaved off his hair and then asked for his vow to be absolved, the observance of the first vow fulfills the second. [The rationale is that] the second vow does not take effect until after the first one is completed.16In this context, this statement means that as long as the first vow is being observed, the days cannot be reckoned as part of the observance of the second vow. Implied is that if they are not considered as part of the observance of the first vow, they can be considered as part of the observance of the second. And since the first vow was released, it is as if it did not exist initially.17See Hilchot Sh'vuot 6:17-18 which explains that a sages' absolution of a vow causes it to be considered as if it was never made.
When a person says: "I will be a nazirite forever" or "I will be a nazirite for all the days of my life," he is considered as a nazirite forever. If he says: "I will be a nazirite for 1000 years," he is considered as a nazirite for a limited time,18The differences between these two categories are discussed in the following halachah.The Ra'avad notes that the Rambam's ruling appears to be based on the Tosefta and the Jerusalem Talmud (Nazir 1:4). The Babylonian Talmud (Nazir 8b) appears to differ, but the version of that text seems distorted. even though it is impossible for a person to live for a 1000 years.
What is the difference between a nazirite forever and a nazirite for a limited time? A nazirite for a limited time is forbidden to cut his hair until the conclusion of his nazirite vow, as [Numbers 6:5] states: "Throughout the days of his nazirite vow, a razor shall not pass over his head until the days are completed." A nazirite forever, by contrast, may alleviate [the burden of his hair]19He should not, however, shave his head entirely. with a razor every twelve months. When he cuts his hair, he must bring a sacrifice of three animals,20As is required when one completes a nazirite vow in purity. See Chapter 8, Halachah 1. as [II Samuel 14:26] states [with regard to Avshalom]: "From year to year, when he would shave, because his hair was heavy for him and he would shave." Avshalom was a nazirite forever. This concept is a halachah transmitted by the Oral Tradition.21Even though the concept is reinforced by a verse, were the Oral Tradition not to have conveyed this idea, the verse could have been interpreted otherwise (Kessef Mishneh).When a nazirite forever becomes impure, he must bring sacrifices [to atone for] impurity and shave as is required in an instance of impurity like a nazirite for a limited time.
Samson was not a nazirite in a complete sense, for he never took a nazirite vow.22Although the angel gave instructions (Judges 13:5 : "The youth shall be a nazirite unto God," Samson never took a nazirite vow himself, nor did his father administer one to him. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XVIII, pp. 68-70, which compares this situation to one in which a Jewish court converts a gentile child. When the child comes of age, if he does not protest, the conversion is binding upon him. Similarly, since Samson - and Samuel - did not protest, the nazirite restrictions conveyed from above became binding upon them. It was merely that the angel caused him to be separated from impurity.23See Judges 13:4.What were the laws applying to him? He was forbidden to drink wine and cut his hair.24As Judges 16:17 states: "A razor has never been brought up against my head, for I am a nazirite unto God from my mother's womb." He was, however, permitted to incur impurity due to contact with the dead.25Hence he was not forbidden to come in contact with the corpses of the Philistines whom he killed (Nazir 4b). This concept is a halachah transmitted by the Oral Tradition.
Accordingly, if someone said: "Behold I am a nazirite like Samson," he is a nazirite forever with regard to [the prohibition against] cutting his hair and [drinking] wine. He may not cut his hair every twelve months like others who are nazirites forever.26For Samson was not allowed to cut his hair at all, as indicated by the verse cited above. He is, however, permitted to become impure because of contact with the dead.27This is permitted even as an initial and preferred option [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 1:2).If one says: "My intent was to refer to another person whose name is [also] Samson," he is not a nazirite.28See Hilchot Nedarim 2:12 which explains that a person is given the option of explaining his intent with regard to a vow that he took. See the glosses of the Kessef Mishneh and the Radbaz to the following halachah which discuss in detail whether this rule applies when it seems obvious that the person's intent was to take a vow to be a nazirite like Samson was. When a person takes a nazirite vow like Samson's, he is not permitted to have it absolved, for Samson's nazirite vow was [binding] forever.29Since Samson's nazirite vow was imposed upon him by an angel at God's command, it could not be absolved as other vows taken because of man's desires (Rashi, Makkot 22a).
When a person says: "Behold, I am like Samson," "...like Manoach's son," "...like Delilah's husband," "...like the one who uprooted the gates of Gaza," or "...like the one whose eyes were gouged out by the Philistines," he must keep the nazirite restrictions observed by Samson even though these deeds could have been performed by another person.30This applies if the person making the vow remains silent. If, however, he specifically states that his intent was another person, his word is accepted as stated in the previous halachah (Radbaz).
[The prophet] Samuel of Rama was a nazirite forever.31Nazir 66a derives this concept through the principles of Biblical exegesis. Therefore one who says: "Behold, I am like Samuel of Rama," "...like Chanah's son," "...like Elkanah's son," "...like the one who hewed Agag at Gilgal," or the like, he is a nazirite forever. We do not say that perhaps his intent was to refer to another person who performed such deeds.32This applies if the person making the vow remains silent. If, however, he specifically states that his intent was another person, his word is accepted as stated in the previous halachah (Radbaz).
When a person says: "Behold, I am a nazirite as this building is full" or "...as this container is full," we investigate his [intent]. If he says: "My intent was not to be a nazirite for my entire life. [Instead,] my intent was only to prolong the days of my nazirite vow for a long time," he must observe his nazirite vow for [only] 30 days.33See Halachah 1.If he said: "I made this vow without any specific intent,"34I.e., with the intent that my words be interpreted by the sages according to their principles. we see the container as if it is filled with mustard seeds and he must be a nazirite for his entire life. He is permitted to cut his hair every twelve months. [At that time,] he must bring sacrifices like everyone who is a nazirite forever.35For he did not specify a time at which point his vow is concluded. See Halachah 12.
When a person says: "Behold, I am a nazirite like the hairs of my head," "...like the dust of the earth," or "like the sand of the sea," it is as if he said: "I will keep as many nazirite vows as I have hairs on my head," "...as there is dust on the earth," or "...as there is sand on the seashore." Therefore he must shave his hair36And bring the required sacrifices. every 30 days and begin observing a second nazirite vow for 30 days, cut his hair37And bring the required sacrifices. and [continue this pattern] until he dies.38For there are more hairs on one's head than 30 day periods in a person's life. Whenever he shaves his hair, he is forbidden to drink wine or become impure because of contact with the dead.39Because the second nazirite vow begins as soon as the first one is concluded. If he drinks [wine] or becomes impure, even on the day he shaves his head, he is worthy of lashes.
When a person says: "Behold, I am a nazirite if I eat this loaf of bread," "Behold, I am a nazirite if I eat it," and "Behold, I am a nazirite if I eat it,"40I.e., he makes three successive vows concerning the same loaf of bread. if he eats it, he is obligated to observe as many nazirite vows as he took.41I.e., this teaches that a nazirite vow can become binding even though one is already obligated to observe an existing vow. He observes them consecutively, each one for 30 days. At the end of each 30 days, he shaves [his hair] and brings his sacrifices.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
When a person says: "Behold I am a nazirite," he should perform the shaving [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity1See Chapter 8, Halachah 1. As mentioned there, he also brings the appropriate sacrifices. on the thirty-first day.2For unless he specifies otherwise, a nazirite vow must be upheld for 30 days. If he performed this shaving on the thirtieth day, he fulfills his obligation.3This leniency is granted based on the principle that a portion of a day is considered as the entire day. Hence it is considered as if he observed his vow for 30 days (see Nazir 5b and notes). If he says: "Behold I am a nazirite for thirty days," he may only perform the shaving on the thirty-first day.4Since he explicitly mentioned 30 days, we assume that he meant thirty complete days.
When a person takes two nazirite vows, he should perform the shaving for the first one on the thirty-first day and the second on the sixty-first day.5For the thirty-first day is considered as the first day of the second vow. If he performed the first shaving on the thirtieth day, he should perform the second on the sixtieth.6In this instance, the thirtieth day is considered as the first day of the second vow. If he performed the [second] shaving on the fifty-ninth day, he fulfills his obligation, for the thirtieth day is counted also for the second nazirite vow.7For a portion of the day is considered as the entire day.
When a person says: "Behold I am a nazirite, and [will be] a nazirite should a son be born to me,"8I.e., he is vowing to observe two nazirite vows. One is unconditional and the other is dependent on whether or not a son is born to him. if he began9The Radbaz emphasizes that these laws apply when he began observing his own nazirite vow before his son was born. If his son was born before he began observing his own nazirite vow, he may observe whichever vow he desires first. observing his nazirite vow10I.e., the vow he took without making it conditional on the birth of a son. and then a son was born to him, he should complete his own nazirite vow and then begin counting [the one associated with] his son.[The following rules apply if] he said: "Behold I will be a nazirite should a son be born to me and behold I am a nazirite for these-and-these days." If he began [observing] his own nazirite vow and then a son was born to him, he should interrupt [the counting of] his vow and begin counting [the one associated with] his son. Afterwards, he goes back and completes his own vow.11As illustrated in the conclusion of the halachah. They are both considered as one nazirite vow. Therefore if he becomes impure in the midst of the nazirite vow [associated with] his son, he invalidates everything. If he became impure after [completing] the nazirite vow [associated with] his son, he invalidates only [the days after the completion of] the nazirite vow [associated with] his son.12Because he has already observed the rites marking the completion of the nazirite vow associated with his son.According to the Rambam, in such an instance, the person's observance of the days of his vow that preceded the vow associated with his son is considered significant. The rationale is that if the observance of the vow associated with his son is considered significant, the days that preceded it are likewise significant. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that although the observance of the vow associated with his son is significant, none of the days associated with his own vow should be counted. For his own vow is an integral unit and should be considered as such.For how many days [must he observe the nazirite laws] to complete his own [nazirite] vow?13I.e., in a situation where he does not become impure and must complete his own vow after completing the vow associated with the birth of his son. See the illustrations in the following halachot. If there remained 30 days or more [from the days he was required to observe for] his nazirite vow14I.e., his own nazirite vow was prolonged, extending more than the required 30 days. after his son was born, he should observe the nazirite vow [associated with] his son and then complete the days remaining from his own nazirite vow. If less than 30 days remain from his nazirite vow, he must count 30 days after the nazirite vow [associated with] his son, for there is never less than 30 days between one shaving [associated with the conclusion of a nazirite vow] and another.
What is implied? One says: "Behold I will be a nazirite when a son will be born to me and behold I am a nazirite for 100 days," he begins observing his nazirite vow and then a son was born to him. If 30 or more days remain from the 100 days concerning which he took the vow after his son was born, he does not forfeit anything. For he [temporarily] concludes his own nazirite vow, begins counting that associated with his son, performs the shaving, brings his sacrifices and then completes the 30 or more days that remain from his own nazirite vow. [At its conclusion,] he performs the shaving. If less than 30 remain from the 100, he forfeits some until [it is counted that he observed] 70 [days].
What is implied? If his son was born on the eightieth day, he should count the vow associated with his son, complete that vow, perform the shaving, and begin counting 30 days after that shaving. Thus he loses the ten days that [immediately] preceded [the birth of] his son, i.e., the days from the seventieth day until the son's birth. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.
When a person says: "Behold I will be a nazirite15I.e., he takes an ordinary nazirite vow which extends 30 days. after twenty days pass," and then says: "I am a nazirite beginning now for 100 days,"16And thus the two vows clash. he should observe his nazirite vow for twenty days17Thus he will have observed 20 of the 100 days of his longer vow. and interrupts [his counting].18He does not, however, perform a shaving or bring sacrifices. He then begins to count 30 days for the nazirite vow that was to begin after twenty days. After he completes [the observance of this vow], he performs the shaving [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity and brings his sacrifices. He then counts the 80 days to complete the 100, performs the shaving and brings his sacrifices.
If one says: "Behold I will be a nazirite after twenty days pass," and then says: "I am a nazirite beginning now," he should [observe the second vow first,] counting 30 days. He should then perform the shaving [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity,19Completing the observance of that vow. and count another 30 days. This is for the vow he took that would begin after 20 days.One might say: Let him observe 20 days, interrupt [the observance of that vow], and observe 30 days and perform a shaving.20Completing the observance of that vow. Thus there will remain ten days left from the nazirite vow which he began to observe initially for which he observed only 20 days. [We do not say this, because] there may never be less than 30 days between shaving [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity and another.
If one says: "Behold I will be a nazirite after twenty days pass," and then says: "I am a nazirite forever beginning now," the nazirite vow which he took originally never takes effect.21Because it is superceded by the second vow which is binding for life. The observance of that vow prevents the observance of the original vow.
Similarly, if one says: "Behold I will be a nazirite like Samson22See Chapter 3, Halachot 13-14. after twenty days pass," and then says: "I am a nazirite beginning now, he should not shave for the last nazirite vow he took.23The rationale is that he is not allowed to shave because of his first vow. He must, however, observe the stringencies of an ordinary nazirite vow for the first 20 days and perhaps, even for the first 30 days (Radbaz).
When a person says: "Behold I am a nazirite one day before I die," he is forbidden to drink wine, to become impure [due to contact with the dead], and to shave forever.24For that day might be the day of his death in which instance retroactively the vow he took would take effect. See the notes to the following halachah.
[The following rules apply when a person takes a vow,] saying: "I will be a nazirite on the day when the son of David25I.e., the Mashiach. comes." If he took the vow during the week, he is forbidden to [perform any act that violates the nazirite prohibitions] forever.26For perhaps the Mashiach will come that day. As we say in the popular restatement of the Rambam's Thirteen Principles of Faith, "I await his coming every day." If he took the vow on the Sabbath or a festival, he is permitted on that Sabbath or festival. Afterwards, he is forbidden forever.[The rationale is that] there is a doubt concerning the question whether [the son of David] will come on a Sabbath or festival or not.27The Rambam's ruling is based on Eruvin 43b. The Kessef Mishneh interprets the Rambam's understanding of that passage as follows: There is a question whether the prohibition against going beyond one's Sabbath boundaries (see Hilchot Shabbat, ch. 27) applies ten handbreadths above the ground or not. Thus there is a question whether Mashiach - who obviously will observe the Sabbath laws - can come on the Sabbath for that will require him descending from heaven and thus going beyond his Sabbath boundaries.(Kin'at Eliyahu questions the entire issue, noting that according to the Rambam, Mashiach will be a flesh and blood human being who will "wage the wars of G‑d... build the Temple" (see Hilchot Melachim 11:1). No where does the Rambam make mention of him descending from heaven. Since the matter is an unresolved question, on the day he took the nazirite vow, the nazirite [restrictions] do not apply to him. For whenever there is a question whether the nazirite restrictions apply, we rule leniently.28Seemingly, every day, there is a question whether the Mashiach will come and hence, we should rule leniently every day. The Radbaz explains that since we are certain that it is possible for Mashiach to come that day, he must observe the nazirite restrictions. For if Mashiach would actually come that day, retroactively the vow he took would take effect. On the following Sabbath, although the above question still remains, it does not eliminate the nazirite vow that has taken effect concerning him.
When a nazirite completes the days of his nazirite vow and does not perform the shaving [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity,29As evident from Chapter 8, Halachah 5, more precisely, it is the nazirite's offering of his sacrifices and not his shaving which completes his nazirite vow. he is forbidden to shave, to drink wine, and to become impure due to contact with the dead as he was before and all the particular laws associated with the nazirite vow are incumbent on him. If he shaves, drinks wine, or becomes impure [because of contact with the dead], he is liable for lashes.30Nazir 15a derives this concept from the exegesis of Numbers 6:6.
[The following rules apply when a person] takes a nazirite vow and thinks that it is not binding and hence acts as if he was not bound by his vow and drinks wine.31The laws mentioned here apply only to drinking wine. Shaving or becoming impure nullify his nazirite vow and require him to begin counting again anew. See Chapter 6, Halachot 1-3. Afterwards, he asked a sage and he ruled that it is a vow and that he is obligated to observe the nazirite laws. He should count the days from the day on which he took the vow.32When these days are completed, according to Scriptural law, he is no longer obligated to observe his nazirite vow even though he did not observe it for the full amount of time that he vowed. According to Rabbinic decree, he should continue to observe the prohibitions for the number of days which he acted as if it was permitted to him.
What is implied? He took a vow for 30 days and acted as if his vow was permitted for ten days and observed the prohibitions for twenty days. After the thirtieth day, he asked a sage and he told him that he was forbidden. He must observe ten days from the time he asked to compensate for the ten days during which he acted as if he was permitted. If he drinks [wine], shaves, or becomes impure [due to contact with a corpse], he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.33This is the punishment given for breaking a Rabbinic decree.
When does the above apply? With regard to a nazirite vow for a short time.34A nazirite vow of 30 days. If, by contrast, he took a prolonged nazirite vow,35A vow for a longer period. it is sufficient that he observe a nazirite vow for 30 days even though he violated this prolonged nazirite vow for his entire life. If he does not observe a prohibition at all, we do not pay attention to him at all.36The sages pay no attention to him. Even if there is legitimate reason for him to ask for his vow to be released, his request is not heeded (Ra'avad).
Whenever a court pays attention to such a person or one like him and they inform these people who act contemptuously with regard to vows that they are not obligated to observe them according to Scriptural law, or they give a lenient ruling or they find a rationale why he could ask for the absolution of the vow, we place that court of commoners under a ban of ostracism.
When a woman takes a nazirite vow, the days of the vow are completed, she brings her sacrifices, one of the animals is slaughtered and its blood is poured [on the altar], if her husband hears of her vow, he cannot nullify it. This applies even if she has not shaven her hair already. Before its blood is poured on the altar, he may nullify her vow.37For he has the right to nullify a nazirite vow which his wife takes (Chapter 2, Halachah 17).When does the above apply? With regard to the shaving [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity. With regard to the shaving performed because one has contracted impurity, the husband may nullify her vow. Even though she has already offered the sacrifices associated with the contraction of impurity, [he may nullify her vow,] because she still must observe another nazirite vow.38For the impurity nullifies the observance of the nazirite vow entirely.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
There are three matters that are forbidden to a nazirite: a) ritual impurity [resulting from contact with a human corpse],1See Halachah 15 and onward. b) shaving [his hair],2See Halachah 11. and c) [partaking of] products of the vine. [This applies] both to the fruit3Whether grapes or wine. or the waste products of the fruit.4E.g., peels or pits. See the following halachah. Alcoholic beverages made from dates, figs, or the like are permitted to a nazirite. The shaichar forbidden to [a nazirite] by the Torah5Numbers 6:3. is an alcoholic beverage made from a mixture of wine.6E.g., a brandy, vermouth, or the like.
What is meant by "products of the grape vine"? When a nazirite eats an olive-sized portion of the fruit [of the vine]: fresh grapes, raisins, or unripened grapes, or he eats an olive-sized portion of the waste products of the fruit which are the peels or the seeds, he is liable for lashes. Similarly, if he drank a revi'it7I.e., a quarter of a larger measure called a log. A revi'it is 86 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 150 cc according to Chazon Ish. of wine or ate an olive-sized portion of coagulated wine - this is considered as fruit - or drank a revi'it of vinegar - which is the waste products of the fruit - he is liable for lashes. Grape leaves, the tender shoots of the branches of the vine, grape sap, and grape buds are permitted to a nazirite, for they are neither fruit, nor the waste products of fruit, but rather are considered as parts of the tree.
All forbidden grape [products] can be combined together [to produce the minimum measure for which one is liable for lashes].8This represents a contrast to other Torah prohibitions. As stated in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 4:16, "when a person takes a small amount of fat, a small amount of blood, a small amount of the meat of a non-kosher animal, a small amount of the meat of a nevelah, a small amount of the meat of a non-kosher fish, a small amount of the meat of a non-kosher fowl, or the like from other prohibited substances, although he collects an olive-sized portion from the entire mixture and partakes of it, he is not liable for lashes."What is implied? One who mixed together fresh grapes with raisins, or with unripened grapes, pits, and peels, and ate an olive-sized portion of the mixture is liable for lashes. Similarly, if he ate them one after the other9He must, however, eat the olived-sized portion within the time it takes to eat three eggs, as explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 14:8. until he ate an olive-sized portion of the entire group, he is liable for lashes. Similarly, he is liable for lashes if he drank a revi'it of a mixture of wine and vinegar.10From the Rambam's wording, it appears that eating and drinking are not combined to reach a single measure.
A permitted substance is not included together with a forbidden substance [to produce the minimum measure] for which a nazirite [is liable for lashes].11This ruling is the subject of a difference of opinion among our Sages (Nazir 35b-37b). Although there is an opinion which maintains that with regard to a nazirite - in contrast to all the other prohibitions of the Torah - the permitted food should be counted as part of the forbidden measure, the Rambam does not accept this view as Halachah.What is implied? Wine was mixed together with honey [producing a mixture] in which the flavor of wine [could be tasted in] its entirety and [a nazirite] drank the mixture. Raisins were pressed together with dried figs [producing a mixture] in which the flavor of raisins [could be tasted in] its entirety and [a nazirite] ate the mixture. He is not liable for lashes unless there will be an olive-sized portion of grape products in a portion of the mixture the size of three eggs, and he will eat a portion the size of three eggs, as is the law with regard to other prohibitions that are forbidden universally, as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.12Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:3.
Similarly, if a person soaked his bread in wine and there was a revi'it of wine within k'dei [achilat] p'ras13The measure described in the previous halachah. of the bread and he ate a p'ras [of the bread], he will have consumed a revi'it of wine.14See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 14:9 where the Rambam states that to be liable for lashes, one must drink a prohibited substance in the time it takes to drink a revi'it. Here, however, he mentions the time it takes to eat k'dei achilat p'ras. It is possible to explain that here, the person is "eating" the wine, i.e., ingesting it as it is absorbed in solid food. Hence, he uses a measure of time that involves eating. In Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot, he speaks about drinking. Hence, he uses a measure of time that involves drinking. [Hence,] he is worthy of lashes. Concerning this and similar situations, the Torah [Numbers 6:3] states: "Anything that has been steeped in grape [wine] shall you not partake."15We have translated the verse according to its halachic interpretation. Its literal meaning is somewhat different. This forbids an entity in which wine has been mixed and its flavor is the flavor of wine.16Nazir 37a exemplifies this concept as follows: One soaked grapes in water and the flavor of the water became that of grape juice. [This applies] provided it has both the flavor and substance [of the wine] as is the case with regard to other prohibited foods.17See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:3.
If wine or the like were mixed together with honey and the flavor of wine cannot be detected, it is permitted for a nazirite [to partake of the mixture]. [The nazirite prohibitions] should not be considered more severe than [those against] fat and blood.18I.e., as stated in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:1-2, if a prohibited substance becomes mixed into another entity, its presence is nullified if there is so much of the permitted entity that the flavor of the prohibited substance cannot be detected. (When it is impossible to have someone taste the mixture, we require 60 times the amount of the forbidden substance.)
If the mixture had the flavor of wine, but there is not a revi'it of wine within k'dei [achilat] p'ras, [the mixture] is prohibited according to Rabbinic decree, as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.19See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:2-3. There the Rambam states that if there was less than an olive-sized portion of forbidden fat in a portion the size of three eggs, it is considered as if the substance of the prohibited substance is not present. Hence, according to Scriptural Law, there is no prohibition, even if the flavor of the forbidden fat is detectable.The Ra'avad differs and quotes authorities who maintain that although lashes are not given in such an instance, the prohibition is of Scriptural origin. If [a nazirite] partakes of it, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.
When a nazirite eats an olive-sized portion of grapes, an olive-sized portion of [grape] seeds, an olive-sized portion of [grape] peels, and an olive-sized portion of raisins, and drinks an olive-sized portion of wine - even if he squeezed a cluster of grapes and drank [their juice]20The Rambam is indicating that grape juice and wine are governed by the same laws. Alternatively, that grapes and grape juice are not considered as part of the same prohibition. - he receives five sets of lashes. For each [of the substances is forbidden] by a different prohibition. And he receives a sixth set of lashes for the violation of [the prohibition]: "He shall not desecrate his word"21See Hilchot Nedarim 1:5; see also Chapter 1, Halachah 2. that applies to all vows.Similarly, if he ate an olive-sized portion of peels or an olive-sized portion of grapes, he receives two sets of lashes, one for the peels or one for the grapes, and he is given [an additional set of] lashes because of [the prohibition]: "He shall not desecrate his word." This law also applies to a nazirite who shaves [his hair] or becomes impure. He receives two sets of lashes: one because of the violation of the particular prohibition and one, because of the prohibition that applies to all vows: "He shall not desecrate his word."
When a nazirite drank a revi'it of wine and a revi'it of vinegar, he receives only one set of lashes. He is not liable for the wine and for the vinegar independently. [The rationale is that] the Torah does not say: "Do not drink wine" and "Do not drink vinegar." Instead, [it states, Numbers 6:3]: "[He shall abstain from wine or alcoholic beverages.] He shall not drink vinegar of wine or vinegar of alcoholic beverages," i.e., he should not drink wine or a beverage into which wine was mixed - [that is the meaning of the term,] "alcoholic beverages" [in the verse] - even if they have become vinegar.22I.e., the verse uses vinegar as an adjective for wine and mentions only prohibition. Thus the prohibition is against drinking wine, even wine that has become vinegar. Even though two separate adjurations are mentioned in the prooftext, there is no separate prohibition for drinking vinegar from wine and vinegar from alcoholic beverages coming from wine, because the end product, vinegar, is the same in both instances.The Ra'avad differs and maintains that there is a separate prohibition against drinking vinegar, just like there are separate prohibitions against eating grapes and eating raisins. See the gloss of the Radbaz for a discussion of this matter. Since [the Torah] repeated only the term vinegar which is one term, he does not receive lashes for them both independently.
When a nazirite is drinking wine for the entire day, even though he is liable in God's eyes23And God will mete out punishment to him for every violation [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Nazir 6:4)]. for every revi'it, he receives only [two sets of] lashes, one for drinking wine and one for "desecrat[ing] his word," as we explained.24See Halachah 8. If he was given a warning for every revi'it, i.e., he was told: "Do not drink," "Do not drink," and he, [nevertheless,] did drink, he is liable for each [revi'it].25The warning causes every violation to be considered independently (Radbaz).According to Rabbinic decree, it is forbidden for a nazirite to abide amidst a gathering of people drinking wine. [Instead,] he should separate himself far from them, because they present a hurdle for him. Our Sages26Avodah Zarah 59a. said: "Do not come close [even to] the area around the vineyard."27For if he comes close, he might be tempted to partake of the grapes.
When a nazirite cuts off one hair, whether using a razor or a scissor, he is liable for lashes, provided he cuts it from its roots as a razor would.28The prooftext cited below indicates that the hair must be removed as effectively as a razor does. It does not, however, indicate that only cutting it with a razor makes a person liable. Note the contrast to the prohibition against cutting the hairs of one's beard. As mentioned in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 12:1, that prohibition applies only to removal of one's hair with a razor. Similarly, if he pulls out [a hair] by hand, he is liable for lashes. Both [the nazirite] whose hair is cut29From a comparison to the laws governing the prohibition against shaving the corners of one's head (Ibid.:1), it would appear that the person whose hair is cut is not liable for lashes unless he assists the person doing the shaving by moving his head or the like. Otherwise, he will not performed a deed and one is liable for lashes only when his violation involves a deed. and the person who cuts his hair [are liable], as [indicated by Numbers 6:5]: "A razor will not pass over his head." If he left enough of [the hair] so that it could be bent over for its tip to touch its root, he does not receive lashes,30Nor are the days of one's nazirite vow nullified by such an act (Nazir 39b). because [cutting in this manner] is not [equivalent to shaving it] with a razor.
If a person applied a potion that removed hair to his head and in this way, removed his hair, he is not liable for lashes.31The Radbaz explains the rationale for this leniency: When applying the potion, the person is not removing the hair with his own hands. He is, however, nullifying the observance of a positive commandment, as [Numbers 6:5] states: "He shall let the mane of the hair of his head grow."
When a nazirite shaves his entire head, he is liable for only one set of lashes for the shaving. If he was given a warning concerning each hair, i.e., he was told: "Do not shave," "Do not shave," and he shaved, he is liable for lashes for every hair.
When a nazirite is scrubbing his hair with his hands and scraping [his scalp] with his nails, he need not worry [about removing hairs accidentally], because his intent is not to remove hair and it is possible that he will not remove any.32Even though he had no intention of removing hairs, were it impossible to scrape his head with his nails without removing hair, it would be forbidden for him, because doing so would be tantamount to willfully removing hairs, as the Rambam continues. Compare to Hilchot Shabbat 1:6. He should not, however, comb his hair with a comb or scrape his head with earth, for [these activities] will certainly remove hair. If he does so, he is not liable for lashes.33For he did not intentionally remove the hairs (Kessef Mishneh). The Shiurei HaKorban explains that since these activities do not produce a razor-clean shave, he is not liable for the violation of a negative commandment. According to the Radbaz who maintains that such a commandment is in fact involved, the question arises: Since it is inevitable (a p'sik reishah) that the hairs will be removed, why is he not liable.
When a nazirite becomes impure through contact with a human corpse in a manner that would require him to remain impure for seven days,34I.e., the ritual impurity incurred when he touches or carries a corpse or is located under the same covering as it. he is liable for lashes. [This applies] with regard to ritual impurity for which he is required to shave, as will be explained,35See Chapter 7, where this subject is discussed in detail. and for ritual impurity for which he is not required to shave.36The Mishneh LiMelech and other commentaries question the Rambam's ruling, noting that in Hilchot Tumat Meit 3:3, he writes: "All ritual impurity resulting from a corpse for which a nazirite is not required to shave does not stem from Scriptural Law." If the impurity does not stem from Scriptural Law, why is the nazirite punished by lashes?The Ma'aseh Rokeach explains that there are times when the Rambam uses the term midivrei sofrim, which usually means "stemming from Rabbinic decree" to refer to matters that are of Scriptural origin, but derived by our Sages using the accepted principles of Biblical exegesis (see Hilchot Ishut 1:2; Sefer HaMitzvot, General Principle 2). Similarly, with regard to the contraction of ritual impurity in question: Although it is not explicitly mentioned in the Torah, it could be considered of Scriptural origin, because it was derived through the laws of Biblical exegesis. See also Chapter 7, Halachah 1, where this issue is discussed.
[When a nazirite] becomes impure through contact with a human corpse many times, even though in God's eyes, he is liable for lashes for each time, the court holds him liable for only one set of lashes. If he was given a warning concerning each time, and he, nevertheless, became impure, he is liable for lashes for every time he [became impure].
When does the above apply? When he became impure and then returned and touched, carried, or stood over [the corpse]. If, however, he was touching a corpse and while the corpse was still in his hand, he touched another corpse, he is liable only once even though he was warned for each time he touched it, for his [state of purity] has already been desecrated.37The Rambam's ruling can be explained based on the following concept: When a person is in contact with a corpse, a person he touches is impure for seven days. When, however, he is not in contact with a corpse, a person he touches is impure only until the evening.Thus if he is in contact with a corpse, there is no difference halachically if he touches another corpse. If, however, he is not in contact with a corpse, it is halachically significant if he touches another corpse, because the impurity resulting from touching him is more severe. And since touching the corpse is halachically significant for others, it is also halachically significant for him. Hence he is liable for lashes for such contact.
When a nazirite enters a home and remains there until a person dies or he enters a shelter in which a corpse is located while he is in a closed container, chest, or closet38I.e., while he is in a closed container, it is as if he is not under the same shelter as the corpse and he does not contract ritual impurity. and a colleague came and opened the top of the chest with his consent,39If the container is opened without his consent, he is not liable, for he is considered to have transgressed due to forces beyond his control. See Hilchot Evel 3:5. he is liable for two sets of lashes:40For as mentioned in the mitzvot cited in the introduction to these halachot and in Chapter 1, Halachah 1, there are two prohibitions involved in this instance as the Rambam continues to explain. one, due to [the violation of] the prohibition [Numbers 6:6]: "He shall not approach a human corpse" and one, due to [the violation of] the prohibition [ibid.:7]: "He shall not become impure," for his impurity and his entry come about at the same time.41The removal of the top of the container brings about his "entry" into the place where the corpse is located and, at that same time, he becomes impure. If, however, he enters [such a shelter] in an ordinary manner, his becoming ritually impure precedes his entry. For from the time that his nose or his toes enter, he becomes ritually impure42See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 1:11. and he does not become liable for entering [the shelter] until his entire [body] enters.43Compare to Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 3:18.In this instance, since he is already ritually impure, the prohibition against entering a place of ritual impurity does not apply to him (Nazir 43a).
When [a nazirite] enters a shelter where a corpse is located or a cemetery unintentionally44I.e., he was not aware that a corpse was located in this place or that it was a cemetery. and after he discovers this fact, he received a warning, but did not jump up and leave, but instead remained there, he is liable for lashes.45The commentaries question why the person is liable for lashes. Although he is performing a transgression by remaining in the cemetery, seemingly, the performance of that transgression does not involve a deed and hence, he should not be liable for lashes. The Lechem Mishneh explains that since he performed a deed when he entered in violation of the prohibition, he is liable when he remained afterwards in conscious violation of the prohibition. Others cite the gloss of the Maggid Mishneh to Hilchot Sechirut 13:2 which explains that whenever a transgression usually involves a deed - as a nazirite would usually perform a deed to contract ritual impurity - one is liable for lashes even when one violates the transgression without performing a deed. See also Hilchot Evel 3:4.[This applies] provided he remains there for the time it takes to prostrate oneself like a ritually impure person who enters the Temple.46See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 3:21-24.
[The following rules apply when one] causes a nazirite to contract ritual impurity. If the nazirite acted intentionally, the nazirite is liable for lashes and the person who caused him to contract impurity violates the prohibition against placing a stumbling block in front of the blind.47See Hilchot Rotzeach 12:14 which interprets this as a general prohibition, warning a person against causing a colleague to transgress. If the nazirite was not aware of the transgression and the person who caused him to contract impurity acted intentionally, neither of them are liable for lashes.48The nazirite is not liable because he did not transgress intentionally. The other person is not liable for the reasons the Rambam proceeds to explain.Why is the person who caused the nazirite to contract impurity not liable for lashes?49See Hilchot Evel 3:5 which states that in a parallel situation when a person causes a priest to become ritually impure, the person who causes him to incur the impurity is indeed, liable. For it is the person who causes him to incur impurity who violates the prohibition. And similarly, one who shaves a nazirite's head is liable (Halachah 11). Since [Numbers 6:9] states: "He defiles his Nazirite head," a person is only liable if he willfully causes his own self to incur impurity.50See the gloss of the Radbaz to Hilchot Kilayim 10:31 which comments on the apparent contradiction between that halachah and the ruling here.
When a nazirite who is in a state of ritual purity makes himself ritually impure, he is also liable for lashes for [the violation of the prohibition, Deuteronomy 23:22]: "Do not delay in paying it."51See Chapter 1, Halachah 4; Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim 1:1; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 14:13, with regard to the nature of this prohibition. For he delayed the fulfillment of his nazirite vow in purity and performed a deed.52By incurring ritual impurity. Similarly, if he took a nazirite vow while in a cemetery, he is also liable for lashes for [the violation of the prohibition]: "Do not delay in paying it."53The commentaries question: Since he was in the cemetery at the time he took the vow, seemingly, his violation of the prohibition does not involve a deed. Generally, when a transgression does not involve a deed, lashes are not given. Why then is he liable? Among the resolutions offered is that failing to depart is also considered a deed (Tosafot, Nazir 17a).From this we learn, that a nazirite who made himself impure receives four sets of lashes:a) because of the prohibition: "He shall not become impure,"b) because of the prohibition: "He shall not desecrate his word,"c) because of the prohibition: "Do not delay in paying it," and because of the prohibition: "He shall not approach..." if he entered and incurred ritual impurity at the same time, as we explained.54See Halachah 18.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
When a nazirite drinks wine or eats a grape product, even if he does so for many days, he does not invalidate even one of the days of his nazirite vow.1Thus if he drank wine for ten days in a thirty day nazirite period, he need not observe more than the thirty days. Similar [principles apply] if he shaved a minority of his head, whether intentionally or unintentionally.If, however, the majority of his head was shaved, whether with a razor or through another means which is as effective as a razor and enough of the hairs to fold over their head to their base2See Chapter 5, Halachah 11. were removed whether intentionally or unintentionally3I.e., the ruling is not dependent on his intent, but on the fact, is the majority of his head shaven or not. - even if thieves shaved his head against his will - thirty days are invalidated. [He must wait] until he has an uncut mane of hair.4I.e., and growing such a mane of hair takes 30 days. Afterwards, he counts [the remaining days].
What is implied? A person took a nazirite vow for 100 days5According to the Rambam, the same ruling applies whether the nazirite vow is for 30 days or longer. and after 20 days, the majority of his hair was shaved. He must wait 30 days until the hair of his head grows. After 30 days, he counts eighty days to complete his nazirite vow. Throughout these 30 days, he must observe all the particular nazirite law, but the days are not counted [as part of his nazirite vow].
When a nazirite contracted ritual impurity [stemming from a corpse] whether intentionally or unintentionally - even if gentiles caused him to incur impurity against his will - all of the days he observed are invalidated. He must perform the shaving required for impurity,6See Halachah 11 bring the sacrifices [associated with arising from] impurity, and begin to count the days of his nazirite vow [anew]. [This is implied by Numbers 6:12]: "The first days will fall." Even if he becomes impure on the day that he completes his [nazirite] vow,7I.e., the thirtieth day of an ordinary nazirite vow or the last day of a prolonged vow. at the conclusion of the day, all of the days are invalidated.
If he contracted impurity on the day after he completed [his nazirite vow], i.e., the day on which he would have brought the sacrifices [associated with the completion of a nazirite vow] in purity had he not become impure, he invalidates only 30 days.8I.e., thus had he taken a prolonged nazirite vow, he will benefit from the observance of all the days beyond the minimum of thirty. The commentaries discuss whether the invalidation of the 30 days is a Sciptural requirement or a Rabbinic decree.What should he do? He must bring the sacrifices [associated with arising from] impurity when he becomes pure and perform the shaving required for impurity. He then observes the nazirite laws for 30 days, he performs the shaving [associated with completing a nazirite vow] in purity and brings the appropriate sacrifices.9See Chapter 8, Halachah 1. If he contracts ritual impurity after the blood [of any of the sacrifices] was sprinkled upon him, none [of the days] are invalidated.10For once the blood is sprinkled upon him, he is considered to have completed his nazirite vow (Nazir 46a; see also Chapter 8, Halachah 5). Instead, he should bring the remainder11I.e., the sacrifices other than the one whose blood was sprinkled on him. They were disqualified because of the impurity he contracted. of the sacrifices [associated with completing a nazirite vow] in purity after he regains ritual purity.12For while a person is impure due to ritual impurity contracted from contact with a corpse, we do not offer any sacrifices for him (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash).
If he contracted ritual impurity on the following day,13E.g., after an ordinary nazirite vow on the thirty-second day or on the hundred and second day if he took a nazirite vow for 100 days (Meiri, Nazir 14b). i.e., the day which is fit for him to begin letting his hair grow, had he shaven his hair after the completion of his vow,14Our text reflects the version of the Mishneh Torah in authoritative manuscripts and early printings. The standard version of the text reads somewhat differently. he does not invalidate anything even though he did not shave yet. For he has completed his nazirite vow and everything associated with it.15Even though he has neither shaved, nor brought his sacrifices (Meiri, loc. cit.).
If he becomes impure on the day he took the [nazirite] vow or on the second day, [these days] are not invalidated. Instead, he completes [the days of his vow including] them after he brings his sacrifices.16I.e., the sacrifices that must be brought when a nazirite becomes impure, as described in Halachah 11. [This is derived from the prooftext cited above:] "The days will fall." [The use of the plural implies that] there must be at least two [full] days. Therefore if he becomes impure from the third day onward, he invalidates all the previous days.
When a person takes a nazirite vow although he is ritually impure due to contact with a corpse, the nazirite vow takes effect.17And he must observe the relevant prohibitions. If he becomes impure again,18See Chapter 5, Halachah 17. drinks wine, or shaves his head, he is liable for lashes. If he remains impure for several days, they are not counted for him until he has [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh days [after he contracted ritual impurity] and he immerses himself [in a mikveh] on the seventh day.19This is the requirement to be observed when emerging from the impurity associated with a human corpse, as described in Hilchot Parah Adumah 11:1. If the impure person has the ashes sprinkled upon him on after the third day of his impurity, the second sprinkling must be performed four days afterwards. When a person takes a [nazirite] vow while he is ritually impure, the seventh day is counted for him.20As stated in the following halachah, such a person is not required to bring any sacrifices after emerging from impurity. Hence, he may begin counting from the seventh day when he becomes ritually pure. Since a nazirite who becomes impure is required to bring sacrifices on the eighth day (see Halachah 11), he does not begin counting the days of his nazirite vow until that day (Kessef Mishneh). When, by contrast, a nazirite who was ritually pure, became impure, he should not begin counting until the eighth day.
When a person takes a nazirite vow in a cemetery, the nazirite vow takes effect.21Even though he contracts impurity there, as stated in the previous halachah. Even if he remains there for several days, they are not counted for him. He is liable for lashes for remaining there.22I.e., provided he remains there for the time it takes to prostrate oneself (Chapter 5, Halachah 19). If he was warned not to take a nazirite vow while there, he should not shave his hair when he leaves there.23I.e., since he is not required to bring a sacrifice, he is not required to shave (Radbaz). The commentaries question, however, why the Rambam mentions a warning in regard to shaving. The only halachic context where a warning is relevant is with regard to lashes. The Radbaz explains that a printing error crept into the text and the proper version should read: "If he was warned not to take a nazirite vow while there, he is liable for lashes. He should not shave his hair...." The Kessef Mishneh also suggests a similar, but not identical emendation. It must, however, be noted that the present version of the text is found in many authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The Kiryat Sefer attempts to explain its meaning. If while in the cemetery he contracted impurity in one of the ways which would require a nazirite to shave,24See Chapter 7, Halachot 2-6. The impurity imparted by the cemetery itself is never sufficient to warrant shaving as explained there. he should neither shave nor bring a sacrifice [associated with emerging from] impurity.25Since he was not pure at the time he took the nazirite vow, he is not required to shave when he incurs impurity.
If [a nazirite] entered [a cemetery] in a closed container, chest, or closet, [made a nazirite vow there, and then] a colleague came and opened the top,26Without his consent. If he acted with his consent, he is liable, as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 18. [causing] him to contract ritual impurity, he is not liable for lashes even though he remains there.27From Chapter 5, Halachah 19, one might think that the nazirite would be liable, because he remained in the cemetery in a state of ritual impurity. Indeed, the Ra'avad argues that he should be held liable if he remains. Nevertheless, according to the Rambam's understanding of Nazir 17b, it can be explained that possibly, a distinction can be made between a nazirite who took his vow outside the cemetery and one who took his vow inside the cemetery in such a situation. The rationale is that if he was a nazirite previously, entry into the cemetery in a closed container put him in a precarious position. Hence, he is liable if he remains there. In this instance, since he was not a nazirite previously, there is no difficulty with his entry. Hence he is not liable for remaining (Ma'aseh Rokeach). The Radbaz does not accept this explanation and maintains that here, the nazirite is not liable only because he was not given a warning. He does, however, receive stripes for rebellious conduct if he remains [there].28For although it is questionable whether he is liable according to Scriptural Law, he is definitely treating his nazirite vow lightly. Hence, he is given this punishment according to Rabbinic Law.
When the nazirite29This is also speaking about a nazirite who accepted his nazirite vows in a cemetery. left the cemetery, remained several days [outside], and then returned, the days he remained outside are not counted [as part of his nazirite vow].30Since he did not emerge from ritual impurity, even though he left the cemetery, the laws stated in Halachah 8 apply and he is not required to bring a sacrifice even if he certainly becomes impure in a manner which would ordinarily require a nazirite to bring a sacrifice upon his emergence from impurity. If he departed, had [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him, immersed himself [in a mikveh],31I.e., performed the rites necessary to emerge from ritual impurity. counted several days of his nazirite vow and returned to the cemetery, the days that he counts are significant for him.32I.e., the days he counted before reentering the cemetery. The days he spent in the cemetery are not counted, as indicated by Chapter 7, Halachah 7. As evident from the continuation of the halachah, this applies in an instance when he is not certain that he contracted impurity for which he is liable according to Scriptural Law. Even if he enters the cemetery on the eighth day [after becoming impure], the seventh day is counted for him.33And he must count only 29 days afterwards rather than 30. In actual fact, he is a nazirite who was ritually pure and contracted impurity. Nevertheless, his counting begins on the seventh day and not the eighth (as one might think based on Halachah 7). The rationale is since he originally accepted his nazirite vow in a cemetery, he is governed by the laws that apply in such an instance (Radbaz). If while there he contracted one of the types of impurity for which a nazirite is required to shave, he is required to bring a sacrifice [as required when emerging from] impurity.34Although he was impure previously, his contracting impurity in this manner is significant enough for him to be required to bring the required sacrifices. The days [he counted] previously are invalidated35He must, however, have waited at least two days outside the cemetery. For as the Rambam states in Halachah 6, only two or more days can be invalidated. and he must perform the shaving [required when emerging from] impurity.
What does the shaving [required when emerging from ritual] impurity involve? When a nazirite becomes impure in one of the ways which require him to shave because of it, he must have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh days. He then has his hair shaved on the seventh day.36See Numbers 6:9. And after having [the ashes] sprinkled on him on the seventh day, he immerses in [a mikveh] as is required of all those who are ritually impure [due to contact with a human] corpse.37See Hilchot Parah Adumah 11:1. He waits until sunset and brings his sacrifices on the eighth day.38See Numbers 6:10. These [sacrifices] are: two turtle doves39A smaller, wild variety of the dove family. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:2 for more particulars. or two young doves,40Ordinary domesticated doves. one as a burnt offering and one as a sin offering, and a year-old lamb as a guilt offering. All of the preceding days are invalidated and he begins counting his nazirite vow [anew]. If he shaved on the eighth day,41After purifying himself on the seventh day (Kessef Mishneh). he may bring his sacrifices on that day.
When does he begin counting [the days of his nazirite vow]? When he brings his sin offering. His burnt offering and his guilt offering,42As stated in Hilchot Shegagot 3:11, this is in contrast to all other guilt offerings required by the Torah. by contrast, do not hold him back from [beginning] his counting.43I.e., even if he brings them on a later date, it is not significant.
If he had [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him on the third day and the seventh day, but did not immerse himself, [but instead] delayed his immersion, when he immerses, he should wait until sunset and bring his sacrifices on the following day.44Because until he immerses himself and waits until sunset, he is not pure and cannot bring his sacrifices. If he immersed himself and waited until after sunset, but delayed [bringing] his sacrifices, he cannot begin counting [the days of his vow] until he brings his sin offering.45For the sin offering is the primary factor leading to his emergence from impurity. See Halachah 15. His burnt offering and guilt offering do not hold him back from counting, as explained [in the previous halachah].
When a nazirite performs the shaving [required after] ritual impurity, he does not have to shave at the entrance to the Temple or cast his hair on the fire [where his sacrifices are being cooked].46These acts are required for the shaving required after a nazirite completes his vow in purity. See Chapter 8, Halachah 2. Whether he shaves outside the Temple or inside, it is forbidden to benefit from his hair.47Numbers 6:11 describes his hair as "holy." Implied is that it is forbidden to benefit from it (Radbaz). It must be buried. [If it is burnt,] it is forbidden [to benefit from] its ashes as is true of the ashes of [all forbidden substances that] must be buried.48See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:12-14. When one shaves in the Temple,49I.e., on the Temple Mount. Alternatively, it could refer to someone who entered the Women's Courtyard (where the nazirites perform the shaving associated with completing their vows in ritual purity). if he casts [his hair] under the pot where his guilt offering [is being cooked], he fulfills his obligation.50I.e., he is seeking to emulate a nazirite who shaves after completing his vow in purity who casts his hair under the pot where his peace offering is being cooked. There is a difference of opinion among the Sages (Nazir, Tosefta 4:5) if it is desirable to emulate that act. The Rambam follows the view that at the outset, the hair should be buried and not destroyed by fire. Nevertheless, all authorities agree that after the fact, the shaving is acceptable if the hair is burnt.
When a nazirite becomes impure through contact with a corpse on several occasions, whether he was warned about each individual time or he was not warned about each individual time,51As stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 16, if a person receives a warning, he receives lashes for every time he contracts impurity. Nevertheless, these warnings have nothing to do with the concept of ritual impurity and have no effect upon it (Radbaz). he brings only one [set of] sacrifices for all the times he became impure.When does the above apply? When he becomes impure a second time before he brings the sacrifices [associated with emerging from] impurity the first time, but was delayed for several days after he regain ritual purity from bringing his sin offering and contracted impurity in those days.52As evident from Halachah 13, bringing the sin offering is the determining factor in a nazirite's resumption of the counting of the days of his nazirite vows. Hence, if he has not brought that sacrifice, the two times he contracted ritual impurity can be covered by one sin offering. [In such a situation], he only brings one sacrifice. When, however, he contracted impurity, became ritually pure, and brought his sin offering, should he contract impurity a second time after bringing his sin offering, he is required to bring a second set of sacrifices even though he has not brought his guilt offering or his burnt offering.
[The following rules apply when] a nazirite performed the shaving [required when completing his vow in] purity and afterwards discovered that he had contracted the ritual impurity [stemming from contact with a corpse] in the midst of the days of his vow. If he became impure due to a [the source for] impurity that was known [by others], all [of the days of his vow] are invalidated.53As stated in Halachah 3. Since he was impure, the fact that he completed the observance of his nazirite vow is not significant. He must bring the sacrifices [required when emerging from] impurity, perform the shaving [required when emerging from] impurity, count [the days of] another nazirite vow, and bring the sacrifices [required when completing his vow in] purity.If he became impure due to [a source of] impurity [likened to] the depths,54See Halachah 18. he does not invalidate [the days he observed].55And he is considered to have completed his nazirite vow. This is a law communicated by the Oral Tradition.56I.e., this is not a concept that can be derived through the principles of Biblical exegesis or through deductive logic. Instead, it is part of the Oral Tradition communicated to Moses at Sinai (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Nazir 9:2).
If he discovered that he was impure - whether from a known [source of] impurity or [a source of] impurity [likened to] the depths - before the blood from one of his sacrifices57Seemingly, this applies to any one of the sacrifices, not only the sin offering. was sprinkled upon him, all [the days] are invalidated.58For until the blood is sprinkled upon him, he has not concluded his nazirite vow. If he discovers this after the blood from one of his sacrifices was sprinkled upon him,59For this completes the observance of the nazirite vow. Afterwards, he may drink wine and become impure. [should this be] an unknown [source of] impurity, it does not invalidate [the days] even though he has not performed his shaving yet.
What is meant by impurity [likened to] the depths?60Just like mortal wisdom cannot fathom the extent of the depths, so, too, the existence of this corpse is not known to any mortal (Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura, Parah 3:2). [A human corpse which] no one, not even one at the end of the world knows about. The concept of impurity [likened to] the depths applies only with regard to a person who died naturally, but not to a person who was killed. For the killer knows [of the existence of the corpse].61The Radbaz states that it must be apparent that the person was killed by another human and not an animal. It must be noted that the Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, but the Radbaz supports the Rambam's position.
When a corpse is found in open view, this is not considered impurity [likened to] the depths.62For it is likely it was seen by others. If a corpse is found sunk in the earth of a cave while covered with water, this is impurity [likened to] the depths which is not known. If [it is discovered] buried in straw or in pebbles, it is impurity [likened to] the depths.63In all of these instances, it is highly possible that no other person knew about the impurity. If [it is discovered] in water in the dark or clefts of the rocks, it is not impurity [likened to] the depths.64In these instances, though it is difficult for a person from the outside to see the corpse, since it is possible that he will, the impurity is considered to be public knowledge.
[The following rule applies when] a nazirite who became impure through contact with a corpse goes down to a cave and immerses there,65I.e., to conclude the process of emerging from ritual impurity. brings the sacrifices required [after emerging from] impurity, counts [the days of his] nazirite vow, performs the shaving [required after completing the vow in] purity, and afterwards, discovers that there was a corpse sunk in the earth of the cave when he descended to immerse himself. Although this is an unknown source of impurity, all of the days are invalidated. [The rationale is that] his impurity was an established fact and hence, that condition is presumed to continue until he definitely purified himself.66Thus in this instance, since it is possible that he touched the corpse when immersing, we are not certain that he purified himself. In the previous halachot, leniency was granted, because the nazirite was ritually pure. Hence we presume that he continues in that state unless we know for certain that he became impure. In this instance, however, he already was impure. Hence we presume that he remains in this state until we know for certain that he has regained purity.[In the above situation, if a nazirite] descended to [the pool] to cool himself off, he is ritually pure until he has certain [knowledge] that he touched the corpse.67I.e., we follow the logic mentioned in the previous note with regard to the situation when a nazirite is ritually pure. If the corpse is found floating on the water, we presume that [the nazirite] is impure. Since [the corpse] is floating, we operate under the presumption that [the nazirite] touched it.68In Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 14:3, the Rambam writes that if one is in doubt whether he touched a dead lizard floating on water, he is ritually pure, but concludes that this principle applies only with regard to impurity resulting from contact with a dead lizard and not to similar situations applying with regard to other sources of impurity. The rationale is that we follow the principle: When a doubt concerning ritual impurity arises in a private place, we rule stringently. Since the corpse is floating and can be seen, we do not consider it an unknown source of impurity.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
There are types of impurity resulting from [contact with] a corpse that do not require a nazirite to perform a shaving and do not invalidate the days previously observed even though he became impure in a manner that requires him to observe impurity for [at least] seven days.1The Rambam explains these concepts in the following halachot. [The rationale is that] it is not stated concerning such situations: "When one will become impure due [to contact with] a corpse...", but rather [Numbers 6:9], "When a person will die upon him." [This implies that] he must become impure with those impurities that involve the actual substance of the corpse.2In Hilchot Tumat Meit 3:3, the Rambam writes: "All ritual impurity resulting from a corpse for which a nazirite is not required to shave does not stem from Scriptural Law." If this impurity were Rabbinic in origin, the Rambam would not have to explain why it does not invalidate the previous days, it would be obvious. A Rabbinic decree cannot supercede Scriptural Law and according to Scriptural Law, it is forbidden for a nazirite to shave.As explained in the notes to Chapter 5, Halachah 15, there are times when the Rambam uses the term midivrei sofrim, which usually means "stemming from Rabbinic decree" to refer to matters that are of Scriptural origin, but derived by our Sages using the accepted principles of Biblical exegesis (see Hilchot Ishut 1:2; Sefer HaMitzvot, General Principle 2). Similarly, with regard to the contraction of ritual impurity in question: Although it is not explicitly mentioned in the Torah, it could be considered of Scriptural origin, because it was derived through the laws of Biblical exegesis. Hence, the Rambam needs a derivation from a Scriptural source to explain why shaving is not required. Afterwards, he must bring the sacrifices [required] and perform the shaving required [when emerging from] impurity. All of the days [he observed] initially are invalidated.
These are the types of impurity stemming from contact with a corpse that a nazirite must shave because of [contact with] them: a) a stillborn fetus, even if the sinews connecting its limbs have not formed,3I.e., a fetus in a preliminary stage of development. b) an olive-sized portion of the flesh of a corpse,4Whether still soft or dried (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:1). c) an olive-sized portion of a decomposed corpse,5The Rambam defines the term netzel at the conclusion of the halachah; see also Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:1. d) bones from a corpse which represent the majority of the number of the bones of a corpse6More details concerning the impurity resulting from the bones of a corpse are discussed in Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:8-10. even though their volume is not a fourth of a kav,7A kav is a relatively small measure (1376 cc according to Shiurei Torah, 2400 cc according to Chazon Ish). Thus we are probably speaking of the bones of an infant or a fetus. See Halachah 4. e) bones which represent the majority of the structure of the bones of a corpse even though their volume is not a fourth of a kav,8Whether still soft or dried (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:1). f) a half of a kav of bones9A person becomes impure even when he comes into contact with a fourth of a kav of bones (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:9). Nevertheless, a nazirite is not required to shave unless there is a half a kav there. See Halachot 6-7. even though they do not represent the majority of the number or the structure of the bones of the corpse - all the bones must, however, be from one corpse, not from two, g) the backbone that comes from one corpse, h) the skull that comes from one corpse, i) a [complete] limb that comes from one corpse, j) a limb taken from a living person that has flesh that could cause it to regenerate in a living person,10For a limb that is cut off from a living body is considered as if it was cut off from a corpse (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:3). k) half a log11Half a log is 172 cc according to Shiurei Torah and 300 cc according to Chazon Ish. Even though one revi'it is sufficient to convey ritual impurity (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:12), for a nazirite to be required to shave, twice that amount is required. See also Halachah 6. of blood from one corpse, and l) a handful of the decomposed mass of a corpse.12See the following halachah for a more detailed definition of the term rekev; see also Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:11.What is meant by the term netzel? Flesh from a corpse that decomposed and became putrid liquid.
The decomposed mass (rekev) of a corpse does not convey ritual impurity unless it was buried naked in a marble coffin13For in such a situation, the decomposed mass contains nothing more than the corpse, for marble does not decompose. The same law would apply to a glass or stone coffin (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 3:4). and was entirely intact. If one limb was lacking or it was buried in garments14For then its clothes would be mixed together with it. or in a wooden or metal15For metal rusts and wood rots and thus the mass would contain something other than the corpse (ibid.). coffin, there is no concept of rekev. The concept of rekev applies with regard to a corpse alone. This excludes a person who was slain, for his blood is lacking.
When two corpses are buried together,16For the concept of rekev applies only when there is one corpse. the hair and the nails of a corpse were cut off and buried together with it,17Since the hair and/or nails were separated, they are considered as separate entities. or a woman was buried together with a fetus in her womb,18For the fetus is considered a separate entity. the rekev does not convey ritual impurity.Similarly, if one ground up a corpse until it became a decomposed mass, [these laws do not apply]. It must decompose naturally. If one ground the corpse and then left its remains until they decomposed naturally or a portion of the body decomposed while the person was alive, he died, and then the entire body decomposed, there is an unresolved doubt [concerning the ruling]. Hence, if [a nazirite] becomes impure because of this rekev, there is an unresolved doubt whether he is impure. Similarly, there is an unresolved doubt whether [a nazirite] is impure if he contacts impurity from a fourth of a kav of bones coming from the backbone or the skull when he is under the same shelter19Or covers them with part of his body or part of his body is covered by them, as stated in the following halachah. As indicated by Halachah 6, the unresolved doubt applies only with regard to the impurity resulting from being in the same shelter as this amount of a corpse's bones. If one touches a corpse, he becomes impure, no matter how small the quantity of bones he touches is. as they are.
[With regard to] all of these twelve [sources] of impurity that we listed:20In Halachah 2. If a nazirite touches one of these sources, carries it, covers it from above with [a portion of his body], [the source of] impurity covers [a portion of] the nazirite's [body], or the nazirite and [the source of] impurity were located under the same shelter, [the nazirite becomes impure].21See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 1:10-11. He must perform the shaving [required because of] impurity and bring the sacrifices [required because of] impurity. All [of the days he observed] are invalidated. The only exception is a rekev. It does not convey impurity when one touches it, for it is impossible to touch it entirely [at the same time], for it is not a single mass.22See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ohelot 2:2). If, however, one carried it or became impure because one was under the same shelter,23For the fetus is considered a separate entity. he must perform the shaving.
Similarly, if a nazirite touches or carries a bone24Or a piece of a bone. from a corpse - even if it is merely the size of a barley-corn25This is not a minimum measure; even a smaller portion of a bone is sufficient to make the nazirite impure (Radbaz). - he must perform a shaving because of it and bring the sacrifices [required because of] impurity. All [of the days he observed] are invalidated. A bone the size of a barley corn does not, however, convey impurity26In Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:8 and in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ohelot 1:8, 2:3) the Rambam explains that this concept is derived from the exegesis of Numbers 14:19: "When a person dies in a tent." Implied is that the object that conveys impurity must clearly indicate that it comes from a person and this is not true of a bone this small. if one was under the same shelter.27For the fetus is considered a separate entity.If, by contrast, [a nazirite] becomes impure because of contact with one of the following twelve matters, [the days he observed] are not invalidated:a) a clod of earth from the Diaspora;28In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ohelot 2:3), the Rambam writes that in the Diaspora, people are not as careful with regard to burial and will bury a corpse anywhere. Accordingly, our Sages feared that perhaps a small portion of a bone would become mixed together with earth. Hence, they decreed that all earth from the Diaspora -even if brought to Eretz Yisrael - conveys ritual impurity. See also Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:16.Based on Chapter 2, Halachot 21-22, we are forced to say that we are speaking about an instance where a nazirite from Eretz Yisrael came in contact with the earth of the Diaspora. If a nazirite vow is taken in the Diaspora, different laws apply as stated there (Radbaz).b) [earth from] a field in which a grave had been plowed;29For we fear that small pieces of the corpse's bones were strewn over the field and that the nazirite came in contact with one (ibid.). both of these convey impurity through touch or if they were carried;30But not because of an ohel (shelter).c) branches which emerge from trees,31See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 13:1-2 where the Rambam writes that for a shelter to convey ritual impurity according to Scriptural Law, the shelter must be a handbreadth by a handbreadth. protrusions that emerge from fences,32I.e., protrusions less than a handbreadth by a handbreadth. from a bed, a camel, or the like, cover him and one of the twelve sources of impurity [mentioned in the Halachah 2];33Our text follows the authentic manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text follows a different - and somewhat difficult to comprehend - version. See the conclusion of Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 19:6 where the Rambam discusses this issue and states that such impurity is midivrei sofrim, "from the words of the Sages."d) he becomes impure by being under the same shelter as a quarter of a kav of bones34See the notes to Halachah 2. that do not constitute the majority of the number of the corpse's bones, nor the greater portion of his structure;e) he became impure because of a revi'it of blood from a corpse which conveys ritual impurity whether one touches it, carries it, or is found under the same shelter;35As mentioned in the notes to Halachah 2, according to Scriptural Law, one is ritually impure. Nevertheless, the Oral Tradition teaches that a nazirite is not required to perform a shaving in this instance (Nazir 54a). f) he became impure because he touched or was under the same shelter36For the fetus is considered a separate entity. as a gravestone37I.e., the stone laid over the corpse. See the definition of this and the following term in Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:15. or a stone at the side of a grave;38Which serves as support for the gravestone. for they convey impurity in either of these two ways; g) he became impure because of contact with a limb cut from a living person or a corpse which does not have sufficient flesh upon it.39I.e., enough flesh that would cause the flesh to regenerate as stated in Halachah 2. See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 2:3.
Even though in all the above situations, [the nazirite] is impure for seven days and he must have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled [upon him] on the third and seventh days, he should not perform the shaving [required when emerging from] impurity, nor bring the sacrifices [required at that time], nor are his initial days invalidated. Nevertheless, the days when he is impure are not counted as part of his nazirite vow.
When [a nazirite] touches a shelter in which a corpse is found or utensils40The Radbaz maintains that this applies to utensils other than those made of metal. Touching metal utensils requires a person to have the ashes of the Red Heifer. According to the Rambam, however, it appears that there is no difference between metal utensils and those of other substances. that are touching a corpse,41Since the utensil is touching the corpse, touching the utensil is considered equivalent to touching the corpse (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 5:3). he should not have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled [upon him] on the third and seventh days.42Even though he must consider himself impure. It appears to me43This expression indicates a ruling for which the Rambam does not have an explicit source in the previous Rabbinic literature, but instead derives through his own process of deduction.The Rambam makes this deduction according to his interpretation of Nazir 7:3 which links these two matters with those mentioned in Halachah 6. The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statement, maintaining that for this law to apply the utensils must be touching the corpse at the time he is touching the utensils. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam would also accept this conception and states that it appears to be indicated by the Rambam's wording here. Others, however, note that the Rambam's wording in Hilchot Tuma'at Meit, loc. cit., does not lead to that conclusion. that this law is unique to a nazirite. Any other person who contracts impurity that persists for seven days from utensils must have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled [upon him] on the third and seventh days, as will be explained in Hilchot Tuma'at Meit.44Hilchot Tuma'at Meit, loc. cit. Similarly, it appears to me that the reason [a nazirite] does not have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled [upon him] on the third and seventh days if he touched utensils [that convey such ritual impurity] is so that the days on which he is impure because [of contact with] the utensil will be counted as part of the days of his nazirite vow.45Were the sprinkling of the ashes to be required, he would be required to shave. Hence, he would not be able to count them as part of his vow (Kessef Mishneh). This constitutes a difference between the subjects mentioned in this halachah and those mentioned in Halachah 6.
When a nazirite contracts tzara'at46A skin affliction with symptoms similar to that of leprosy, but rather than being merely a physical condition is a sign of spiritual impurity. and has his status [as a metzora] defined,47I.e., the priest has declared that he is afflicted by tzara'at, as stated in Leviticus 13:11. all of the days during which he is set apart [as a metzora] and the seven days that he counts after purifying himself from his tzara'at between the first shaving48As Leviticus 14:5-8 describes, when a person who was afflicted with tzara'at is purged of that affliction, he must bring sacrifices and shave his hair. Afterwards, he may enter the camp of the Jewish people, but may not dwell within his own tent for seven days. and the second shaving49Which is performed after these seven days (ibid.:9). do not count as days of his nazirite vow.50See Halachah 15 which states that during these days, his hair is not "holy." This state of ritual impurity does not, however, invalidate the days counted previously (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Nazir 7:3). The days when he is quarantined,51I.e., the days prior to the determination of whether he truly is afflicted with tzara'at when we wait to evaluate whether a blemish that he possesses is tzara'at or not. See Leviticus 13:4-5; Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 7:2. by contrast, are counted [as part of his nazirite vow].52Since he is not required to shave his hair off after the conclusion of these days, they are counted as part of his nazirite vow (Kessef Mishneh). Similarly, if either a male or a female has a zav emission from their flesh,53A man becomes a zav when he has an emission from his urinary tract similar, but not identical to that which results from gonorrhea. A woman becomes a zavah when she experiences vaginal bleeding at times other than would be expected due to her menstrual cycle. In both cases, the individuals are ritually impure. See Leviticus, ch. 15. all of the days of the emission are counted as part of their [nazirite vow] although they are impure.54Here also, since emerging from this impurity does not involve shaving, these days are counted as part of his nazirite vow (Radbaz). This matter is a halachah transmitted to Moses at Sinai.
Needless to say, if [a nazirite] becomes impure as a result of other sources of impurity55E.g., he became impure due to contact with a dead lizard or because of the emission of semen in which instance he is impure only for a day. that the days during which he is impure are counted [as part of his nazirite vow] and no days are invalidated. If he becomes impure due to contact with a corpse during the time he is afflicted with tzara'at, all of the previous days are invalidated. [The rationale is that] he is still a nazirite, even though he is ritually impure.
A nazirite is permitted to become impure due to contact with a corpse when doing so is a mitzvah56See the following halachah. and may shave when doing so is a mitzvah.57See Halachah 15. He is, however, forbidden to partake of [all] wine, whether in connection with a mitzvah or with regard to matters left to one's own choice.What is implied? A person took an oath that he will drink wine on this day. Thus it is a mitzvah for him to drink.58I.e., he is commanded to fulfill his oath and prohibited against not fulfilling it. Afterwards, he took a nazirite vow. The nazirite vow takes effect and [supercedes] the oath he took. Hence he is forbidden to drink wine. Needless to say, [a nazirite]59Even one who has not taken a vow. is forbidden [to partake of] the wine [over which] Kiddush and Havdalah are recited. For [associating these blessings with wine] is merely a Rabbinic ordinance.60See Hilchot Shabbat 29:1, 6. There is a Scriptural obligation to recite these prayers, but the association with a cup of wine is Rabbinic in origin (Radbaz).
What is meant by the statement that he is permitted to become impure due to contact with a corpse when it is a mitzvah? If he was walking on the road and encountered a corpse and there was no one else to bury it,61See Hilchot Evel 3:8 which elaborates concerning this matter with regard to the prohibition incumbent on priests not to come in contact with ritual impurity:When does the above apply? When the priest is alone and there is no one else with him; even when he calls out on the road, no one answers him. If, however, when he calls others answer, this is not considered an unattended corpse. Instead, he should call to the others and they should come and tend to [the corpse]. he should become impure through contact with it and bury it.62Even though it is a mitzvah for him to become impure and bury the corpse, he is obligated to shave and bring sacrifices. All the days of his nazirite vow which he observed previously are invalidated. These matters were communicated by the Oral Tradition.
When a nazirite and a priest63Who is also forbidden to become impure due to contract with a corpse, but is commanded to bury a corpse if there is no one else to do so, as cited in note 56. encounter a corpse that it is a mitzvah [to bury] the nazirite should [bury it and] become impure even though he invalidates the days [he observed] previously and must bring a sacrifice [because of his] impurity. The priest should not become impure. [The rationale is that the nazirite's] holiness is within the context of time64I.e., limited to the span of his nazirite vow. - even if he took an everlasting nazirite vow65See Chapter 3, Halachah 11. Although such a person must observe the nazirite laws for all time, his state of holiness is not an intrinsic element of his being, but rather dependent on his desire to take the nazirite vow. Before he took the vow he was not obligated by these restrictions and he may have the vow absolved - and thus remove them. The holiness of a priest, by contrast, is an inherent element of his being, not dependent upon his choice or will (Lechem Mishneh; see also Radbaz, Hilchot Evel 3:9). - while the priest's holiness is beyond the context of time.
If two nazirites - one whose nazirite vow was for 30 days and one whose nazirite vow was for 100 days encounter [such a corpse] - the one whose nazirite vow was for 30 days should become impure. If one was a nazirite for a limited amount of time66Even a span of time that he will never complete, e.g., 150 years, see Chapter 3, Halachah 12. and the other was a nazirite forever, the nazirite for a limited amount of time should become impure. For the nazirite for all time has a higher degree of holiness.
What is meant by the statement that he is permitted to shave when doing so is a mitzvah? When a nazirite contracts tzara'at and becomes healed in the midst of the days of his nazirite vow, he should shave all of his hair.67Even though shaving the hair on his head is forbidden.[The rationale is that] by shaving, he fulfills a positive commandment,68See Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 11:1. for concerning a metzora, [Leviticus 14:8] states: "And he shall shave all of his hair." Whenever there is [a conflict between] a positive commandment and a negative commandment, if it is possible to observe both of them, that is desirable. If not, the positive commandment supercedes the negative commandment.69And hence, the nazirite should shave his hair.Nevertheless, when a nazirite shaves his hair during the midst of his nazirite vow, he violates both a negative commandment and a positive commandment, as [Numbers 6:5] states: "[His hair] is holy. He shall let the mane of the hair of his head grow." And [the observance of] a positive commandment does not supercede a negative commandment that [is reinforced by] a positive commandment. Why then does the positive commandment of shaving the blemish supercede his nazirite vow? Because the nazirite has already become impure because of the tzara'at and the days when he is defined as impure are not counted [towards the fulfillment of his vow], as we explained.70Halachah 9. [Hence,] his [hair] is not holy during these days. Thus the positive commandment [mentioned above] is withdrawn and only the negative commandment [Leviticus, loc. cit.]: "A razor shall not pass over his head" alone remains incumbent upon him. Therefore the positive commandment of shaving [because of the tzara'at] can come and supercede it.71The Ra'avad accepts the Rambam's ruling, but gives a different rationale: The commandments associated with the nazirite vow are considered as insubstantial, because the nazirite could appeal to have his nazirite vow absolved. Although the rationale given by the Ra'avad is mentioned in Yevamot 5a, the Rambam favors the reason he gave, for there are some nazirites who do not have the option of absolving their nazirite vows (see Chapter 3, Halachah 14).

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
What does the shaving [required after completion of the nazirite vow in] purity involve? When the nazirite completes [the observance of] the days of his nazirite vow, he should bring three animals [as sacrifices]: a male lamb for a burnt offering, a ewe1Both the ewe and the lamb must be less than a year old (Numbers 6:14 . as a sin offering,2See Hilchot De'ot 3:1 where the Rambam quotes Ta'anit 11a that states that a nazirite is required to bring a sin offering, because he abstained from drinking wine and elaborates on the negative aspects of an ascetic existence. and a ram3At least two years old. as a peace offering.[The following rules apply when a person] brought three animals, but did not specify [for which sacrifice each was designated]. The one fit to be offered as a sin offering should be offered as a sin offering. The one fit to be offered as a burnt offering should be offered as a burnt offering. And the one fit to be offered as a peace offering should be offered as a peace offering.4Although the ewe is also fit to be brought as a peace offering, since it is the only one fit to be brought as a sin offering, we designate it for such and use the male lamb for the peace offering.Together with the ram brought as a peace offering, he should bring six and two thirds esronot5An isaron is equivalent to the size of 43.2 eggs. In modern measure, the size of an egg is 57.6 cc according to Shiurei Torah, and 99.5 cc according to Chazon Ish. of fine flour. He should bake twenty loaves from them: ten loaves of matzah6These loaves were made from a mixture of flour, water, and oil. The oil was added to the batter before they were baked (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:21). and ten loaves of matzah wafers.7These wafers were made with flour and water. After they were baked, oil was poured over them (ibid.:23). He should pour a revi'it [of a log] of oil over these twenty [loaves]. This measure is a halachah transmitted to Moses at Sinai. The twenty loaves should be brought in one container.8Numbers 6:17 speaks of "the basket of matzot."
He should slaughter the sin offering first,9The order of the rituals outlined by the Rambam follows the order in which they are mentioned in Numbers 6:15-18. This explanation may clarify the questions raised by the Kessef Mishneh. then the burnt offering, and then the peace offering. Afterwards, he should shave. If he shaved after bringing the sin offering or the burnt offering, he fulfills his obligation. He should cook the peace offering or boil it.10Rav Avraham MinHaHer interprets this term as meaning boiling it with water alone, without spices. He should take from the sauce of the peace offering and apply it to his hair. Afterwards, he should place the hair under the pot where the peace offering is cooking. If he placed it under the pot of the sin offering, he fulfilled his obligation.11Although Numbers 6:15 mentions the peace offering since uses the word zevach, offering and that term can also be applied to the sin offering, putting the hair under the sin offering is acceptable (Nazir 45b).
Where does he shave his hair? In the Women's Courtyard,12The courtyard before the Temple itself. It was given this name, because women were allowed to congregate on balconies there at certain times. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:7-9. in the Chamber of the Nazirites that was in its southeastern corner. There they would cook their peace offerings13The sin offerings had to be cooked within the Temple Courtyard and the burnt offerings were placed on the fire of the altar. and cast their hair into the fire. If he shaved outside the Temple,14We have translated the term mikdash as "Temple," for that is the most apparent meaning and most authorities understand it being used in this context. The Radbaz, however, notes that in certain contexts (see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 4:1), the Rambam interprets the term mikdash as referring to the city of Jerusalem as a whole. And in his commentary to Ma'aser Sheni 3:4, he states that the term medinah (the term used in this halachah) refers to cities outside Jerusalem. he fulfills his obligation. Whether he shaves outside the Temple or inside it, he should cast his hair under the pot.15The Radbaz understands the Rambam as implying that even when one shaves outside of Jerusalem, he should send his hair to have it cast under the fire in the Chamber of the Nazirites. Not all authorities share this view.He should not shave until the entrance to the Temple courtyard is open, for [Numbers 6:18] states: "at the entrance16The Hebrew words petach, "entrance," and patuach, "open," share the same root. Seemingly, the gate to the Temple building must also be open. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:5. to the Tent of Meeting." The intent is not that he should shave in front of the entrance of the Sanctuary, for that would be demeaning to the Sanctuary.17The Chamber of the Nazirites where he would shave is, by contrast, a private place.
Afterwards, the priest takes the roasted forearm of the ram, one matzah from the basket, and one wafer and places them on the palm of the nazirite18The Rambam is quoting Numbers 6:19-20. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:9, where the Rambam writes that (because it is a peace offering) he must also wave the ram's breast and thigh and the inner portions of the animal that were offered on the altar. or female nazirite and waves them.19The priest puts his hand beneath the hand of the nazirite and moves these sacred articles up, down, and to each of the four compass directions. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 5:5). Afterwards, the nazirite is permitted to drink wine and to become impure due to contact with the dead.
A bald nazirite does not have to pass a razor over his head. Even though a nazirite does not have hair20To shave. or does not have a palm21To wave the sacrifices. he may still bring his sacrifices. He [may] then drink [wine] and become impure. If he brought his sacrifices, but did not shave his head, [the failure] to shave does not prevent [the termination of his nazirite vow] and he may drink [wine] and become impure that evening.22The Radbaz states that this is understandable if he brings his offerings on the thirtieth day of his nazirite vow, for until he completes thirty days of observance, he is bound by the terms of the vow. He questions why, however, the sacrifice in itself is not sufficient if it is brought on the thirty-first day or afterwards.The Or Sameach explains that on any day, until sunset, he is given the option of bringing his hair to the Chamber of the Nazirites and burning it there. From the evening onward, that option is no longer viable. Hence until he either burns his hair there or the evening arrives, he is not able to drink wine. Once the blood from one [of the sacrifices] has been sprinkled upon him, he is permitted although [the portions of the sacrifice] were not placed on his hand and he did not wave them. For all these factors are [the most desirable way of performing the mitzvah]; they are not an absolute requirement.
Although the shaving is not an absolute requirement, it is a mitzvah [for the nazirite] to shave,23Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 93) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 377) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The mitzvah includes both the shaving performed after the conclusion of the nazirite vow in purity and that performed after a nazirite emerges from impurity. even if an extensive time has past [since the completion of his nazirite vow].When a nazirite shaves without using a razor24From the fact that Numbers 6:9 mentions a razor in the prohibition against a nazirite cutting his hair, Nazir 40a deducts that a razor should be used in the shaving process. or he shaved and left two hairs,25For in several halachic contexts, two hairs are considered as significant entities. it is as if he did nothing; he did not fulfill the mitzvah of shaving. [This applies] whether the nazirite is pure or impure.
[When a nazirite] shaved, left two hairs, his hair grew back entirely, and he shaved [his head again, removing] those two hairs,26Since he let his hair grow back, he must shave his entire head, not merely the two hairs left initially. Note the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh who explain that the Rambam shares the approach of Tosafot with regard to the interpretation of Nazir 42a. or27Before his hair started to grow back. he shaved one and the other fell off, he has fulfilled the mitzvah of shaving.28Since there were two hairs at the time he started shaving and ultimately, there were none remaining, he is considered to have fulfilled the mitzvah. If one fell off and he shaved the other one, the mitzvah of shaving does not apply.29For at the time he began acting, the mitzvah of shaving no longer applied.
When a nazirite shaved [his head] when his peace offering was brought and that offering was unacceptable,30E.g., its blood was spilled before it was poured on the altar; alternatively, it came in contact with impurity and was thus invalidated. his shaving is also unacceptable and his sacrifices are not of consequence for him.31The rationale is that since he cut his hair off in an unacceptable manner, i.e., since the sacrifice was unacceptable, his shaving was unacceptable, the sacrifices he offers afterwards are also not acceptable. If he shaved when his sin offering was brought and it was discovered that the sin offering was not slaughtered with that intent,32But rather for the sake of another type of sacrifice. This disqualifies the sin offering (Hilchot Pesulei Hamukdashim 15:1). and afterwards, he brought the peace offering and the burnt offering and offered them as required, his shaving is also unacceptable and his sacrifices are not of consequence for him.33Since the sin offering was unacceptable, the shaving is unacceptable. Accordingly, the sacrifices he offered afterwards are also unacceptable.
If he shaved [his head] when his burnt offering and peace offering were brought, but they were slaughtered for another intent,34In such an instance, the sacrifices are acceptable (i.e., the appropriate portions can be offered on the altar and the others eaten), but the person who brings them is not considered to have fulfilled his obligation (ibid.). Accordingly, the nazirite is considered as having shaved his head before he was allowed to. his shaving is also unacceptable and his sacrifices are not of consequence for him.35Since the shaving is unacceptable, the sin offering he brought afterwards is also unacceptable.
If he shaved [his head] when he brought [all] three offerings and one of them was acceptable, his shaving is acceptable.36For as stated in Halachah 5, as long as one of the sacrifices was brought in an acceptable manner, he is considered to have concluded his nazirite vow. [Afterwards,] he should bring the other offerings [that were not acceptable] and offer them in an acceptable manner.
Whenever we have said: "His shaving is unacceptable," he is considered as one who shaved in the midst of the days of his nazirite vow who invalidates 30 days [of observance] as explained.37Chapter 6, Halachah 1. Thus he should observe [the laws of a nazirite for] 30 days after the unacceptable shaving and bring his sacrifices.38Shaving his hair again.
The peace offerings of a nazirite that were slaughtered in a manner that did not conform to their requirements39E.g., it was not offered for the sake of a peace offering or the ram was less than two years old. are acceptable,40The portions appropriate for the altar may be offered there and one may partake of the meat. They are considered as peace offerings that were offered voluntarily. but they do not fulfill the obligations of [the nazirite] who brought them.41To fulfill the obligations of his nazirite vow, he must bring a different sacrifice. They may only be eaten for one day42As is the rule governing the peace offerings of a nazirite. Peace offerings that are brought voluntarily may be eaten for two days and the intervening night. and they need not [be accompanied by] bread,43As is required for a peace offering of a nazirite (see Halachah 1). nor are they placed [on the nazirite's hand for waving],44As is required for a peace offering of a nazirite (see Halachah 4). This interpretation is based on the explanations of the Or Sameach. The Merkevet HaMishneh quotes the Orach Mishor who suggests amending the text so that it reads "they require presents" - i.e., the breast and the thigh that are given to a priest in connection with a voluntarily peace offering - "but not the foreleg" - which is given to the priest in connection with a Nazirite's peace offering. nor is the foreleg [given to the priest].
These three animals and the bread that accompanies them all must come from ordinary property45I.e., the sacrificial animals may not have been consecrated previously and the bread may not come from terumah or the second tithe. as is true with regard to other vows to sanctify offerings, as will be explained in the appropriate place.46Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 16:15. The rationale is that since he is obligated to bring these offerings, they must be brought from resources that belong to him entirely (Radbaz).
When a person says: "I am becoming a nazirite on the condition that when I perform the shaving, I will be able to bring my sacrifices using [money exchanged for] the second tithe,"47The second tithe must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there in a state of ritual purity. If a person lives outside Jerusalem, the Torah gives him the option of redeeming the second tithe with its worth and taking that money to Jerusalem to purchase food to be eaten there in a state of ritual purity. Although money with which the second tithe was redeemed may be used to purchase voluntary peace offerings, it may not be used to purchase the peace offerings of a nazirite, as indicated by the previous halachah. he becomes a nazirite, but he should not bring his sacrifices using such funds. Instead, [he must purchase them] with ordinary funds.48The rationale is that as soon as he says: "I am becoming a nazirite," he must observe the restrictions associated with a nazirite vow. The statement: "on the condition that..." does not take effect, because it was made after he had become obligated to observe the nazirite restrictions (Rashi, Beitzah 20a). From this, Tosafot concludes that if he reverses the order of the clauses, saying: "On the condition that when I perform the shaving, I will be able to bring my sacrifices using [money exchanged for] the second tithe, I will become a nazirite," he may bring his sacrifices from such funds.
When a man takes a vow to become a nazirite, he may bring sacrifices set aside by his father for this purpose.49This law applies when the nazirite is the sole heir, as stated at the conclusion of the halachah. A woman, by contrast, may not perform the shaving using the sacrifices of her father.50Even if she is her father's sole heir (Nazir 30a). This is a halachah conveyed by the Oral Tradition.What is implied? A person's father took a nazirite vow, set aside money to purchase sacrifices [to offer on the completion of that vow], but died [before he could offer them]. [The money] was left without being designated for any specific purpose.51I.e., he did not specify which coins should used to purchase a particular type of sacrifice. See Chapter 9, Halachot 3-4. After his father died, he said: "I am a nazirite on the condition that I am able to bring my sacrifices from the money which my father set aside for his sacrifices," he may bring his sacrifices from these [funds]. Similarly, if he and his father were nazirites and his father set aside money [for his sacrifices] without designating it for a specific offering and then died, if, after the father's death, the son said: "I will perform the shaving with the sacrifices of my father," he may bring his sacrifices from these [funds].52I.e., even though when he took the nazirite vow, he did not have the intent to use the money set aside by his father - because his father was alive at that time - he may use it for his vow. If he does not make these statements,53Even if he was a nazirite himself (Radbaz). the money should be used for freewill [offerings].54Burnt offerings brought as an embellishment to the altar.If the father died and left many sons, they should divide the money that was not specified [among themselves], because it is their inheritance. Each one may perform the shaving [with sacrifices purchased] from his portion.55The remainder of the costs of the sacrifices, he must add from his own funds. The firstborn receives a double portion.56As he does with regard to other aspects of the inheritance. It is necessary to clarify this point, because one might think that since this money is not the sons' personal property, he would not be given this extra portion.
Whether the father was a nazirite for all time57See Chapter 3, Halachot 11-12, which explain that a nazirite for all time performs a shaving once a year and brings three sacrifices at that time. and the son was a nazirite for a limited time or the father was a nazirite for a limited time and the son was a nazirite for all time, [the son] may perform the shaving and bring his sacrifices from the money [designated] for the nazirite vow of his father.
If the father set aside money to bring the sacrifices [that are required when a nazirite emerges from] impurity and dies, the sons may not use that money to purchase sacrifices [that are offered when one completes the nazirite vow in] purity.58He may, however, use the funds to bring the sacrifices required when he becomes impure and emerges from impurity. Similarly, if the father set them aside for the sacrifices [offered when one completes the nazirite vow in] purity, the son may not use them for the shaving [and the sacrifices required when a nazirite emerges from] impurity. [There is] an unresolved doubt whether this [is acceptable]. If he brought his sacrifices from such funds, he is not considered to have fulfilled his obligation.59The commentaries raise questions regarding this ruling, because the unresolved doubt raises questions in either direction. For just as it is possible that he did not fulfill his obligation by bringing the sacrifices with the money set aside by his father, it is possible that he did. Hence, were he to bring sacrifices with his own funds, they would be unnecessary and he would be slaughtering ordinary animals in the Temple courtyard (a serious transgression). There is a way to avoid this difficulty, for him to offer his second set of sacrifices conditionally, i.e., making a stipulation: "If the first set of sacrifices were acceptable, then these are voluntarily offerings. If, however, the first set were unacceptable, then these are the offerings required" (Kessef Mishneh).This approach is, however, still somewhat problematic, because a sin offering may not be brought as a voluntary offering. Therefore, the Lechem Mishneh (in his gloss to the conclusion of Chapter 10) states that he should bring only a sin offering of a fowl which is brought when there is a doubt (see Chapter 10, Halachah 8, and notes). And the Lechem Mishneh continues, he need not bring a burnt offering and a peace offering at all. They are not of fundamental importance and the offerings he brought originally are sufficient for him.
If a person says: "It is my responsibility to perform the shaving for a nazirite," he is obligated to bring the sacrifices required when a nazirite [completes his vow] in purity. He may have them offered by any nazirite that he desires. If he said: "I am obligated to bring half of the sacrifices of a nazirite," or he said: "It is my responsibility to [provide the means for] half the shaving for a nazirite,"60We have chosen a translation that reflects more the halachic meaning of the person's statements than the words' literal meaning. he is obligated to bring half the sacrifices [required of] any nazirite he desires. That nazirite should bring the remainder of his sacrifices from his own funds. If, however, he said: "I am obligated to bring the sacrifices of half a nazirite," he must bring all of the sacrifices of a nazirite, for there is no concept of being half a nazirite.61See Chapter 3, Halachah 8. The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, but the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify it, based on the interpretation of Nazir 12b.
When one says: "I am becoming a nazirite and I accept the responsibility to [provide the means for] the shaving for a nazirite," and his colleague says: "And so am I," the colleague is a nazirite, but he is not obligated to [provide the means for] the shaving, for he only included himself in his colleague's statements with regard to becoming a nazirite. If he said: "And so am I, and I accept the responsibility to [provide the means for] the shaving for a nazirite," he is obligated [for this as well]. If they are clever, each one should bring sacrifices provided by his colleague.62By bringing each other's sacrifices, they fulfill their vows to provide for the shaving of another nazirite and fulfill their obligations for their own nazirite vows. If they do not do this, they must each bring the sacrifices for their own vows and the sacrifices for another nazirite. If they do not do this, they are each obligated to [provide the means for] the shaving of other nazirites.
If one says: "[I am a nazirite and]63This addition is made on the basis of the gloss of the Radbaz. it is my responsibility to [provide the means for] half the shaving for a nazirite," and his colleague hears and says: "And I also am a nazirite and I also accept the responsibility to [provide the means for] half the shaving for a nazirite," [they are both nazirites]. If they are clever, one should bring half the sacrifices of the other and the second should bring half the sacrifices of the first and then each one should complete the [required] sacrifices [from his own resources]. If not, [in addition to bringing their own sacrifices,] each one must bring half the sacrifices of any nazirite he chooses.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
[The following rules apply when a person] sets aside money for the sacrifices of nazirites,1I.e., he set aside money to pay for the sacrifices of poor nazirites. those sacrifices were offered, and there is money left over. He should bring sacrifices of other nazirites with those funds,2Even if there are not enough funds remaining to purchase an entire sacrifice, the remaining funds should be contributed toward the purchase of a sacrifice. for the remainder of money [set aside for] nazirite [offerings should be used] for nazirite [offerings].3Since the money was set aside for that purpose, it should be used accordingly. If one set aside money for his own nazirite [offering] without specifying for which sacrifice it should be used4See Halachah 4 for more details concerning this concept. and money was left over, the remaining funds should be used for freewill offerings.5Voluntary burnt offerings whose sacrifice embellishes the altar. Since the money was set aside for use for his own offerings, it should not be used for the offerings of another person. This is the meaning of the phrase Shekalim 2:5: "What is left over from a nazirite's [offerings] should go for the sake of that nazirite.
When a person set aside money that was designated for specific purposes for his nazirite offering and money was left over, the remainder of the funds set aside for the burnt offering should be used for a burnt offering. The remainder of the funds set aside for the sin offering should be brought to the Dead Sea.6Brought to a place where it is impossible to benefit from it. It must be noted that at times the Rambam interprets the term Yam HaMelach as referring to the Mediterranean Sea.The rationale for this ruling is that once a person has received atonement, it is forbidden to benefit from any funds designated for his sin offering. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 4:1. The commentaries also note that in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 5:9, the Rambam writes that money left over from a sin offering should be used to purchase freewill offerings. The remainder of the funds set aside for the peace offering should be used for a peace offering. There is no need that the offering be accompanied by bread.7As the nazirite's peace offering must be accompanied (see Chapter 8, Halachah 1). It is eaten for one day.8Like the peace offering brought by a nazirite in contrast to an ordinary peace offering which may be eaten for two days and one night.
[The following rules apply when a person] set aside money for [sacrifices for] his nazirite vow and died. If the money was not designated for specific sacrifices, it should be used for freewill offerings.9Although a certain amount of the funds would have been used for a sin offering, since they have not been designated for that purpose, it does not become prohibited to use them for other purposes. If the money had been designated for specific sacrifices, the funds set aside for the burnt offering should be used for a burnt offering. The funds set aside for the sin offering should be brought to the Dead Sea.10As is the law when the owner of a sin offering dies (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 4:1). The funds set aside for the peace offering should be used for a peace offering. It is eaten for one day. There is no need that the offering be accompanied by bread.
What is meant by money not designated for specific sacrifices? For example, [a nazirite] set aside money to use to bring his sacrifices and did not say anything. If, however, he said: "This is for my obligation," it is as if they have been designated for a specific purpose.11Since it is known that he is required to bring these sacrifices, it is considered as an appropriate amount has been allotted for each offering. Hence the money set aside for the burnt offering and peace offering should be used for such sacrifices and the money set aside for the sin offering should be taken to the Dead Sea. Needless to say, that if he says: "This [money] is for my burnt offering, sin offering, and peace offering," the money is considered as set aside for a specific purpose.
When a person sets aside an animal with a blemish12I.e., a blemish that disqualifies it as an offering. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, chs. 1-2. [for his sacrifice], it is as if he set aside money without designating it for a specific purpose. Similarly, if he set aside a slab of silver or of gold or a utensil, it is as if he set aside money without designating it for a specific purpose.13Since the animal is available for immediate sale, it is considered as if the owner has cash in hand. [This applies] even if he said: "This is for my burnt offering, sin offering, and peace offering."
When a person says: "These [funds] are for my sin offering and the remainder is for my nazirite offering" and dies or a woman made such statements and then her husband nullified her nazirite vow,14In which case, she has no obligation to bring the sacrifices. the money for the sin offering should be brought to the Dead Sea. Half of the remainder of the money should be used for a burnt offering and half for a peace offering.
If he says: "These [funds] are for my burnt offering and the remainder is for my nazirite offering" [and dies], the money for the burnt offering should be used for a burnt offering and the remainder should be used for freewill offerings.15Although there are funds for a sin offering involved, since the purpose was not specified, they may be used for freewill offerings.
When a person thought that he was obligated in a nazirite vow and set aside his sacrifices and then inquired of a sage who told him that [his statements] do not constitute a vow and he is not obligated to be a nazirite, what should he do with the sacrifices that he set aside? They should go and pasture with the rest of the herd.16It is considered as an entirely ordinary animal, as if it had never been consecrated. For they were consecrated in error and that consecration is not binding, as will be explained in the appropriate place.17Hilchot Arachin 6:34.
[The following rules apply when] a woman takes a nazirite vow and set aside her sacrifices and afterwards, her husband nullified her vow. If the animal belonged to him, it should go out and pasture in the herd,18It is considered as an entirely ordinary animal, as if it had never been consecrated. for a person cannot consecrate an article that does not belong to him.19This is a general principle, applicable in many contexts with regard to sacrifices. See Hilchot Arachin 6:21, 24; Hilchot Temurah 1:3. If the [animals set aside for] sacrifices were hers and her husband did not own any part of them, e.g., they were given to her as a present on the condition that her husband have no authority over them, but instead, she could do whatever she wants with them,20Generally, all of a woman's property is placed in her husband's care during their marriage and all her earnings belong to him. How then can she have money or property that is entirely her own? When a person gives it to her as a present with the above stipulation. See Hilchot Ishut 22:27; Hilchot Nedarim 7:17; Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 3:13-14. the sin offering should be left to die,21It is forbidden to benefit from the animal or to use it for any other purpose. Hence, it is left to die. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 4:1. the burnt offering should be sacrificed as a burnt offering, and the peace offering should be sacrificed as a peace offering. It is eaten for one day. There is no need that the offering be accompanied by bread.22See Halachah 3.
If [a woman] set aside money that was not designated for specific sacrifices, it should be used to purchase freewill offerings. If it was designated for specific purposes, the funds set aside for the burnt offering should be used for a burnt offering. The funds set aside for the sin-offering should be brought to the Dead Sea. The funds set aside for the peace offering should be used for a peace offering. It is eaten for one day. There is no need that the offering be accompanied by bread.
When a woman took a nazirite vow and became ritually impure [due to contact with a corpse] in the midst of the days of her nazirite vow, and afterwards her husband heard of her vow and nullified it, she must [still] bring the sacrifices [required when a nazirite] becomes ritually impure.23The rationale is that when a husband nullifies a vow, his nullification does not uproot the vow from its source. Instead, his nullification affects only the future. Hence, she is liable for the repercussions of becoming impure and must bring a sacrifice. If, by contrast, she were to have had her vow nullified by a sage, it would have been nullified at its source and it would be as if she was never a nazirite. Hence she would not have to bring a sacrifice. See Hilchot Nedarim 13:2 (Radbaz).
When a father binds his son to a nazirite vow24See Chapter 2, Halachot 13-14. and set aside sacrifices, but the son did not desire this nazirite vow and he or his relatives objected or he shaved himself or his relatives shaved him,25See ibid.:15. the sin offering should be left to die, the burnt offering should be sacrificed as a burnt offering, and the peace offering should be sacrificed as a peace offering. It is eaten for one day. There is no need that the offering be accompanied by bread.26See Halachah 9.If he set aside money that was not designated for specific sacrifices, it should be used to purchase freewill offerings. If it was designated for specific purposes, the funds set aside for the burnt offering should be used for a burnt offering. The funds set aside for the sin-offering should be brought to the Dead Sea. The funds set aside for the peace offering should be used for a peace offering. It is eaten for one day. There is no need that the offering be accompanied by bread.
When a person says: "I will be a nazirite when a son is born to me," and sets aside a sacrifice, his wife miscarries27The Radbaz explains that the Rambam interprets our Sages' statements in Nazir 13a as applying when the events occurred in this order. Others interpret the Talmud as speaking about a situation where the sacrifices were set aside after the woman miscarried. According to the Radbaz, the Rambam would not argue with that view. Instead, he is stating that the law applies even in the instance mentioned. and then she gives birth,28See Chapter 1, Halachah 17. the status of the sacrifices is questionable.29Since he is not bound by his nazirite vow after the miscarriage as stated in the cited halachah, it is possible that the consecration of the sacrifices is nullified. On the other hand, that is not a definite fact. Hence our Sages debated this issue. It is forbidden to shear them or perform labor with them.30These prohibitions apply with regard to all consecrated animals. Since these prohibitions are Scriptural in origin, they must be observed because of the doubt regarding these animals' status. See Hilchot Me'ilah 1:7-8.
[A question arises when] there are two nazirites; one became ritually impure [due to contact with a corpse] and it is not known which of them became ritually impure.31See Halachot 16-17 which describe how such a situation could arise. How should they bring their sacrifices?32As the Rambam proceeds to explain, the nazirite who completed his vow in ritual purity is obligated to bring one set of sacrifices, while the one who became impure must bring a different set. Since it is not known which of these individuals became impure, there is a question which sacrifices they should bring. Neither can bring the sacrifices required by the other as a freewill offering, because the guilt offering that is required when emerging from impurity may not be brought as a freewill offering, nor may the sin offering that is required after completing one's nazirite vow in a state of purity.They should bring the sacrifices33I.e., sharing the costs equally. [required when emerging from] impurity and the sacrifices [that mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity at the conclusion of the span of their nazirite vow.34This applies when they both took a nazirite vow for the same number of days at the same time (Radbaz). If their nazirite vows conclude at different times, they must wait to the latest date. One of them then says: "If I was the one who became impure, the sacrifices [to emerge from] impurity are mine and the sacrifices [that mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity are yours. If I am the one who is ritually pure, the sacrifices [that mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity are mine and the sacrifices [to emerge from] impurity are yours."35The other makes similar statements and they both perform all of the rituals necessary in the bringing of the sacrifices. In this way, the one has fulfilled the obligation to bring the sacrifices required when emerging from impurity and the other, the obligation to bring the sacrifices that mark the completion of the nazirite vow.After bringing these sacrifices, they [both] then count the full span of another nazirite vow36In which they observe all the prohibitions incumbent on a nazirite. and bring another [set of] sacrifices [that mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity.37In this way, the nazirite who became ritually impure has fulfilled the obligations incumbent on him at the conclusion of his nazirite vow. They then bring38I.e., sharing the costs equally. the sacrifices [that mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity and one says: "If I was the one who was ritually impure, the sacrifices [brought previously to mark the emergence from] impurity were mine and the sacrifices [brought to mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity were yours and these are the sacrifices [that mark my completion of a nazirite vow in] purity. If I was the one who was ritually pure, the sacrifices [brought previously to mark the completion of a nazirite vow in] purity were mine and those [brought to mark the emergence from] impurity were yours. And these are the sacrifices [that mark your completion of a nazirite vow in] purity."39The other one makes a similar statement and they each perform all the rites required when bringing these sacrifices. Thus neither one lost anything [in bringing] these sacrifices.40More precisely, the person who was ritually pure was obligated to pay for half the sacrifices of the person who was ritually impure. Thus although no extra sacrifices were offered, he did suffer a slight loss. Nevertheless, this is obviously far preferential than for each one to have to bring the sacrifices required when emerging from ritual impurity on his own as stated in the following halachah.
If one of them dies, [the other] must bring a fowl as a sin-offering41This is the practice followed whenever there is a question whether one is obligated to bring a sin offering or not. This sacrifice is burnt and not eaten (Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:10). If he was impure, he will have discharged his responsibility by bringing this sacrifice, because after the fact, this is sufficient. The burnt offering and the peace offering are not absolute necessities. See Chapter 10, Halachah 5. and an animal as a burnt offering42This is for the sake of the offerings he is required to bring if he completed his nazirite vow in a state of purity. The peace offering and guilt offering are not absolute necessities. See Chapter 6, Halachah 12; Chapter 10, Halachah 8. and say: "If I became impure, the sin offering fulfills my obligation and the burnt offering is a freewill offering. If I was pure, the burnt offering is my obligation and the fowl brought as a sin-offering is [because of] the doubt." He then counts the full span of another nazirite vow43In which they observe all the prohibitions incumbent on a nazirite. and brings the sacrifices44All three sacrifices, as the Rambam proceeds to explain. [required when completing a nazirite vow in] purity. He should say: "If I was impure, the first burnt offering I brought is a freewill offering and this is the sacrifice that I am obligated to bring. If I was pure, then the first burnt offering was obligatory. This is a freewill offering and these are the remainder of my sacrifices."[In these instances,] neither of them45The nazirites who entered a situation in which a doubt arouse which of them was impure. perform the shaving [to emerge from] ritual impurity unless they are minors or women.46Who are not bound by the prohibition against shaving the corners of their heads. See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 12:5. [The rationale is that] these individuals should not shave their heads because of a doubt.47Although a nazirite who is ritually impure and one who completes his nazirite vow in purity is allowed to shave his head, that is permitted because there is a definite positive commandment which supercedes the prohibition. In these instances, however, we are unsure if there is a commandment obligating the nazirite to shave. Hence, no leniency is granted. The nazirite's failure to shave does not prevent him from bringing his sacrifices, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 5.
How could a doubt arise for them with regard to whether they contracted ritual impurity? For example, two nazirites were standing in a private domain where the ruling is that if a doubt concerning ritual purity arises in a private domain, the person is considered impure.48See Hilchot Shaar Avot HaTumah 16:1. We assume that if the nazirite knew that he was ritually impure, he would not deny it, because we operate under the assumption that a person would not consciously avoid bringing a sin offering if he knew that he was liable (Keritot 12a). A person who was standing outside saw them and said: "I saw that one of you became impure, but I do not know which one it is."If, however, this witness is together with them in the courtyard, they are both ritually pure. [The rationale is that] since there are three of them, they are considered as "many people." And when there are many people in a private domain, when a doubt arises concerning them, they are ritually pure like a doubt concerning ritual impurity in the public domain as will be explained in its place.49Ibid.. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this principle. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's view.
When does the above apply? When both nazirites remain silent or the matter is doubtful for them. If, however, one of them says: "I did not become ritually impure," even if two witnesses testify that he became impure, he does not bring a sacrifice because of their statements. His statement: "I did not become ritually impure," can be understood to mean: "I will not bring a sacrifice [because of] impurity, because I have already asked [a sage] to absolve my vow." Thus he is not contradicting the witnesses and a person's word is accepted with regard to his own person.50See Hilchot Shaar Avot HaTumah 14:11. If, however, he remained silent or was in doubt concerning the matter, he should bring a sacrifice even when the cause is the testimony of one witness, as we explained [above]Similarly, if a witness tells a person: "You took a nazirite vow in my presence" and that person disputes the matter, he is not liable for anything.51For the person's own word supercedes the testimony of one witness. If he does not dispute the matter, he must observe [the restrictions of] a nazirite vow because of his statements.Even if [a person] told two others, "I saw one of you take a nazirite vow, but I do not know which of you it was," since [neither of them] dispute his statements, they both must observe a nazirite vow, because of his statements. If a person observed a nazirite vow because of the statements of one witness and drank wine or became impure [due to contact with a corpse] and two witnesses administered a warning, he is given lashes even though the fundamental dimension of the testimony is dependent on one witness.52The rationale is that since, because of the doubt inspired by the testimony of the witness, the person willingly accepted the observance of the nazirite vow, he is obligated to observe it (Radbaz).
When a corpse was lying across the breadth of a path53I.e., even if the corpse is in full public view. and a nazirite walked by there, he is pure. [This applies] even if the only way to pass was [to step] over the corpse54Thus he would contract ritual impurity by covering the corpse with his body (ohel).The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this issue, citing Nazir 63b as support. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer interpretations of the Talmud that support the Rambam's position. In that source, the Talmud differentiates between a corpse that is visible and a corpse whose existence is unknown, as explained in Chapter 6, Halachot 18-19. The Rambam maintains that the distinctions apply only after the fact, when the blood from the sacrifices has already been sprinkled on the person. Before then, the ruling depends on the principle: When there is a doubt concerning ritual impurity in the public domain, the person is considered pure. If such a doubt arises concerning a question in a private domain, he is considered as impure.In explanation of the Rambam's position, the Kessef Mishneh states that we are speaking about an instance where it is possible for the nazirite, albeit with difficulty, to pass by the corpse without touching it or passing over it. If that is not the case, he is certainly impure. The Radbaz states that we are speaking about any instance where the person could have - and we presume he did - move off the path so as not to touch the corpse. or to touch it and even if it was a source of impurity that was known.55In contrast, if it was not known that a corpse was located there, the nazirite is pure in the case of a doubt. [The rationale is that when there is] an unresolved doubt concerning ritual impurity in the public domain, [we consider the person] pure.
When does the above apply? When he was walking. If, however, he was riding or carrying a burden, he is impure.56Because, as the Rambam proceeds to explain, it is almost impossible for the person not to contract ritual impurity. [The rationale is that] it is possible for a person who is walking on his feet not to touch the corpse, have his body pass over it, nor move it. When, by contrast, a person is carrying a burden or riding, it is impossible for him not to touch the corpse, have his body pass over it, nor move it, for the corpse is lying across the path.57And when riding or carrying a burden, the person will not be able to squeeze by.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
A person cannot perform one shaving [that will fulfill the requirements for] his nazirite vow and [for the emergence from the state of ritual impurity associated with] tzara'at.1As stated in Hilchot Tumat Tzara'at 11:1-3, after the signs of tzara'at have disappeared from a person's flesh, he must undergo a twofold purification process that involves shaving his hair on the first and seventh days. Neither of these shavings can be considered as the same shaving as the one performed by a nazirite. The rationale is that the first shaving of the purification from tzara'at is for a different purpose than the shaving performed by a nazirite. For the intent of the shaving of a nazirite is to remove hair, while the intent of the first shaving performed by a person afflicted with tzara'at is to allow hair to grow (Nazir 60b, Radbaz). Similarly, the second shaving associated with tzara'at is not analogous to the shaving associated with the nazirite vow, for the shaving of a metzora is performed before the sprinkling of the blood and the shaving of a nazirite afterwards.When it is questionable whether a person was afflicted with tzara'at [and thus became a metzora], the shaving [associated with emerging from] tzara'at does not supercede his nazirite vow. 2Which involves a prohibition against shaving. As stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 15, ordinarily, "When a nazirite contracts tzara'at and becomes healed in the midst of the days of his nazirite vow, he should shave all of his hair. The rationale is that] by shaving, he fulfills a positive commandment. [And] when there is [a conflict between] a positive commandment and a negative commandment... the positive commandment supercedes the negative commandment." There is also a positive commandment for a nazirite to grow his hair long and a negative commandment does not override a negative commandment and a positive commandment. Nevertheless, when a nazirite contracts tzara'at, that there is no positive commandment involved in growing his hair. Since it is possible that this is not the situation prevailing in this instance, he should not shave (Radbaz). Therefore [the following rules apply] if a person took a nazirite vow for a year and throughout this year, there was a question whether he had been afflicted with tzara'at and a question whether he had contracted ritual impurity through contact with a human corpse3In this instance, it is questionable whether he is required to shave to perform a shaving to emerge from ritual impurity (as explained at the beginning of Chapter 6) or not. or there was a question whether he had been afflicted with tzara'at and at the end of the year, a question arose whether he had contracted ritual impurity. He should count seven days, have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled [upon him] on the third and seventh days,4A person who seeks to emerge from the impurity associated from the state of ritual impurity associated with contact with a human corpse must have the ashes of a Red Heifer sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh days after he became ritually impure. He must also immerse himself in a mikveh (Hilchot Parah Adumah 11:1). but he should not shave [his hair] on the seventh day. He may not drink wine or become impure due to contact with a human corpse until four years have passed.5For only then will he complete all the shavings required because of the doubts and complete his nazirite vow. He may partake of consecrated food after two years have passed.6For then he will have performed both of the shavings required of a person who contracted tzara'at and will have had the ashes of the Red Heifer sprinkled upon him to purify him from the impurity associated with contact with a human corpse. [The rationale is] that he is required [because of the doubts concerning his status,] to shave [his head] four times: a) the shaving [required when he completes his nazirite vow in a state of] purity,7The Rambam mentions this shaving first, because this is the only definite obligation. b) the shaving [required for a nazirite to emerge from a state of] impurity, [for which he is obligated because of the doubt], and the two shavings required of a metzora, for there is a doubt whether he is a metzora.
The first shaving should be performed after the conclusion of the first year.8For until then he is forbidden to shave because perhaps he is not impure and his nazirite vow must be observed. The details regarding the sacrifices that must be offered when shaving his hair are explained in Halachot 4-5. He shaves his head, his beard,9As stated in Halachah 9, this applies only to a minor or a woman who took nazirite vows. If the nazirite is an adult male, he may not shave his head, because of the doubt. and his eyebrows and undergoes the purification process involving a cedar tree, a hyssop, and two wild birds10According to certain commentaries, this refers to a kosher species of sparrows, according to others to a jay. See the notes of the Living Torah to Leviticus 14:4. like other metzoraim.11See Hilchot Tumat Tzara'at, Chapter 11, where this purification process is described in detail. If he was not impure due to contact with a corpse, nor a metzora, this is the shaving performed upon completion of his nazirite vow in purity. If he was indeed a metzora during the first year, this is the first shaving required of the metzora.He then waits another year as is the span of his nazirite vow, and then performs the second shaving required of metzora. He may not shave after seven days like other metzoraim, for perhaps he was not a metzora, but instead had been impure because of contact with a corpse. [In that instance,] during this second year, he was a nazirite, who was forbidden to shave.12The Ra'avad writes that the Rambam's statements are correct if he became ritually impure more than seven days before the end of his first year of nazirite observance. If, however, there is less than seven days left before the conclusion of the year, different rules apply, for he will have not fulfilled the seven days required before shaving to emerge from impurity. The Kessef Mishneh takes issue with the Ra'avad's statements. [Nevertheless,] after he performed these two shavings, he has completed the purification process required after tzara'at13Were he to have indeed been a metzora. and he is permitted to partake of consecrated foods.He then waits another year and afterwards, performs a third shaving, lest he had been definitely a metzora during the first year and not impure because of contact with a corpse. [The observance] of the first year was not of consequence for him because these were days when his status [as a metzora] was defined.14And as stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 9, the days when a person's status is defined as a metzora are not included as part of the fulfillment of his nazirite vow. [The observance] of the second year was not of consequence for him because these were the days when he was counting [as part of the purification process of a] metzora between the first shaving and the second shaving.15He could not wait only seven days, because it is possible he was not a metzora in which instance, he would not be permitted to shave his hair within the time of his nazirite vow. Therefore he must wait a third year, [observing his] nazirite vow. [Afterwards,] he performs a third shaving for his nazirite vow. This shaving [is required to emerge from] purity.16Our translation follows the understanding of the Radbaz and is supported by Halachah 5. The standard published text follows a slightly different version. [Nevertheless,] perhaps he was definitely impure because of contact with a corpse and he was also definitely a metzora and one shaving cannot serve the purpose of his nazirite vow and [purification from] tzara'at. Thus the first and second shavings were [for purification] from tzara'at. The third shaving was [for the sake of purification from] ritual impurity. None of these three years count because the third shaving was to purify him from ritual impurity.17And until he is ritually pure, the days he observes for his nazirite vow are not of consequence. He may not, however, perform these shavings earlier, because he is not definitely impure or a metzora. Therefore he must wait a fourth year, [observing] his nazirite vow and perform a fourth shaving. After each of the times that he shaves because of the doubt,18I.e., the first three shavings. it is forbidden to benefit from his hair because of the doubt involved, because it is permitted to benefit from the hair of a nazirite who became afflicted with tzara'at.19Ordinarily, it is forbidden to benefit from the hair of a nazirite (Chapter 8, Halachah 2), even if he became impure (Chapter 6, Halachah 14). Nevertheless, as the Rambam states in Chapter 7, Halachah 15, when a nazirite becomes afflicted with tzara'at, the holiness associated with his hair is nullified. Even with regard to the last shaving, his hair is not definitely forbidden, because it is possible that he already fulfilled his obligations with the first shavings (Radbaz).
Similar [rules apply if a person] took a nazirite vow for ten years and, in the midst, there arose a question whether he was a metzora and there also arose a question whether he contracted ritual impurity [through contact with a corpse] at the conclusion of this period. He may not drink wine for forty years and must perform four shavings, one at the conclusion of each decade. The first shaving comes because of the doubt concerning the days he must observe because of tzara'at. The second shaving [comes] because of the days a metzora [must count between his two shavings]. The third shaving is because of the doubt concerning his ritual impurity. And the fourth shaving is [the one required when completing a nazirite vow in] purity.20This all follows the pattern explained in the notes to the previous halachah.
How should such a person bring the sacrifices required of him?21The full order of sacrifices that such a person would be required to bring were he in fact to have contracted ritual impurity and have been afflicted by tzara'at is the following:a) because of tzara'at: on the eighth day of the purification process, he must bring a guilt offering, a sin offering, and a burnt offering;b) because he became impure, he must bring a sin offering, a guilt offering, and a burnt offering; andc) upon completion of his nazirite vow in purity, he brings a burnt offering, a peace offering, and a sin offering. If he was rich, he should sign over all of his property to another person.22Because, as will be explained, it is possible to bring a fowl as a sacrifice when there is a doubt involved, but not an animal. [The rationale is that] a wealthy metzora who brought a sacrifice befitting a poor one does not fulfill his obligation.23See Hilchot Mechusrai Kapparah 5:10; Hilchot Shegagot 10:13.A wealthy metzora must bring a ewe as a sin offering, while a poor one may bring two sets of doves or turtledoves. If the rich man retains possession of his property, he will not be able to bring a sin offering, because an animal can never be brought as a sin offering because of doubt (Radbaz). Afterwards, he brings a fowl as a sin offering and an animal as a burnt offering for the first, second, and third shavings.24For all of these are brought because of the doubt involved. No one should partake of any of the fowl brought as sin offerings, because of the doubt involved.25See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:10. For the fourth shaving, he brings the sacrifices required of a nazirite [who completes his vow in] purity, as we explained.26Chapter 8, Halachah 1. The Rambam does not mention the wild birds that must be brought as part of the purification process for a metzora, for they were not sacrifices brought within the Temple.
He brings three fowl as sin offerings for the following reasons: the first27I.e., the sin offering brought after the first shaving. is because of the doubt whether he is ritually impure,28Because of contact with a corpse alone and not afflicted with tzara'at. the second because of the doubt whether he is afflicted by tzara'at, for a metzora brings a sacrifice only after his second shaving,29The wild birds brought after the first shaving are not considered sacrifices, because they are not brought within the Temple.According to this possibility, it was not necessary for him to have brought the sin offering at the time of the first shaving. That first shaving cannot, however, serve two purposes as the Rambam explains. the third because of the possibility that he was ritually impure. [The rationale is that] one shaving cannot fulfill the obligation for both one's nazirite vow and [purification from] tzara'at and perhaps he was definitely both a metzora and impure because of contact with a corpse. [In that instance,] the first and second shavings were to become purified from tzara'at, as explained.30See Halachah 2. The third shaving is the shaving [required to emerge from] ritual impurity. Therefore he must bring the sacrifices [required when emerging from] impurity at that time.
[The following principles apply with regard to] the three animals31I.e., the lambs.[brought] as burnt offerings that accompany [the sin offerings]. He brings them conditionally. [When bringing] the first, he stipulates: "If I was pure, this is for my obligation."32As required of a nazirite who completes his nazirite vow in purity. If I was impure, this is a freewill offering."33For the burnt offering required when a nazirite completes his vow in purity is a lamb and that required from a nazirite emerging from ritual impurity is a dove or turtle dove. He should make a similar stipulation for the second and third [shaving] as well.34I.e., for the second shaving, he should make the following stipulation: "If I was only ritually impure because of contact with a corpse, then the first sin offering was to emerge from ritual impurity and this is the sin offering required at the conclusion of the nazirite vow. If I had contracted tza'arat, this is for the sake of purification from that affliction. And if I was neither ritually impure nor had contracted tzara'at, this is a freewill offering."For the third shaving, he should stipulate: "If I was both ritually impure and afflicted by tzara'at, the second sacrifice was to be purified from tzara'at and this is to emerge from the ritual impurity stemming from a corpse. If I had been afflicted by tzara'at, but not ritually impure, this is to complete the obligation of my nazirite vow. If I had not been afflicted by tzara'at, this is a freewill offering."
For the fourth shaving, he brings the sacrifices [required when completing a nazirite vow in] purity35I.e., a burnt offering, a sin offering, and a peace offering. and stipulates: "If I was impure, the first burnt offering was a freewill offering36For a nazirite who became impure should not bring a lamb as a burnt offering. and this is my obligatory offering.37We do not say that the burnt offering brought after the second or third shaving was the required offering, because perhaps he had been afflicted with tzara'at in which instance, those shavings were necessary to purify him (Kessef Mishneh)."If I was definitely [afflicted with tzara'at], the first [burnt offering] was the one that I was obligated to bring as a metzora.38With regard to a sin offering, the Rambam wrote in Halachah 5 that a metzora should not bring his sacrifice until after the second shaving. For this reason, the Ra'avad protests the Rambam's statements. Nevertheless, as stated with regard to a related issue in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 18:9, a distinction can be made between a burnt offering and a sin offering, for the sin offering is the fundamental catalyst for atonement and the burnt offering is merely a present (Kessef Mishneh; Lechem Mishneh). This is the one that I was obligated to bring for my nazirite vow. And the two [brought] in between are freewill offerings.39One of these burnt offerings was obviously a freewill offering, because only one burnt offering is required for the two shavings required to be purified from tzara'at. The other burnt offering is also a freewill offering, because the shaving is required lest he was also impure because of contact with a corpse. Nevertheless, the burnt offering required for such a shaving is not a lamb, but rather a dove or a turtle dove."If I was pure with regard to contact with a corpse, but I had been afflicted with tzara'at, the first and second [burnt offerings] were obligatory, the one for the obligation of a metzora40As explained above. and the one for the obligation of a nazirite. The third and the fourth are freewill offerings. The remainder [of the sacrifices] are the sacrifices [required when completing a nazirite vow in] purity.41The fact that they are being brought much later than the burnt offering is not significant."If I was impure and afflicted with tzara'at the first burnt offering was the obligation of a metzora.42As explained above. The second and the third are freewill offerings43One of these burnt offerings was obviously a freewill offering, because only one burnt offering is required for the two shavings required to be purified from tzara'at. The other burnt offering is also a freewill offering, because the shaving is required lest he was also impure because of contact with a corpse. Nevertheless, the burnt offering required for such a shaving is not a lamb, but rather a dove or a turtle dove. and this is the sacrifice [required when] shaving [after completing a nazirite vow in] purity."
The guilt offering and the burnt offering are not absolute requirements,44Hence they are not required in this complex situation. neither for the shaving [required for a nazirite to emerge from] ritual impurity, nor for [the purification afflicted with] tzara'at. 45See Chapter 6, Halachah 12, with regard to a nazirite and Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:5 with regard to a metzora. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the guilt offering is also an absolute requirement for the purification of a nazirite. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's ruling. Thus if he had definitely been a metzora, but had not become impure because of contact with a corpse, he became pure when bringing the wild birds. The fowl brought as a sin offering serves as his sin offering.46The commentaries raise a difficulty with the Rambam's statement, noting that as explained in Halachah 5, the sin offering for a metzora is brought in association with the second shaving, not the first. The Merkevet HaMishneh states the intent is that the sacrifice is brought because of the question of impurity stemming from contact with a human corpse. It should not be eaten because it was brought because of a doubt.47For it is not known whether he was a metzora or not. And the [lamb] brought with it as a burnt offering is part of the requirement for shaving [after completing a nazirite vow in] purity, so that the shaving will be associated [with the sacrifice of] an animal.48For if he does not bring an animal as a sacrifice, the shaving is not acceptable and in violation of his nazirite vow. If he was ritually impure because of contact with a corpse, the [lamb] brought as a burnt offering is a freewill offering.49One of these burnt offerings was obviously a freewill offering, because only one burnt offering is required for the two shavings required to be purified from tzara'at. The other burnt offering is also a freewill offering, because the shaving is required lest he was also impure because of contact with a corpse. Nevertheless, the burnt offering required for such a shaving is not a lamb, but rather a dove or a turtle dove.If he had not been afflicted by tzara'at, but had been impure due to contact with a corpse, the fowl brought as a sin offering is the offering [required of] a nazirite who became impure and the [lamb] brought as an animal is a freewill offering. And ultimately,50After the fourth shaving. he will bring the sacrifices [required when a nazirite vow is completed in] purity.If he was neither impure due to contact with a corpse nor a metzora, the [lamb] brought as a burnt offering for the first shaving is that required when shaving.51The fact that the remainder of the sacrifices are not brought until a significantly later time, i.e., after the fourth shaving, is not significant. The fowl brought as a sin offering is brought because of the doubt and it is not eaten.
When do the above statements that a nazirite performs four shavings apply? When speaking of a minor52As mentioned in Chapter 2, Halachah 13, a nazirite vow taken by a minor can be binding according to Scriptural Law. or a woman.53For the prohibition against shaving the corners of the hair and the beard is not incumbent upon them (Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 12:5). An adult male should not perform a shaving because of a doubt,54I.e., the first three shavings described above. neither a shaving because of ritual impurity or one because of tzara'at lest he have been ritually pure and thus he will be cutting off the corners of his hair when there is no mitzvah involved.55As explained above, when a mitzvah is involved in the shaving, we follow the principle: The performance of a positive commandment supercedes the observance of a prohibition. This applies, however, only when we are certain that the observance of a positive commandment is indeed involved. Therefore, [in such a situation,] an adult male should perform only the shaving [required when completing the nazirite vow in] purity. For these four shavings are not absolute requirements,56See Hilchot Tumat Tzara'at 11:4. they are only [the more complete way of performing] the mitzvah.
How should a nazirite conduct himself if he is certain that he contracted tzara'at and is uncertain whether he contracted ritual impurity. After he is purified from his tzara'at,57Shaving and bringing the appropriate sacrifices. The sequence when the shavings are performed and sacrifices are brought is not explicitly mentioned by the Rambam. However, as reflected in the gloss of the Lechem Mishneh, seemingly he may perform the shaving immediately. Since he is definitely afflicted with tzara'at, there is no prohibition against his shaving during the term of his nazirite vow. he should have [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh days.58This purifies him from the impurity associated with a human corpse. Unless he performs this act of purification, no sacrifices may be offered on his behalf (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:12). The fact that he is still ritually impure because of tzara'at does not prevent him from purifying himself from the impurity associated with contact with a corpse (Hilchot Parah Adumah 11:3). He performs the shaving [required when emerging from] ritual impurity59After the completion of all the days of his nazirite vow. He is required to wait this amount of time, because perhaps he never became impure. Thus were he to perform the shaving earlier, he might be shaving in the midst of his nazirite vow. and then begins to count the days of his nazirite vow in their entirety. For, due to the doubt that he became ritually impure, [the observance of] the first days is nullified. [After completing that vow,] he brings the sacrifices [required when completing a nazirite vow in] purity and [is permitted to] drink wine. After he brings the sacrifices [required after being purified from] tzara'at, he may partake of sacrificial food.
[The following rules apply if] it is certain that he became impure [from contact with a corpse] and there is a question whether he was a metzora. After he is healed from his questionable status as a metzora, he should count the full amount of the days of his nazirite vow60Any observance of his vow before then is disqualified. Nor can he bring the sacrifices required when emerging from ritual impurity until he first purifies himself from the possibility of having been afflicted with tzara'at. and afterwards61Since it is not certain that he has tzara'at, the shaving does not supercede his nazirite vow and thus he must wait until the observance of his nazirite vow is concluded. perform the shaving [required for tzara'at]. [The rationale is that] shaving [because of tzara'at] that is questionable does not supercede his nazirite vow. Afterwards, he counts the seven days between the first shaving of a metzora and the second and performs that shaving. He should bring his sacrifices and may partake of sacrificial foods if he had [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh days.62For otherwise, he is ritually impure and may not partake of sacrifices. Our translation reflects an emendation of the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah based on authoritative manuscripts. Afterwards, he counts seven more days [because of] the impurity associated with a corpse and performs the shaving [required to emerge from] ritual impurity. Afterwards, he counts the full term of his nazirite vow.
Similarly, [the following rules apply if] he was certainly both ritually impure and a metzora. After he becomes healed from his tzara'at, he performs the first shaving [required to be purified from] tzara'at, has [the ashes of the Red Heifer] sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh [days],63To be purified from the ritual impurity stemming from contact with a human corpse, so that sacrifices may be offered on his behalf, as explained above. and has his head and beard shaved on the seventh day. This is the second shaving [required to be purified from] tzara'at. He brings the sacrifices [associated with that purification] on the eighth day and may partake of sacrificial foods. He then counts seven days64For the reason explained in the following halachah. and performs the shaving [required to emerge from] ritual impurity. Afterwards, he counts the full term of his nazirite vow. He then brings the sacrifices [required when completing a nazirite vow in] ritual purity and [may then] drink wine.
Why is it necessary for him to count seven [days before bringing the sacrifices required after emerging from ritual impurity]?65I.e., he is required to wait this amount of time as explained in Chapter 6, Halachah 7, but seemingly, he has already waited these days, in the process of his purification from tzara'at. [Because] the seven days of ritual impurity [associated with contact with a human corpse] are not counted during the seven days between the two shavings of a metzora.
When a person says: "I will be a nazirite if I do this and this" or "...if I do not do [this or this]," he is a wicked man and a nazirite vow of this type is one of the nazirite vows taken by the wicked. If, however, a person takes a nazirite vow to God in a holy manner, this is delightful and praiseworthy66See ch. 13 of Hilchot Nedarim. Halachot 24 and 25 of that chapter focus on the negative dimension of taking vows that involve prohibitions, but Halachah 23 explains that there are situations, i.e., when one feels challenged by his material desires, when taking such vows are praiseworthy. See the incident from Nedarim 9b quoted in the notes to that halachah. and concerning this, [Numbers 6:7-8] states: "The diadem67This Hebrew term shares the same letters as the root of the word nazirite. of his God is upon his head... He is holy unto God." And Scripture equates him with a prophet, as [Amos 2:11] states: "And from your sons, I will raise [some] as prophets, and from your youths, [some] as nazirites."
