=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
There are 24 presents that are given to the priests.1The Rambam specifies and categorizes them in this chapter. All of them are explicitly mentioned in the Torah. A covenant was established with Aaron over all of them.2Numbers 18:19 speaks of 'an eternal covenant of salt.' It is called a covenant of salt, because just as salt never spoils, so too, this covenant will endure forever (Rashi). Any priest who does not acknowledge them3The Kessef Mishneh notes that Menachot 18b, the Rambam's apparent source, states: 'Any priest that does not acknowledge the priestly service does not receive a portion of the priesthood.' The Kessef Mishneh questions why the Rambam changes the wording of his source. does not have a portion in the priesthood and he is not given any of these presents.
Every [priest] who partakes of one of the presents [given to the priests] that is sanctified4E.g., like terumah or the first fruits which are referred to as 'holy.' should recite a blessing: '[Blessed are You].. who sanctified us with the sanctity of Aaron and commanded us to partake of...' [mentioning the particular type of present he is eating].5These presents also include elements of the sacrificial offerings. The Rambam speaks about the mitzvah to partake of these sacred foods in Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:1-2. And see Hilchot Terumah 15:22 which describes partaking of terumah.
Eight of the presents may be eaten by the priests only in the Sanctuary, within the walls of the Temple Courtyard.6See Halachah 4. The division of the presents into these categories is not found in a prior Rabbinic source, but instead, was made by the Rambam himself (Kessef Mishneh). Five of them may be eaten only in Jerusalem within the walls of the city.7See Halachah 5. According to Scriptural Law, there are five presents that are acquired [by the priests] only in Eretz Yisrael.8See Halachah 6. There are five presents that they acquire both in Eretz Yisrael and in the Diaspora.9See Halachah 7. And there is one present that that they acquire from the Temple's [property].10See Halachah 8.
What are the eight that may be eaten only in Temple? The meat of the sin offering - this includes both sin-offerings of fowl and sin-offerings of animals,11In Halachah 13, however, the Rambam considers these two as separate presents. As the Radbaz clarifies, there is a difference in the procedure involved in these two offerings. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 1:1; 10:3. the meat of a guilt-offering,12See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:1, 10:3. whether a definite guilt-offering or a guilt-offering brought because of doubt,13In Halachah 13, however, the Rambam considers these two as separate presents. As the Radbaz clarifies, there is a difference in the procedure involved in these two offerings. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 1:1; 10:3. communal peace offerings,14See Hilchot Ma'asehHaKorbanot1:4, 9:4. [the portion of] the omer offering that remains,15I.e., the portion that remains after a handful is taken to be offered on the altar. See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7: 12. [the portion of] an Israelite's meal offering that remains,16I.e., the portion that remains after a handful is taken to be offered on the altar. An Israelite's offering is mentioned in contrast to that of a priest which is offered on the altar entirely. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:2-3, 12:9. the two loaves [offered on Shavuot],17See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 8:11. the show bread,18See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim4:9. and the log of oil brought by a metzora.19SeeHilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 4:3. [All of] these may be eaten only in the Temple.
What are the five that are eaten only in Jerusalem? The breast and the leg of the peace offering,20SeeHilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:4-5. the portion granted [the priests] from the thanksgiving offering,21See ibid. 9:12. the portion granted [the priests] from the ram brought by a nazirite,22See ibid. 9:12. the firstborn of a kosher animal,23See Hilchot Bechorot 1:2. and the first fruits.24See Chapter 3, Halachah 3. [all of] these may be eaten only in Jerusalem.
What are the five [that are given] in Eretz Yisrael? Terumah, terumat ma'aser, and challah - these three are sanctified,25And must be eaten in a state of ritual purity. the first shearings,26See Chapter 10, Halachah 1. and an ancestral field [that was consecrated]27See Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim 4:1-2, 19. - these are ordinary property. [The priests are granted] these according to Scriptural Law only in Eretz Yisrael.28According to Rabbinic Law, terumah and challah are also separated in the Diaspora. Terumot and challot from Eretz Yisrael may be eaten only in Eretz Yisrael.29On the contrary, if they are taken to the Diaspora, they become impure (see Hilchot Terumah 2:17).
What are the five that the priests acquire in all places? The presents [given when slaughtering animals],30The foreleg, the jaw, and the maw; see Chapter 9, Halachah 1. [the money given for] the redemption of a firstborn [son],31See Chapter 11. [the lamb given for] the redemption of a firstborn [donkey],32See Chapter 12. [property] stolen from a convert [who died heirless],33See Hilchot Gezeilah 8:5. and dedication offerings.34See Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim6:4. These five are ordinary property.
The present that they acquire from the Temple's property35The Rambam puts this present in a category of its own, because unlike all of the above which were given by individuals, this present comes from the Temple's property (Radbaz). Once the hides are given to the priests, they are considered as ordinary property and may be used for mundane purposes. is the hides from the burnt-offerings.36See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:19. Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:9. This also applies to the hides from other sacrifices of the most holy order. They are all given to the priests.
The eight presents that may be eaten only in the Sanctuary are all sacrifices of the most holy order. They may be eaten only by male priests, as will be explained in the appropriate place.37Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:1, 10:3, 12:3. Concerning them, [Leviticus 6:22] states: 'All males among the priesthood shall partake of it.
The five [presents that may be eaten only] in Jerusalem are all sacrifices of lesser sanctity.38See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:17 with regard to the sacrifices of lesser sanctity. Chapter 3, Halachah 1, equates the first fruits with those sacrifices. [Both] males and females [of the priestly family] may partake of them.39See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:17. Concerning them, [Numbers 18:11] states: 'To you, and your sons and your daughters with you have I given them as an eternal decree.' [Although a woman may partake of them,] they are granted only to the males of the priestly family. For they are given to the men of the watch [serving in the Temple].40As explained in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:3, the priestly family was divided into 24 watches. Each one would serve in the Temple for a week. During that week, its members had the rights to all the sacrifices offered during that time.The fat and the blood of the firstborn [of kosher animals] was offered and only a male was allowed to offer it.41This sacrifice is not given to the priests of the weekly watch, but instead to the priest of the owner's choice [Hilchot Bechorot 1:15; the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 4:9)]. That priest in turn offers it on the altar and may give its meat to whichever members of the priestly family, males and females, he desires to (see Radbaz). Similarly, the hides of the sacrifices of the most sacred order, an ancestral field, dedication offerings, and the stolen property of a convert, are acquired only by the men of the priestly watch [of that week], as will be explained.Similarly, the redemption of firstborn [sons is given] only to males of the priestly family, for concerning it, [Numbers 3:48] states: 'And you shall give the money to Aaron and his sons.' [Similarly, the redemption of] a firstborn donkey [is given] to males of the priestly family, for all the laws of the firstborn are parallel. [The redemption is given] to males and not females.
Thus you have learned that the presents given [directly] to females like males are five: terumah,42See HilchotTerumah 12:22. terumat ma'aser, challah,43For the laws applying to terumah apply to both of these. the presents given when slaughtering an animal,44The foreleg, the jaw, and the maw; see Chapter 9, Halachah 1. and the first shearings.What is the source that teaches that the first shearings may be given to a woman of the priestly family? 'The first of your grain, your wine, and your oil, and the first shearings of your flock shall you give to him' [Deuteronomy 18:4]. [The verse establishes an equivalence:] Just as [terumah,] the first of the grain, may be given to females as well as males, so too, the first shearings.
Our Sages45Tosefta, Challah 2:7. reckoned these presents in another manner, stating: 24 presents for the priests were given to Aaron. They are 10 in the Temple, 4 in Jerusalem, and 10 in the outlying areas.
The ten in the Temple are: a) an animal brought as a sin-offering, b) a fowl brought as a sin-offering, c) a guilt-offering, d) a guilt-offering brought because of doubt, e) the communal peace-offerings, f) the log of oil brought by a nazirite, g) the two breads, h) the show bread, i) the remnants of the meal offering, and j) the remnants of the omer offering.
The four in Jerusalem are: a) the firstborn [kosher animal], b) the first fruits, c) the portion granted [the priests] from the thanksgiving offering and the portion granted [the priests] from the ram brought by a nazirite, and d) the hides of the sacrifices.46Although these hides are not eaten in Jerusalem, but instead, can be sold and the proceeds used for any purpose, the Rambam places them in this category, because the priests would not take them out of the holy city. Instead, as a token of respect for their holiness, they would sell them there and use the proceeds to partake of food that was eaten in that holy place (Radbaz, gloss to Halachah 5).
The ten in the outlying areas are: a) terumah, b) terumat ma'aser, c) challah, d) the first shearings, e) the presents given when slaughtering an animal, f) the redemption of a firstborn [son], g) the redemption of a firstborn donkey, h) a field that was designated as a dedication offering, i) an ancestral field, and j) the stolen property of a convert.According to this reckoning, all of the portions given the priests from sacrifices of lesser sanctity are considered as one present. This includes: the breast and the leg that is given [the priest] from every peace offering, together with the bread that is given with them if [the peace offering] was a thanksgiving offering47A thanksgiving offering is one type of peace offering. and the foreleg given the priest from the nazirite's ram, with the bread given with it, and the breast and the leg.48I.e., from the nazirite's ram, the priest is given a foreleg, a hindleg, and the breast. And he is also given a portion of bread that is offered with that sacrifice. Since they are all peace offerings, all of the portions given the priests are considered as one present.
AIl of the presents that are dependent on the sacrifices will be explained in their appropriate places in the laws of sacrifices.49See the sources given above. Similarly, [the laws pertaining to] the stolen property of a convert will be explained in Hilchot Gezeilah.50See Hilchot Gezeilah 8:5. We have already explained the laws governing an ancestral field and dedication offerings in Hilchot Arachin51Hilchot Arachin, chs. 4-8. and the laws of terumah and terumat ma'aser in Hilchot Terumah. In the present halachot, I will explain the laws of the [priestly] presents that are not dependent on the sacrifices: the first fruits,52See chs. 2-4. challah,53See chs. 5-8. the presents given when slaughtering an animal,54See ch. 9. the first shearings,55See ch. 10. the redemption of a firstborn son,56See ch. 11. the redemption of a firstborn donkey.57See ch. 12.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
It is a positive commandment to bring the first fruits to the Temple.1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 125) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 91) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. [The obligation of] the first fruits applies only while the Temple is standing, and only in Eretz Yisrael, as [implied by Exodus 23:19]: 'Bring of the first ripened fruit of your land2I.e., from the land given specifically to you, Eretz Yisrael. to the house of God your Lord.'3I.e., only when the House of God, the Temple, is standing. According to Rabbinic decree, one should bring first fruits even from the cities of Sichon and Og4I.e., the lands on the eastern side of the Jordan that were captured from these kings by Moses as he led our people to the promised land. These territories were not part of the land flowing with milk and honey promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.The Rambam's position here represents a reversal from his position in Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., where he writes that according to Scriptural Law, the mitzvah of the first fruits applies in these lands. Similarly, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:10), he states that the mitzvah applies in these lands according to Scriptural Law. and from Syria.5Lands to the north of Eretz Yisrael. These lands are not considered as part of Eretz Yisrael according to Scriptural Law. See Hilchot Terumah 1:9. For a person who purchases land in Syria is like one who purchases in Jerusalem. We do not bring the first fruits from the lands of Ammon and Moab6Lands to the southeast of Eretz Yisrael which were not conquered by the Jews upon their initial conquest of the land. and Babylon, even though they are liable for terumah and tithes according to Rabbinic decree.7See Hilchot Terumah 1:1. If one brings the first fruits from the Diaspora, they are not considered as first fruits.8And instead are considered as ordinary produce. The rationale is that the first fruits must be ritually pure and all produce coming from the Diaspora is ritually impure by Rabbinic decree.
The first fruits are brought only from the seven species which are mentioned when relating the praise of Eretz Yisrael.9Deuteronomy 8:8. They are: wheat, barley,10See the gloss of Rabbi Akiva Eiger which states that rye, oats, and spelt, although considered as subspecies of wheat and barley in other contexts, should not be brought as the first fruits. grapes, figs, pomegranates, olives, and dates. If one brought fruit from other species, it is not sanctifted.11The Jerusalem Talmud (Bikkurim 1:3) derives this from the exegesis of Deuteronomy 26:2: 'And you shall take of the first of all the fruit of the land. 'Take of" implies an exclusion. Not all of the fruit may be brought as first fruits.
We do not bring [first fruits] from the dates in the mountains, nor from the fruit from the valleys, not from oil-producing olives that are not of the highest quality, but rather from dates from the valleys and fruit from the mountains, for they are of the highest quality. If a person brought first fruits of inferior quality, e.g., dates from the mountains, figs that were perforated and had oil applied to them,12As the Rambam explains in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 2:5), these techniques are used to hurry the ripening of figs. Although they are effective, they reduce the quality of the figs. dusty and smoked grapes,13I.e., at times, fires were lit under grape vines to kill worms and insects in the vine. This, however, reduced the quality of the fruit. they are not consecrated.
We may not bring liquids as the first fruits14I.e., one may not bring juice from pomegranates, dates, and figs. with the exception of [oil from] olives and [wine from] grapes, as [implied by Deuteronomy 26:2 which speaks of]: 'the fruit of the land,' i.e., [the fruit and] not a beverage. If one brought beverages, they are not accepted.15From the conclusion of the tractate of Challah, it would appear that it is not acceptable to bring wine or oil either. Nevertheless, the Rambam does not accept that teaching, favoring instead Terumah 11:3 which deems them acceptable. See the explanation in the Kessef Mishneh.
People who are close to Jerusalem should bring fresh figs and grapes.16For it is preferable that fresh fruits should be brought. People who are distant should bring dried figs and raisins.17For if they bring fresh fruit, it will spoil.
The first fruits should not be brought before Shavuot, for that holiday is referred to as 'the harvest festival, the first fruits of your work.' If one brings [them at that time], we do not accept them from him. Instead, they should be left there18I.e., in the Temple courtyard. The Radbaz states that this applies only to fruit that will not spoil. Otherwise, the fruit brought prematurely is like all the other fruit mentioned in the previous halachot and its consecration is not effective. until Shavuot, at which time, he should make the declaration concerning them. Similarly, the first fruits should not be brought after Chanukah.19After Chanaukah, it is not appropriate to bring the first fruits, because they are to be brought at the time of the harvest and the harvest is concluded by Sukkot. Moreover, if one brings the first fruits between Sukkot and Chanukah, he cannot make the declaration concerning them (Chapter 4, Halachah 13).The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's words for their implication is that the first fruit brought after Chanukah becomes consecrated. The Ra'avad maintains that since the fruit did not ripen until then, the first fruits are considered as of low quality and do not become consecrated. Nor, the Ra'avad maintains, can they be considered as being from the following year, as the Rambam states, because until the 15th of Shvat, they are considered as from the crops of the previous year. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam, maintaining that since the crops have generally been harvested, any produce that does grow is considered as belonging to the coming year. The Radbaz emphasizes that here too, we are speaking of produce that will not spoil. Otherwise, it is not consecrated. For first fruits that ripen after Chanukah are considered as being of the coming year. They should be left until Shavuot.
The first fruits may not be brought from produce of the present harvest for produce of the previous harvest or from produce of the previous harvest for produce of the present harvest.20Yevamot 73b states that there is an equation between the tithes and the first fruits. Hence, just as the tithes may not be brought from one harvest for another (Hilchot Terumah 5:11; Hilchot Ma'aser 1:7), so too, the law applies with regard to the first fruits.What is implied? One should not bring produce that budded before the 15th of Shvat21This refers to the first fruits brought from fruit. With regard to wheat and barley, the date when a change is made is Rosh HaShanah. as first fruits for produce that budded after the 15th of Shvat. [This applies] both to produce that is planted and produce that grows on its own, as [implied by Numbers 18: 13]: 'The first fruits of everything in their land.'22I.e., the prooftext implies that the obligation applies to any and all situations where these species grow (see Menachot 84b and Radbaz).
The obligation of the first fruits applies to the produce of partners, [implied by]: 'The first fruits of everything in their land.'23The plural form of the verb "that they bring" used by the prooftext indicates that the obligation applies even when the produce is owned by two people jointly (Chullin 136a).
When produce grows in a flower pot, even if it has a hole or it grows in a ship, one should not bring first fruits from them at all. [for the prooftext] speaks of 'their land.'24Produce that grows in such a situation is considered as growing from the earth in certain contexts. Nevertheless, the prooftext indicates that the first fruits are an exception. One should, however, bring from produce that grows on a roof or in a ruin.
[In all the following situations,] a person should not bring the first fruits from the produce that grows in one domain or the produce that grows in another domain. [These situations include] one who plants a tree in his field and extends25'Extending' refers to planting a bough from a tree or a vine in the ground, so that an extension can grow from it [the Rambam' s Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:1)]. it into his colleague's field26Without his colleague's permission as obvious from the following halachah. or into the public domain, or the trunk of the tree was in his field and he extended its end in his field but there was a public road or a private path interrupting between the trunk and the end which was extended. [This is derived from Exodus 23:19]: "the first fruits of your land.' [Implied is that] all the growth [of the tree] must be from your land.'27And even the fruit that grow from the trunk are nurtured to a certain extent from the end that was implanted.
If his colleague gave him permission28There is, however, no way one can be granted permission to use the public domain in this manner. [to implant the end] in his property even for a brief time, he may bring the first fruits. If the tree was close to his colleague's boundary or leaned into his colleague's field29See Hilchot Shechenim10:8. [and he planted there], even though he was obligated to distance [his planting], he may bring [the first fruits]30This applies even to the fruit which grew in his colleague's domain. Since his colleague gave him permission to grow the produce there, it can be considered as his land. and recite the declaration, for Joshua gave the land [to our people] as an inheritance with that intent.31The commentaries note that when Hilchot Nizkei Mammon 10:8 mentions the ten conditions on which basis Joshua gave the land to the people as an inheritance, this condition is not included among them. Among the resolutions given is that the conditions mentioned there apply also in the Diaspora, while this condition applies only in Eretz Yisrael.
Sharecroppers, tenant farmers,32The former give the owners a share of the crops; the latter rent the fields for money. See Hilchot Ma'aser 6:13; the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:2). men of force who compel the owners [to sell] their land and purchase it for a low price,33This was, unfortunately, a common practice in Eretz Yisrael during the Roman era, when the gentiles and their Jewish comrades would threaten a person until he was forced to sell his land for far below its worth. and robbers34One who takes land without paying at all. may not bring first fruits, because [the prooftext] states: 'the first fruits of your land.'35And none of the above are rightful owners of the land. [This applies] even when the owners despair [of recovering their land].36For land can never be stolen and always remains the property of its rightful owners (see Hilchot Gezeilah 8:14).
When a person purchases a tree in a field belonging to a friend, he may not bring [the first fruits], because he does not own land. [If he purchases] three [trees], he does own land. Even if he formally acquired only the trees, it is as if he owns land.37See Hilchot Mechirah 24:1-2. The rationale is that since he purchased this amount of trees, he also receives the land necessary to tend to them. Although he is not the legal owner of the land and has only the right to use it, that right is sufficient for the land to be called his own. If he purchased one tree and the land around it, he should bring [the first fruits].38Because he is the owner of both the land and the tree (Our bracketed additions are based on the gloss of the Radbaz. We are forced to accept this interpretation, since, as stated above, the first fruits must come from "your land."
When a person purchases fruit that has been harvested and purchases the land [on which they grew],39I.e., even if he does not purchase the fruit and the land at the same time, as long as he owns both at the time appropriate to bring the first fruits, he should bring them (Radbaz). he should bring the first fruits, because he possesses both land and the fruits.When one sells a colleague fruit, but not the land, even when the fruit is still attached to the land, [neither the seller, nor the purchaser may bring the first fruits]. The seller may not bring them, because he does not own the fruits. The purchaser may not bring them, because he does not own the land. If the seller buys the fruit back from the purchaser, he may bring [the first fruits], because he [now] owns [both] the land and its produce.
When a person sells his property to a gentile and later purchases it back from him, he must bring the first fruits from it according to Scriptural Law.40See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Gittin 4:9); note the differences between his initial version and his final version. There is a debate among the commentaries if the obligation to bring the first fruits is Rabbinic in origin (as was the Rambam's initial view) or Scriptural in origin (as is his view here). [The rationale is that] it is not absolved from the mitzvah because of the gentile's purchase,41The Ra'avad comments that this applies even though the produce reached maturity while in the possession of the gentile. The commentaries state that the Rambam would accept this ruling. as we explained.42Hilchot Terumah 1:10.
[Although] one nullified an asherah,43A tree that was worshiped. as was the practice of both the Canaanites and the Greeks.When a gentile owns an entity that is worshiped, he can nullify its connection with idolatrous worship and from that time onward, it may be used for ordinary purposes. Nevertheless, it is not fit to be used for an offering on the Altar, because of its previous connection with idolatry. An entity owned by a Jew that was worshiped can never be nullified. See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:8-11. the first fruits should not be brought from its produce. For the first fruits are like the sacrifices of the Temple.44As stated in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:6, if an animal was once associated with the worship of false deities, it may no longer be used as a sacrifice in the Temple.
There is no set measure for the first fruits according to Scriptural Law. According to Rabbinic Law, one should give one sixtieth of the crop. If one desires to set aside his entire crop as first fruits, he may.
When a person separated his first fruits and afterwards added to them or adorned them, the addition is also considered as the first fruits.45And the stringencies applied to the first fruits, e.g., that they be eaten in a state of ritual purity, are also applied to them.When does the above apply? When he brought [the first fruits] from Eretz Yisrael. If, however, he brought them from Transjordan or Syria, they are not as the first fruits.46The rationale is that, as stated in Halachah 1, the obligation to bring first fruits from these lands is Rabbinic in origin. Hence, it is not powerful enough to convey that status on the additions as well. Even though they are not considered as the first fruits, they should only be eaten in a state of ritual purity.47As the first fruits themselves. No matter where it is from,48I.e., even from Transjordan and Syria (Radbaz). the first fruits should only be adorned with fruit from the seven species [mentioned in the praise of Eretz Yisrael].49One may, however, adorn figs with grapes and grapes with dates (Bikkurim 3:10).
How should one separate the first fruits? A person descends to his field, sees a fig tree, a cluster [of grapes], and/or a pomegranate tree that has budded, and ties them with a reed.50As a sign, so that he will recognize them later. There is no obligation to use a reed for this purpose. Another sign is also acceptable. The Rambam, quoting the mishnah, was merely stating a common practice [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 3:1)] . He should say: "These are the first fruits.' They become designated as first fruits even though they are attached to the ground after they have been given that title, even though they have not ripened entirely.51Although they must reach a complete stage of development by the time they are brought to the Temple, it is not necessary that they reach this stage at the time of their designation.When they ripen and are reaped from the ground, it is not necessary to designate them again. If he did not designate them while attached or call them first fruits and then he reaped them, he should designate them after he reaps them.52Unless he designates them, the fact that they are set aside is not sufficient for them to be considered as first fruits.If his entire harvest becomes impure, he should not designate the impure produce as first fruits. Instead, as an initial preference, he should set aside other produce as first fruits for the impure produce. It appears to me that if he does not have other produce, to separate [as first fruits], he should not set them aside to be destroyed.53See parallels in Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 3:9; Hilchot Meilah 4:7. Terumah and the second tithe, by contrast, should be set aside even if the produce is impure, for they will not be wasted. Similarly, it appears to me54The expression 'It appears to me' refers to a conclusion derived by the Rambam through deduction without an explicit prior Rabbinic source. The Kessef Mishneh questions whether that expression is appropriate in the present instance since this point is stated in Yevamot 73a,b. The Kessef Mishneh concludes that perhaps 'It appears to me' refers only to the rationale the Rambam states here, for that concept is not stated in Yevamot, loc. cit. that if the first fruits become impure, he should not use them as kindling for a furnace, because they are like objects consecrated for the Temple.55And consecrated articles may not be destroyed. It is necessary for the Rambam to give this explanation, because the Torah refers to the first fruits as terumah and impure terumah may be kindled.
When a person set aside his first fruits and they rotted away,56See Halachah 3 which states that spoiled produce is unacceptable. were taken by others, lost, stolen, or became impure,57For then, they are no longer fit to be offered. he is obligated to set aside others in place of them,58He does not, however, make the declaration for the first fruits when bringing these fruits, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 9. as [Exodus 23:19] states: '...bring to the house of God your Lord.' This teaches that one is liable to replace them until he brings them to the Temple Mount.59Once he brings them to the Temple Courtyard, he is not liable to replace even if they become impure (Radbaz).
If a person set aside his first fruits to bring them to Jerusalem himself, he should not send them with an agent60The rationale for this ruling can be explained as follows: When a person sends his first fruits to the Temple via an agent, the agent does not make the declaration (Chapter 4, Halachah 2). Since they were harvested in a manner that allows that declaration to be made, it is improper for them to be sent in a manner that prevents it from being made. If, however, he initially harvested them with the intent of sending them [to the Temple] with an agent, it is permitted for him to do so.61For in this instance, they were harvested with the intent that the declaration not be made.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
The first fruits are given to the men of the priestly watch1The priests were divided into 24 watches. Each one would serve in the Temple for a week at a time. [on duty at that time]. They divide them among themselves like the Temple sacrifices.2See Hilchot Ma'aseh Korbanot10:15. We have already explained that [the first fruits] are called terumah.3Hilchot Terumah15:20, Chapter 2, Halachah 19 above, et al. Therefore a non-priest who partakes of the first fruits anywhere4I.e., within Jerusalem or outside the city. is liable for death at the hand of heaven,5The punishment a non-priest incurs for partaking of terumah (Hilchot Terumah 6:6). provided he partook of them after they entered the walls of Jerusalem.6It is forbidden to partake of the first fruits in all situations. One does not, however, become liable for this severe penalty unless they first entered the holy city. The rationale is that since a priest may not partake of them until they are brought to Jerusalem, the prohibition against a non-priest partaking of them does not apply until then.
If a portion [of the first fruits] were inside Jerusalem and a portion were outside,7The Aruch LeNer states that there is a difference of opinion among the Rabbis if this law applies when the produce is carried in a single container or only when it is carried in two containers. [a non-priest] is liable for death for the portion that is inside and it is considered as consecrated property in all contexts. The portion that is outside is considered as ordinary property in all contexts.
When a priest partakes of the first fruits outside of Jerusalem after they have entered inside [the city's] walls, he is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law, as [Deuteronomy 12:17] states: 'You may not eat within your gates...8I.e., in cities outside of Jerusalem. the terumah of your hand.' [The latter term] refers to the first fruits,9Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 149) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 449) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as we explained in Hilchot Terumah.10Hilchot Terumah 15:20.Similarly, if a priest partakes of them in Jerusalem before they are placed in the Temple courtyard,11Nevertheless, as indicated by the following halachah, the person bringing the first fruits need not make the declaration for them to be permitted. he is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law, as if he partook of them outside of Jerusalem,12I.e., this is included in the same negative commandment. because [the first fruits] must be placed down in the Temple Courtyard as [ibid. 26:10] states: 'And you shall place them before the altar of God your Lord.'
After the person bringing [the first fruits] places them down in the Temple Courtyard, they are permitted to the priest even though the former has not recited the declaration over them. When the first fruits were taken out of their place13I.e., Jerusalem, the place where they may be eaten. and then returned, they are permitted to be eaten.14Sacrificial meat, by contrast, would be disqualified if this happened.
[The laws applying to] partaking of the first fruits are identical [to those applying] to partaking of terumah in all of their details. In addition, [the following stringencies apply with regard] to first fruits. They are forbidden to one in the acute state of onein mourning.15See the following halachah. They must be brought to [Jerusalem]. And a priest who is ritually pure who partook of the first fruits that were impure receives lashes like an Israelite who is ritually pure who partook of the second tithe that became impure.16See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 3:1. [These concepts] do not apply with regard to terumah.17Although a priest is not allowed to partake of impure terumah, such a transgression is not punishable by lashes. It is only a prohibition that results from a positive commandment (Hilchot Terumah 7:3).
What is the source which teaches that the first fruits are forbidden to an onein?18Onein / Aninut refers to the state of severe mourning experienced on the day of the death of one's relative. See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 3:6. With regard to these fruits, [Deuteronomy 26:11] states: 'And you shall rejoice in all the good.'19From this phrase, it is derived (Halachah 13) that it is necessary to bring peace offerings together with the first fruits. However, the two teachings are not exclusive. Implied is that they have to be eaten in a state of happiness and not in a state of acute mourning. One who partakes of [these fruits] in a state of acute mourning is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct.20Since the prohibition is not stated as a negative commandment in the Torah, one is not liable for lashes as prescribed by Scriptural Law. The Radbaz and others question this ruling, because, as Yevamot 73b teaches, an association is established between the first fruits and the second tithe. Hence just as one is liable for lashes for partaking of the second tithe in a state of acute mourning, so too, one should be liable for partaking of the first fruits.
The first fruits must [be brought in] a container, as [ibid.:2] states: 'And you shall place them in a container.' The most preferable way of performing the mitzvah is to bring each type of fruit in a separate container. If one brings them [all] in one container, he has fulfilled his obligation. [Even in such an instance,] he should not bring them mixed together. Instead, he should bring the barley below,21This order is prescribed by the Tosefta, Bikkurim 2:8. The commentaries explain that the rationale for this order is that the produce that is most perishable is placed on top and that which is preserved best on bottom. wheat on top of it, olives on top of it, dates on top of them, pomegranates on top of them, and figs on the top of the container. There should be a substance, e.g., palm leaves, wild grass, or leaves, or the like, that intervenes between each type of produce. One should surround the figs with clusters of grapes from the outside.
When a person brings the first fruits in a metal container, the priest takes them and returns the container to its owner. If he brings them in a reed or grass basket or the like, both the first fruits and the basket should be given to the priests.22Bikkurim 3:8 relates that the rich would bring their first fruits in gold and silver containers, while the poor would bring them in wicker baskets. The rich would thus be allowed to keep their containers, while the poor would have to give them to the priests.The rationale is that the metal containers are significant and thus cannot be considered to be ancillary to the fruits. Hence they must be returned to their owners. The wicker baskets, by contrast, are not significant and thus are considered to be ancillary to the fruits. Therefore they may be kept by the priests. In this regard, Bava Kama 913 states, 'Poverty pursues the poor,' i.e., because they were too poor to afford expensive containers, they were required to forfeit even their simple baskets. If the first fruits become impure, the baskets should not be given to the priests.23Since the first fruits themselves are not given to the priests (see Chapter 4, Halachah 10), they do not acquire the containers either.
When they would bring the first fruits, they would also bring turtle doves and doves in their hands. Similarly, they would hang turtle doves and doves from the sides of the baskets24They were not placed on the baskets themselves, lest they soil the fruit [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 3:5)]. in order to adorn the first fruits. Those that were with the baskets would be offered as burnt offerings25For fowl that were given as a free-will offering were sacrificed only as burnt offerings. and those they would bring by hand would be given to the priests [as presents].26The Ra'avad offers a different interpretation of the above mishnah, explaining that only the first fruits were given to the priests, the fowl would be offered as burnt offerings. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's interpretation. Nevertheless, Rashi (Menachot 58a) and Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura follow the Ra'avad's understanding.
It is a positive commandment27Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 132) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 606) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to make a declaration in the Temple concerning the first fruits when they are brought. One should begin and say [Deuteronomy 26:3-10]: 'I am making a statement to God your Lord that I have come to the land... An Aramean [sought] to destroy my ancestor...' until he completes the entire passage, concluding: '...You gave me, O God.' [This declaration] may only be made in the Holy Tongue, as it states: 'And you shall respond and say.'28Sotah 32a understand this phrase as indicating that the passage should be recited exactly as it is written in the Torah.
At first, those who knew how to read would read [the passage themselves] and those who did not know how to read would read after one who read for them. [As a result,] those who did not know how to read would refrain from bringing [the first fruits] so that they would not be embarrassed.29I.e., the fact that they did not know the Holy Tongue would be an embarrassment for them. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 3:7), the Rambam explains that this practice was instituted in the early age of the Second Temple era when many of those who returned to Zion did not know the Holy Tongue, as indicated by Nechemiah 13:24. [Hence] the court ordained that the passage would be read for one who knows how to read like it is read for one who does not know.30In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam explains that there is a support for this in the Biblical verse cited above: 'And you shall respond and say.' Anita, translated as 'respond,' has the connotation of repeating what someone else says.
A person who brings the first fruits is permitted to give them to his servant or his relative [to carry] throughout the journey until he reaches the Temple Mount.31As stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 21, a person should not send his first fruits to Jerusalem via an agent and if he does so, he may not make the declaration (Chapter 4, Halachah 8). Nevertheless, if he himself is bringing them, he may lighten his burden by having another person carry them. All of this applies before he reaches the Temple Mount At that point, he must carry them himself. When he reaches the Temple Mount, even if he is a king of Israel,32The Mishnah (Bikkurim 3:4) cites as an example, the conduct of King Aggripas. he must place the basket on his own shoulder33In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam states that the Torah explicitly requires the person to bring the first fruits to the priest by hand. and proceed until he reaches the Temple Courtyard. He should read [the declaration,] 'I am making a statement to God your Lord today...,' while the basket is still on his shoulder. He then removes the basket from his shoulder. While he holds it by its edge, the priest puts his hand below it and raises it [up and down and to all four directions].34This practice, referred to as tenufah, is required when bringing the peace offerings and other sacrifices. He then reads: An Aramean [sought] to destroy my ancestor and he descended to Egypt...' until he completes the entire passage.' He then places the first fruits at the side of the altar, at the southwest corner, on the south side of the altar.35The side which is before the entrance to the Sanctuary, for the first fruits must be Elaced down 'before God' (Radbaz). He then prostrates himself36As required by Deuteronomy 26:10. and departs.What is the source which teaches that the first fruits must be raised [up and down and to all four directions]? [The above prooftext states:] 'And the priest shall take the basket from your hand,' including [an obligation to] raise the first fruits [up and down and to all four directions]. Just as [the first fruits] must be raised [up and down and to all four directions], so to they require that a peace offering be brought with them and song [accompany their offering], for with regard to them, [ibid.:11] states: 'And you shall rejoice in all the good.' [Now,] with regard to the festivals, [ibid. states: 'And you shall rejoice on your festivals.' [An association is drawn between the two:] Just as the happiness of the festivals is marked by peace offerings, so too, peace offerings [are required] here. [Nevertheless,] these offerings are not absolute requirements.37After the fact, the first fruits are acceptable even if the sacrifices were not brought. The rationale is that the offering is not explicitly mentioned in the Biblical passage (Radbaz to Halachah 14). This concept also applies with regard to the song that should accompany them.
When is a song pronounced over them? When they reach the Temple courtyard. The Levites would begin proclaiming:38See Chapter 4, Halachah 17. 'I will exalt You God, for You have drawn me up...' (Psalms 30:2 .39This psalm relates to the theme of thanksgiving, and was also recited over the thanksgiving offering (Sh'vuot 15b).
[When bringing] the first fruits, it is necessary that one remain [in Jerusalem] overnight.What is implied? When a person brought his first fruits to the Temple, made the declaration, and offered his peace offerings, he should not depart from Jerusalem that day to return home.40The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh clarify that even if the person does not bring a sacrifice, he is still required to stay in Jerusalem overnight because of the first fruits. Instead, he should stay in Jerusalem overnight and return to his city on the following day, as [Deuteronomy 16:7] states: 'And you shall turn back in the morning and return to your tent.' [That verse41Which speaks about the pilgrimage festivals, not bringing first fruits. teaches a general principle:] All occasions when you turn from the Temple when you visit it should only be in the morning.42The commentaries question why, since, this is a general theme, the Rambam mentions it only here and not in other places.Thus the first fruits require seven factors: a) that they be brought to [Jerusalem], b) [in a] container, c) that the declaration be recited, d) that they be accompanied by a peace offering, e) and song, f) that they be raised [up and down and to all four directions], and g) that the person stay overnight [in Jerusalem].

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
Whenever anyone brings the first fruits, it is necessary that a [peace] offering be brought, song [be recited], they be raised [up and down and to all four directions] and the person remain in Jerusalem overnight.1As explained in the concluding halachot of the previous chapter. The declaration, however, is not a universal requirement. There are some who are obligated to bring the first fruits, but who do not recite the declaration over them.
The following must bring [the first fruits], but may not recite the declaration: a woman, a tumtum2A person whose genital area is covered with a mass of flesh and whose gender is impossible to detect. and an androgynous3A person with male and female sexual characteristics. - for there is a doubt whether they are considered as a female;4With regard to an androgynus, the doubt concerns the individual's halachic status. With regard to the tumtum, the doubt concerns the actual facts: Which gender is covered by the mass of flesh? none of these can say "[the land] which You gave me,"5In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:5), the Rambam explains that Eretz Yisrael was given as an ancestral heritage only to males who are free men. Thus this disqualifies all of those mentioned in this clause and also the servant mentioned in the following clause. and similarly, a guardian, a servant, and an agent, because they cannot say "which You gave me."6For the first fruits they are bringing are not from their own land. They are acting on behalf of others.
A convert, by contrast, may bring the first fruits and make the declaration, for [Genesis 17:5] states with regard to Abraham: "I have made you a father to a multitude of nations." Implied is that he is the father of all those who enter under the shelter of the Divine presence.7For he taught all mankind faith [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:4)]. The oath that his descendants would inherit the land was given to Abraham first.8I.e., all future converts are considered as Abraham's seed and thus have a share in the land "that God swore to [give] to your ancestors." Indeed, based on Ezekiel 47:22, Kapot Temarim states that in the Messianic era, converts will be given a share of the Holy Land. Similarly, the priest and the Levites bring [first fruits] and make a declaration, because they have cities in which to dwell.9As related in Numbers, ch. 35, in addition to the six cities of refuge, the Levites were given 42 cities that were scattered throughout the entire land of Eretz Yisrael. Although the land was given them from the tribal inheritances of the other tribes, it is still appropriate for them to speak of the land which God gave them, because the gifts were given as a result of God's command (Radbaz). See also Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 11:17.
A person who purchases two trees in his colleague's field10He does not purchase the land on which the trees grow. Nevertheless, since he purchased two trees, our Sages (Bava Batra 81b; see Hilchot Mechirah 24:6) question whether or not he is given the right to the land around the trees. If, however, he purchases three trees, all agree that he has the right to the land. must bring [the first fruits], but may not recite the declaration.11Bava Batra 82a questions: Reciting the declaration is no more than reciting verses from the Torah. Even if he is not obligated to do so, what would be wrong with reciting these verses? In resolution, it explains that a) it appears that he is lying (because he is praising God for giving him land which in fact may not be his); or b) by bringing them as first fruits, he will prevent the terumah and the tithes from being separated from them. [The rationale is that] there is a doubt whether he has a right to the land [on which the trees stand] or not.What should he do? He should first12I.e., before bringing them to the Temple Courtyard. consecrate them to the Temple treasury13The consecration has a questionable status, because a person may not consecrate property that does not belong to him (Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim 6:16). And if the produce is first fruits, it does not belong to him. for it is possible that they are ordinary produce14For if the land does not belong to him, they are not considered as first fruits. and non-consecrated food is not brought into the Temple Courtyard.15This is a general principle. See Hilchot Shechitah 2:3. The priest then redeems them from the Temple treasury and partakes of them.He must separate terumah and the tithes from them, because of the possibility that they are ordinary produce. He must give the tithes from them to the priests,16According to Scriptural Law, tithes must be given to the Levites. Nevertheless, when the Levites failed to return to Zion with Ezra in large numbers, he punished them and decreed that they should not be given the tithes. Afterwards, according to many views, it was possible to give the tithes either to the priests or the Levites. Nevertheless, in this instance, the tithes must be given to the priests for the reason stated by the Rambam. because it is a possibility that they are first fruits and forbidden to non-priests. He should not bring them himself, but instead, send them via an agent17For when an agent brings first fruits, a declaration should not be made, as stated in Halachah 2. so that [the fact] that the declaration [is not recited] will not prevent them from being eaten. For whenever a declaration concerning [first fruits] is not fit to be made because of a doubt concerning their status, [the fact that] a declaration [is not recited] prevents it [from being eaten].18Bava Batra, loc. cit., explains that when there would be no difficulty in making the declaration, the fact that it is not made does not disqualify the first fruits from being eaten. When, however, it is required to be made, but cannot be made for a particular reason, the failure to make it disqualifies the offering.
If one set aside his first fruits and then sold his field, he should bring them, but not make the declaration, because he cannot say: "[the land] which You gave me,"19Praising God for giving him the land. since it no longer belongs to him. The purchaser is not required to separate other first fruits, because the seller has already separated them.20And first fruits should be brought only once for each species. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:7, based on the Jerusalem Talmud), the Rambam states that this is derived from Deuteronomy 26:3 which states: "I am making a statement to God your Lord today," implying that the statement can be made only once (see also Halachah 11). If, however, he does separate them, he should bring them, but not make the declaration.21For the concept derived above applies primarily to making the declaration and not actually bringing the first fruits. From another species [of produce], he should set aside the first fruits, bring them, and make the declaration.22Since they are being brought by two individuals, the fact that one species has been brought already does not disqualify the first fruits brought by the other person. If, however, they were being brought by the same person, he would not make the declaration again, as stated in Halachah 11.
When a person sells [the right to harvest] the produce of his field, the purchaser should bring [the first fruits], but not make the declaration. [The rationale is that] the acquisition of the produce is not equivalent to the acquisition of [the land] itself.23And thus he cannot rightfully praise God for giving him the land. When, however, one brings first fruits from the property of his wife,24This refers even to property which the husband receives as nichsei milog (see Hilchot Ishut 16:1-2), i.e., the property itself belongs to the woman, but he is entitled to derive benefit from it. he makes the declaration even though he does not own the actual land, as [implied by Deuteronomy 26:11]: "which God, your Lord, has given you and your household."25"Your household" can be interpreted as referring to one's wife. Thus even though the land belongs to his wife, he should make the declaration. Even if his wife dies after he has set aside [the first fruits] and he is in the midst of his journey [to Jerusalem], he should bring [the first fruits] and make the declaration.26The husband inherits his wife's property. Thus now he owns both the land and the produce.
When a person sells his field or sells trees and the land around them in the era when the Jubilee year is observed,27And ancestral property is returned to its original owner. See Hilchot Shemitah VeYoval, ch. 11. [the purchaser] should bring [the first fruits] and make the declaration in the first Jubilee.28For he is the owner of the land and the produce. Although he is required to return the land in the Jubilee year, that is a result of the Torah's decree and does not diminish the purchaser's ownership of the land. [The rationale is that] the seller has not taken for granted that the land will be returned to him.29Since the owner does not have the experience of having his land returned to him, he does not consider it a surety that it will be returned to him. In his mind, it is sold (Radbaz). The Rambam's source is Gittin 48a. Rashi interprets the passage differently. If, however, he sold it again in the second Jubilee, [the purchaser] should bring [the first fruits], but should not make the declaration. For he is certain that he will receive only the produce,30And he knows that the land will be returned. Accordingly, it is as if he purchased only the produce and not the land. and the acquisition of the produce is not equivalent to the acquisition of [the land] itself.31As stated in Halachah 6.
When a person set aside his first fruits and became mortally ill,32This reflects the Rambam's version of the Jerusalem Talmud (Bikkurim 1:5). The version in the standard published text is slightly different (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). the one who is fit to inherit his [estate] should bring the first fruits without making the declaration.33While the owner of the produce is alive, the person fit to inherit the estate is considered as an agent, and hence may not make the declaration. Even though he was not explicitly appointed, we assume that this is the owner's desire. According to the Rambam's conception, if the owner is ill, but is not in mortal danger, another person cannot serve as his agent unless he is appointed as such. When a person set aside his first fruits and sent them with an agent, but the agent died in the midst of the journey, even if the owner brought them, he should not make the delaration. [The rationale is that the phrase (Deuteronomy 26:2 :] "And you shall take... and you shall bring" does not apply unless the taking and the bringing are as one.
When a person set aside his first fruits, but they were lost34In any manner, as indicated by Chapter 2, Halachah 20. before they reached the Temple Mount and therefore he separated others instead of them,35For he is required to replace them (ibid.). he should bring the second fruits, but should not make the declaration. [The rationale is that] he cannot say [that he is bringing] "the first fruits of the land," for those that he is bringing are not the first fruits. One is not liable for an additional fifth [for partaking of] the produce separated second, as [he would had he partaken of] the first fruits.36As stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 5, the first fruits are considered as terumah. And as stated in Hilchot Terumah 6:6, one who partakes of terumah inadvertently must make restitution and add a fifth.
When a person brings his first fruits and they become impure in the Temple Courtyard, he should spill out the basket there.37Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:8). The Ra'avad maintains that the produce should be left in the Temple Courtyard until it rots. From Chapter 2, Halachah 19, some have inferred that according to the Rambam, the impure produce should be burnt. Kin'at Eliyahu maintains that this approach is far more appropriate than leaving it to rot in the Temple Courtyard. He does not make the delaration.38For the declaration is made as a statement of thanksgiving after the first fruits are successfully offered and that is not possible in the present situation.
If a person brought his first fruits from one species and made the declaration and afterwards brings first fruits from another species, he should not make the declaration for them. [This is derived from the phrase (Deuteronomy 26:3 :] "I am making a statement today." [Implied is that] he makes one statement and not two.
If a person separated his first fruits and then the spring [that served as his field's water supply]39The bracketed additions are based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:6). dried up or the tree [from which they were reaped] was cut down, he should bring them, but should not make the declaration. [The rationale is that] he is like someone who no longer possesses the land, because it has been ruined.40In its present state, the land is not able to produce fruit. Hence, it is as if he no longer possesses it (ibid.; according to Rav Kappach's text).
When a person brings his first fruits between Sukkot and Chanukah41After Chanukah, he may not bring them at all.- even if he set them aside before Sukkot - he should bring them without making the declaration, [as implied by Deuteronomy 26:11]: "You shall rejoice in all the good." [Implied is that] the declaration should be made only in a time of happiness, [i.e.,] between Shavuot and the end of Sukkot.42This is the harvest season when a person feels happy with the bounty God has granted him. All individuals other than these43I.e., those mentioned from Halachah 5 and onward. must bring their first fruits and make the declaration.
The first fruits, the terumot,44I.e., both "the great terumah" and terumat ma'aser. challah, the principal and the fifth,45I.e, when a non-priest partakes of any of the above mentioned substances, he is obligated to pay the principal and a fifth as restitution. and the presents given when slaughtering an animal46See Chapter 9. are a priest's private property. He may use them to purchase servants, land, or a non-kosher animal. A debtor47Even a non-priest. of his may collect them as payment for his debt and a woman may take them in lieu of the money due her by virtue of her ketubah. And they may be used to purchase a Torah scroll.48The Radbaz questions why a Torah scroll is mentioned. If he is allowed to purchase a non-kosher animal with these objects, seemingly, it is obvious that he should be able to use them to purchase a Torah scroll. He explains that one might think that it is preferable that a person write a Torah scroll himself than purchase one. The Ma'aseh Rokeach explains that in contrast to other types of property, a Torah scroll may never be sold. Hence, if he uses the money from these objects to purchases it, he will never be able to derive physical benefit from these substances.
The first fruits and the terumot are forbidden to be eaten by non-priests. [Generally,] when the first fruits are mixed with ordinary produce, they are permitted if there is 101 times the original amount as is the law with regard to terumah.49Hilchot Ma'achalot Asuurot 15:3; Hilchot Terumot 15:20-21. Nevertheless, if they become mixed with the same species50If, however, they become mixed with a substance of another species, the presence of the first fruits can be nullified. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:12. of ordinary produce in Jerusalem, [the mixture] is forbidden even if the slightest amount of [the first fruits are mixed in] as [is the law regarding] the second tithe.51See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 6:14-15. [The rationale is that] since [they are located in Jerusalem,] the place where one partakes of them, they are considered like52This refers even to first fruits belonging to an Israelite. Hence, they are considered only "like an entity that could be permitted," but are not actually in that category (Radbaz). an entity that could become permitted.53For the entire mixture could be eaten by priests in a state of ritual purity. With regard to the law that the entire mixture is forbidden when even the slightest amount of a forbidden substance becomes mixed with it, see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:10. Although the first fruits are forbidden to non-priests even in Jerusalem, nevertheless, even the slightest presence of them in a mixture causes it to be forbidden.Even if one sowed the first fruits after they were brought to Jerusalem,54And thus the forbidden fruit itself no longer exists. even the slightest amount of produce that grows from them causes a mixture to become forbidden.55This is a penalty imposed upon him because the mixture could have - and the produce that grows could - be given to the priests. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 2:2). If, however, one sows the first fruits before they were brought to Jerusalem, the produce that grows from them is ordinary produce.56Since the first fruits may not be eaten outside of Jerusalem, the mixture is not judged with the severity that applies to a mixture containing a forbidden entity that could become permitted. Instead, it is considered as an ordinary mixture and the presence of the first fruits can be nullified.
How are the first fruits brought to Jerusalem? All of [the inhabitants of] the towns in a regional area57See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 6:1 for more particulars concerning the Hebrew term. gather in the central town of the regional area, so that they will not ascend to Jerusalem as individuals, for [Proverbs 14:28] teaches: "The glory of the King is among the multitude of people."58Thus coming as a group is a greater act of Divine glorification.They come and sleep in the city's thoroughfare, but they do not enter the homes lest they contract impurity because of being under the same shelter as a corpse.59I.e., the first fruits must be brought in a state of ritual purity, and if a person bringing them enters a home, he may unknowingly contract ritual impurity, because he was under the same shelter as a corpse. In the morning, the leader calls out: "Arise and let us ascend to Zion, to God our Lord."60Cf. Jeremiah 31:5. An ox with its horns glazed with gold leads the procession. A crown of olive [branches]61For of the seven species, olive branches are the most attractive [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 3:3)]. are placed on its head, to publicize that the first fruits come from the seven species [for which Eretz Yisrael is praised]. A flute plays before them until they arrive close to Jerusalem. They walk the entire way and proclaim: "I rejoiced when it was told me: 'Let us go to the house of God.'They would travel for only two thirds of the day.62This would impress them and the inhabitants of the towns through which they passed with the importance of their pilgrimage. Also, it allowed for people of many regions to congregate and ascend to Jerusalem together. When they arrived close to Jerusalem they sent emissaries to notify the inhabitants of Jerusalem and they adorned their first fruits63See Chapter 3, Halachot 7 and 9. and beautified them. If they had [some] produce that was fresh and other produce that was dried, the fresh produce was placed on top.64Because fresh produce is more attractive. The leaders of the Israelites and of the priests65The Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). and the Temple treasurers would go out from Jerusalem to greet them. [The size of the welcoming party] was proportionate to the number of people who come. If many people come, many go out to greet them; if few, few. When they have all entered the gates of Jerusalem, they begin declaring: "Our legs were standing in your gates, O Jerusalem" (ibid.).
All of the artisans in Jerusalem would stand in honor of them66Kiddushin 33a notes that this is a great mark of respect for those who bring the first fruits. After all, artisans are not required to stand before Torah scholars and yet they would stand before the people who brought the first fruits. and would greet them: "Our brethren, the inhabitants of so-and-so, you have come in peace." They proceed through Jerusalem while the flute is sounded until they reach the Temple Mount. When they reach the Temple Mount, each one should carry the first fruits on his shoulders67See Chapter 3, Halachah 12. and say: "Halleluyah. Praise God in His holiness" [Psalm 150:1] until [the conclusion of that psalm]: "May all the souls praise You." They proceed through the Temple Mount until they reach the Temple Courtyard. When they reach the Temple Courtyard, the Levites open with the song [Psalm 30]: "I will exalt You, for You have drawn me up..."68See Chapter 3, Halachah 13.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
It is a positive commandment to separate a portion that is raised up1This phrase translates the Hebrew terumah, for that term is also applied to challah in certain contexts. For that reason several of the laws that apply to terumah also apply to challah. from the dough [and given] to a priest,2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 133) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 385) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Rambam considers separating the dough and giving it to the priests as two parts of the same mitzvah. The Ramban, by contrast, considers them as separate mitzvot. as [Numbers 15:20] states: "Raise up the first of your dough, the challah,3The heading of this set of halachot is "The Laws of the First Fruits and the Other Presents [Given] to Priests in the Outlying Areas." In the first four chapters, the Rambam discussed the first fruits. Now he proceeds to explain the other presents. He begins with challah because it also involves grain and is also called terumah. See Radbaz. as an offering...." According to Scriptural Law, this first portion does not have a minimum measure. Instead, even if one set aside a portion the size of a barley corn, he has absolved the entire dough. When a person designates his entire dough as challah, his deeds are of no consequence unless he leaves a portion of it [for himself].4By calling it "the first," the Torah is implying that there is a second, i.e., that something is left over [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:9), based on the Jerusalem Talmud]. See also Hilchot Terumah 3:5 and note the contrast to Chapter 2, Halachah 17.
According to Rabbinic Law, one should separate one twenty-fourth of the dough, so that there will be a [significant] present for the priest. [This is derived from Deuteronomy 14:4 which] states: "Give him," i.e., give him something that is fit to be called a gift.A baker who makes a dough to be sold in the market place should separate one forty-eighth. [The rationale is that] since his dough is larger,5The Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 2:7) gives another reason for the difference in measures. Ideally, the requirement would only be one forty-eighth. Nevertheless, generally, the one separating challah from the dough is a woman and women are by nature tightfisted. If they are told to give one twenty-fourth, they will ultimately give a forty-eighth. The Siftei Cohen 322:2 gives another reason for reducing the measure required of a baker. He is preparing the dough for profit and our Sages did not desire to cause him a loss. this measure contains [enough] to be a [significant] present.
Even when a private person makes dough for [the wedding] celebration of his son, he should separate one twenty-fourth even though it is large, so as not to make a distinction in [the requirements of] a dough made by a private person.6Our Sages desired that their laws be uniform out of fear that once distinctions were made, individuals would ultimately give less than the desired amount. [Conversely,] when a baker makes a small dough, [he must separate only] one forty-eighth, so as not to make a distinction in [the requirements of] a dough made by a baker.
If a dough became impure unknowingly or because of forces beyond one's control, one need not separate more than one forty-eighth.7Challah which is impure may not be eaten by a priest and may be used only as fuel. An ordinary person may, however, partake of a loaf made from impure dough. Hence, rather than waste the dough, it is preferable to give a smaller portion as challah. If he purposefully made it impure, he must separate a twenty-fourth, so that the sinner will not benefit.8I.e. the person separating the dough would benefit from it becoming impure, because he will have to give a smaller portion to the priest.Impure challah is permitted to be used by a priest as kindling fuel like impure terumah.9See Hilchot Terumah 11:1. At present, since all dough is impure, theoretically, this is the measure which should be given (Siftei Cohen 322:3). In practice, however, at present, even impure challah is not given to a priest.
According to Scriptural law, we are only obligated to separate challah in Eretz Yisrael, as [Numbers 15:19] states: "When you partake of the bread of the land...," and only when the entire Jewish people are located there, as [ibid.:18] states: "When you enter," i.e., when you all enter and not only when a portion of you enter. For this reason, in the present era - and even in the era of Ezra10Who led the return to Zion after the Babylonian exile. in Eretz Yisrael - [the observance of] challah is only a Rabbinic decree, as we explained with regard to terumah.11See Hilchot Terumah 1:5, 26. Even the Ra'avad, who differs with the Rambam with regard to terumah, finds this position acceptable with regard to challah. See also Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 20:3.
When the produce of the Diaspora is brought to Eretz [Yisrael], challah must be separated from it.12Provided the dough is made in Eretz Yisrael. The converse applies with regard to the following clause. The dough must be made in the Diaspora (Radbaz). When produce from Eretz [Yisrael], are brought to the Diaspora, they are exempt.13The Ra'avad maintains that challah must be separated from such dough by Rabbinic decree. The Kessef Mishneh states that this is obvious from the following halachah. [This is derived from ibid.:] "to which I will bring you." [Implied is that in that land,] you are liable, whether for the produce of the land itself or for that of other lands.
Challah should also be separated in the Diaspora by Rabbinic decree so that the Jewish people will not forget the laws of challah. Challah from the Diaspora should not be brought to Eretz Yisrael, just as terumah14See Hilchot Terumah 2:17. Since the Diaspora is ritually impure by Rabbinic decree, any dough brought from there to Eretz Yisrael would be consigned to destruction. However, it should not be burnt immediately, because we do not know that it definitely contracted ritual impurity in Eretz Yisrael, and it is forbidden to burn challah unnecessarily. Nor may it be returned to the Diaspora, lest people think it is permitted to take challah from Eretz Yisrael to the Diaspora [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 4:10)]. and first fruits15See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. from there should not be brought [to Eretz Yisrael]. If one should bring [such challah], it should be left to the day before Pesach and burned16Since the dough is chametz, "leavened," it must be destroyed before the onset of the Pesach holiday. like terumah.
There are three different sets of laws that apply to challah in three different lands. In the entire area that was settled by those who returned from Babylonia until Kziv,17See Hilchot Terumah 1:8. one challah should be separated according to the appropriate measure18See Halachah 2. and the priests may partake of it. In the remaining portions of Eretz Yisrael that were settled by the Jews who came out of Egypt, but not by those who returned from Babylonia - i.e., from Kziv until Amanah19See Hilchot Terumah 1:7. - two challot should be separated. One should be burnt and one should be eaten.Why do we separate two challot there? Because the first challah is impure, because this land was not sanctified in the time of Ezra and the first sanctification was nullified after the Jews were exiled.20Thus in a strict halachic sense, this land has the status of the Diaspora. [Nevertheless,] since [the land] is from Eretz Yisrael, a challah - one forty-eighth [of the dough] is separated and is burnt. A second challah is also separated and given to a priest to eat, so that people will not say that pure terumah should be burnt. For the first challah was burnt even though it did not contract impurity in a manner that was known to all.21Since this land was once Eretz Yisrael, not everyone knows that it is impure like the Diaspora. This second challah does not have a minimum measure. Instead, one may separate whatever he desires, because it is a Rabbinic ordinance.In all of the lands from Amanah and beyond, whether in Syria22Where certain of the agricultural laws that must be observed in Eretz Yisrael are observed. See Hilchot Terumah 1:4. or other lands, two challot should be separated: One is burnt so that people should not say we saw impure terumah being eaten23For everyone knows that the Diaspora is impure. and one is eaten so that the laws of challah will not be forgotten by the Jewish people. [Since] both of these are Rabbinic institutions, it is preferable to make the one that is eaten larger.24So that food is not wasted. Accordingly, there is no minimum measure for the one that is burnt. Even the slightest amount [is acceptable]. The one which is eaten should be one forty-eighth [of the dough]. It is permitted to be eaten by zavim and zavot25A man becomes a zav when he has an emission from his urinary tract similar, but not identical to that which results from gonorrhea. A woman becomes a zavah when she experiences vaginal bleeding at times other than would be expected due to her menstrual cycle. In both cases, the individuals are ritually impure. See Leviticus, ch. 15.- and needless to say, other people who are ritually impure.26In certain instances, a distinction is made between impurity that results from a physical condition in one's body - such as the above - and other types of impurity (see Halachah 10). However, no such distinction is made here.The Ra'avad differs with this ruling and maintains that the challah is forbidden to any priest who is ritually impure, citing his statements in Hilchot Terumah 7:8.The Rambam's ruling here appears to differ from his ruling in that source. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the leniency here applies only after the priests have immersed in a mikveh. The Radbaz explains that here we are speaking about two challot, with one being burnt. Hence the one given to the priest may be eaten.
In the present age when there is no pure dough,27The shifting of this phrase from the previous halachah to this halachah is based on authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah and also makes for an easier reading of the text. because of the impurity [imparted] by a human corpse,28Which affects everyone in the present age, for we do not have a red heifer to purify ourselves. one challah - one forty-eighth [of the dough]29As is the law with regard to challah that became impure because of factors beyond one's control (Halachah 4). - is separated in all Eretz Yisrael [in the present era]. [This applies even though] it is burnt, because it is impure, since the fundamental obligation to separate it is Scriptural.30At present the obligation to separate challah in Eretz Yisrael is Rabbinic in origin (Halachah 5). Nevertheless, since the original obligation there was Scriptural, the challah that is separated must have a minimum measure even though it is burnt. As was the law in previous ages, from Kziv to Amanah, a second challah is also separated for a priest to eat.31Although at present, everyone knows that all the people living there are ritually impure, no deviation was made from the original ruling. There is no mimimum measure for it.
Although challah from the Diaspora is impure, since its fundamental requirement is a Rabbinic ordinance,32For according to Scriptural Law, there is no need to separate it. it is forbidden to be eaten only by priests who are impure because of impurity that result from a physical condition.33Because there is a more serious dimension to their ritual impurity [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 4:8)]. See also Hilchot Terumot 7:8-9. As mentioned there, the Ra'avad differs with this ruling. These include [priests] who had a seminal emission, zavim, zavot, niddot,34A woman who is impure because of menstrual bleeding. women who give birth, and people afflicted by tzara'at.35A skin malady resembling - but not entirely similar to - leprosy which renders a person ritually impure. Others who are impure because they have been in contact with other sources of impurity, even those who are impure because of contact with a corpse, are permitted to partake of it.Accordingly, if there was a priest who was a minor in the Diaspora - whether in Syria or in other lands - and one desired to separate [only] one challah, he could separate one forty-eighth of the dough. It could be eaten by a priest who is a minor who never had a seminal emission or a female from the priestly family who never menstruated. The person need not separate a second [challah].36To be burnt. Since he is not separating a second challah, the law is more stringent than in Halachah 8, which can be eaten by priests with this level of impurity (Radbaz).
Similarly, if a priest who was an adult immersed himself [in a mikveh and thus purified himself from the impurity resulting from] the emission of semen or zivut, he may partake of this first challah. Then [the one who separated it] need not separate a second challah in the Diaspora. [This applies] even though the sun has not set [after he immersed himself]37And a priest who immersed himself to emerge from ritual impurity could not partake of terumah until sunset of the day he immersed himself (Hilchot Terumah 7:4).The Rambam's ruling is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 322:5). The Rama cites the opinion of Rabbenu Nissan who requires the priest to wait until sunset. and although he remains ritually impure due to the impurity imparted by a corpse.38For purification from such impurity requires the ashes of the Red Heifer and those were not available after the destruction of the Temple.The Ra'avad differs with this ruling as well and maintains that even after immersing, such a priest may not partake of challah. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 322:3-5) quotes the Rambam's rulings in all the above matters. The Rama writes that since at present, it is not customary to partake of challah in any place, even in Eretz Yisrael, only one challah is separated. There is no minimum measure to it (although it is desirable that it be the size of an olive). This challah is burnt. Anyone who separates challah should recite the blessing: "[Blessed are You...] Who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to separate challah."39The Ra'avad states that one should conclude "to separate terumah," for challah is also referred to as terumah. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 328:1) quotes the Ra'avad's ruling. The Rama states that the Rambam's version of the blessing is also acceptable. The Turei Zahav and the Siftei Cohen 328:1 speak of a conclusion that combines both terms "to separate terumah, challah." [This applies both] in Eretz Yisrael and in the Diaspora.40Even though the obligation to separate challah in the Diaspora is only Rabbinic in origin, it is appropriate to recite a blessing, as it is appropriate to do so when fulfilling other Rabbinic commandments (Radbaz). Just as one recites a blessing when [separating challah that] is ritually pure, he should recite a blessing when separating the impure.Therefore a naked man should not separate challah, because he may not recite the blessing.41And it is not fitting to observe a mitzvah without reciting a blessing. A naked woman who is sitting with her entire genital area covered by the ground may separate challah and recite a blessing.42For her nakedness is covered by the ground. A man's, by contrast, projects outward.
A niddah and the like43I.e., the individuals who are impure because of a physical condition mentioned in Halachah 10. may recite a blessing and separate challah in the Diaspora. For she is not cautioned against touching the challah,44Although her touch would render an article ritually impure, it is ritually impure regardless because we are all impure due to contact with a human corpse. Hence, there is no difficulty with her touching it. only against partaking of it. If there is a priest who was a minor or [an adult] priest who immersed himself who is permitted to partake of it as we explained,45See Halachot 10-11. he may partake of it, [eating] together with a non-priest at the same table. [The rationale is that] it does not create a forbidden mixture,46The term midama'at used by the Rambam refers to a mixture of terumah (or challah of Scriptural status) with other substances. even if there are equal quantities of it and ordinary food.47I.e., according to Scriptural Law, the presence of a forbidden substance is nullified when it is mixed with a greater quantity of permitted substances (bittul berov). In this instance, it is not necessary to have a majority of permitted food, half and half is sufficient, for this challah is forbidden only as a Rabbinic injunction.The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that although Bechorot 27a indicates that a majority is necessary, the Rambam's ruling is based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 4:8), from which it is evident that half and half is acceptable. Moreover, the Tur (Yoreh De'ah 323) states that according to the Rambam's understanding that at the outset, it is permitted to nullify a Rabbinic prohibition, one may intentionally make such a mixture.The Rambam's ruling is cited by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 323:1). The Tur and the Rama cite Rabbenu Asher's view that, like terumah, there must be 101 times the forbidden amount before the challah is nullified. It may be given to an unlearned priest48As stated in Hilchot Terumah 6:2, an unlearned priest is unfamiliar with and/or careless in the observance of the laws of ritual purity. Hence, he is not given terumah, lest he cause it to become impure. because [the woman] is impure because of the air of the Diaspora, and the prohibition against a priest actively seeking to receive his presents49Our translation is slightly loose. The literal meaning of the Rambam's words, quoted from Bechorot 27a is "[the decree against] a priest helping in the granary does not apply to him." As stated in Hilchot Terumah 12:19, our Sages forbade that because it would appear that he is working for the terumah. Instead, the terumah should be given him in a manner that connotes respect and reverence. does not apply in this instance.If a person desires to eat first and then separate the challah in the Diaspora, he is permitted, for the fundamental obligation is Rabbinic in origin.50When the obligation is Scriptural in origin, partaking of the food on the basis of a stipulation that one will separate challah (or terumah) afterwards is forbidden. As explained in Hilchot Terumah 1:21, the principle of bereirah - that retroactively, an action performed afterwards is considered as if it was performed at the outset - applies only with regard to matters of Rabbinic Law and not with regard to matters of Scriptural Law.The Siftei Cohen 323:1 emphasizes that the leniencies in this halachah apply only with regard to challah from the Diaspora, for there never was an obligation to separate it according to Scriptural Law. Although, at present, separating challah in Eretz Yisrael is also a Rabbinic obligation, since originally the obligation was Scriptural, none of these leniencies are granted.
Challah is called terumah. Therefore it may only be separated from [dough] in the same location51Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:9). like terumah.52See Hilchot Terumah 3:17. And as an initial preference, one may not separate pure [dough as challah] for impure dough.53See Hilchot Terumah 5:7. After the fact, however, the separation is effective.
All of those individuals concerning whom it was said they should not separate terumah and if they separate it, the separation is invalid,54A deaf-mute, a mentally or emotionally unstable person, a minor, a gentile who separated terumah from produce belonging to a Jew, even with his permission, and a person who separated terumah from produce that does not belong to him without the owner's permission (Hilchot Terumah 4:2). are governed by the same laws with regard to challah. In all situations concerning which it was said that terumah should not be separated from this type of produce for another,55See Hilchot Terumah, ch. 5. challah should also not be separated. Whoever may not partake of terumah,56A non-priest and an impure person. may not partake of challah. Whoever may partake of terumah57A priest, his wife, and his servants. may partake of challah.
A blind person and an intoxicated person58We are speaking of a person who is still in control of his faculties, but whose judgment is slightly blurred. If he loses control of his faculties entirely, he is considered as an emotionally unstable person. See Hilchot Mechirah 29:18. may separate challah as an initial preference. For with regard to dough, there is no inferior or superior portions that he must distinguish and separate from the superior portion.59I.e., with regard to terumah, such individuals are told not to separate terumah as an initial preference, because terumah must be separated from the superior produce and they are incapable of making that distinction (Hilchot Terumah 4:4). Nevertheless, this rationale does not apply with regard to challah.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
One who purchases bread from a baker is obligated [to separate] challah.1The commentaries raise a question concerning this ruling, because seemingly, the baker should separate challah himself. Moreover, because of the severity of the prohibition of challah, the common people were not considered suspect to refrain from making this separation.The Radbaz explains that we are speaking about an instance where the baker told the purchaser to separate challah, alternatively, an instance where the baker is suspect not to separate challah. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the responsibility for the baker to separate challah applies only when the challah is ritually pure. Since it will be eaten by the priest, it is appropriate that the baker separate it. When, by contrast, it is impure and must be burnt, it should be separated by the purchaser. He may separate a portion from bread freshly taken from the oven for bread that has cooled or from bread that has cooled for bread freshly taken from the oven. [This applies] even with regard to many trays of bread.2Difusim, translated as "trays," literally means "molds." In the Talmudic era, bread was baked in various molds so that the loaves would be shaped differently. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:3), the Rambam explains that there was an opinion which forbade separating challah from one tray for another lest the flour used to bake the different breads was from different years.
The obligation [to separate] challah applies only to [dough from] the five species of grain: wheat barley, rye, oats, and spelt,3I.e., whether the dough is made from each of the species individually or a combination of any of the five, as stated in Halachah 15. as [implied by Numbers 15:19]: "When you partake of the bread of the land." The term "bread" refers only to a loaf made from these five species.4The Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 1:1) derives this concept because there is an association between challah and matzah. Matzah may only be made from these five species, for they are the only species that can become leaven. Hence, it is these five to which the mitzvah of challah applies. See Halachah 11 which discusses the laws that apply when a dough is made using one of these grains and other species. If, however, one makes bread from rice, millet, or other legumes, there is no obligation of challah at all.
Although there is no obligation to separate terumah from leket, shichachah, pe'ah,5These mitzvot refer to grain left for the poor. grain which is ownerless,6When the grain was left by its owner, it was ownerless and hence, there were no agricultural obligations incumbent upon it. Now, however, that someone took possession of it, those obligations do apply. and grain which did not reach a third of its growth,7Because at this point it is not considered as grain yet. See Hilchot Ma'aser 2:3-5. Nevertheless, since a dough made from such grain will become leaven, there is an obligation to separate challah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bikkurim 1:4)]. there is an obligation to separate challah from these. Similarly, there is an obligation to separate challah [from dough made from grain in the following circumstances]: the tithes were separated from the grain early while it was still stalks8Before it was threshed; see Hilchot Terumah3:13, Hilchot Ma'aser 3:19. and terumat ma'aser was separated from it, even though the portion of the great terumah is still included in it,9For as stated in Hilchot Terumah, op. cit., there is no obligation to separate terumah from such grain. And since there is no obligation to separate terumah, one might think that one is also exempt from the obligation to separate challah [grain that was from] the second tithe or consecrated property that was redeemed, the extra [portions of barley harvested for] the omer offering,10As explained in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:11-12, three se'ah of barley would be harvested for the omer offering. That barley was then made into flour, sifted and refined until only an isaron (a far smaller measure) was selected for the omer offering. The remainder of the barley was redeemed and could be used for mundane purposes. the two loaves [prepared to be offered on Shavuot], and [the loaves prepared for] the showbread11This refers to the extra flour which had been set aside for the two loaves or the showbread, like the remainder of the barley mentioned in the previous note, it could be redeemed and then used for mundane purposes. which were redeemed.12In all these instances, since the dough was prepared after it was redeemed, it is considered as bread belonging to an ordinary person. Hence, the obligation to tithe it applies (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh).
When a dough was made from grain from the second tithe in Jerusalem13Although produce of the second tithe is "the property of the Most High," in Jerusalem, it is permitted to be eaten by ordinary people. Hence, challah must be separated from the dough (Radbaz). or from grain from the Sabbatical year,14Like the ownerless produce mentioned in the previous halachah, at present, it is the property of the person who took it as his own. Hence, there is an obligation to separate challah. or when there is a doubt whether the dough was made from a mixture of terumah and ordinary produce,15Although there is a possibility that the produce is a mixture of terumah and ordinary produce which is exempt as stated in the following clause, there is also a possibility that this is only ordinary produce in which instance, an obligation does apply. there is an obligation to separate challah. A mixture of terumah and ordinary produce is exempt from the obligation of challah.16The Radbaz states that this law applies only in the present era when the obligation to separate challah is of Rabbinic origin. In that instance, the prohibition of a mixture of terumah offsets the obligation to separate challah, for they are both Rabbinic safeguards. If, however, the obligation to separate challah is Scriptural in origin, it would take precedence.
The loaves for the thanksgiving offering17Together with the thanksgiving offering, 40 loaves (10 each of four types) were offered. and the wafers for the nazirite offering18Together with the ram, a nazirite offered 30 loaves (10 each of three types). See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:12-24 for a description of these loaves. which a person made for himself19To bring as part of his offering, rather than to sell to someone else. are exempt from the obligation of challah, for they are sanctified.20And challah need only be separated from a person's private property, not from consecrated property (Menachot 67a). [If they were made] to sell in the market place to nazirites and to those bringing thanksgiving offerings, there is an obligation to separate challah, since [the baker] has the intent that if they are not sold [for sacrificial purposes], he will eat them.
There is an obligation to separate challah from a dough made for partners21This applies even if the dough is not large enough that each of the partners will receive a portion the size of an olive (Radbaz). Even though they intend to separate the bread after it is baked, as long as they do not intend to separate the dough, they are obligated to separate challah (Siftei Cohen 326:1). and a dough made for many people.22We are speaking about a situation where a person bakes bread in order to give it to many people. He does not, however, declare the bread ownerless. Were he to do so, there would be no obligation to separate challah, as stated in Chapter 8, Halachah 6.
When a person makes dough using grain that is tevel - whether the challah is separated before terumah or the terumah separated before challah - what he did is effective.23I.e., even though he should have separated the terumah before the dough was made, after the fact, his separation is effective If he separated the challah first, he should not partake of it until he separates terumah and terumat ma'aser for it. If he separated terumah first, he should not partake of it until he separates challah.24The Radbaz questions why the Rambam does not mention the second tithe, for in the years that there is an obligation to separate it, one may not partake of the produce until it is separated.
When a person makes a dough with the intent25The Radbaz states that the law depends on the intent of the person making the dough and not what it is eventually used for. of feeding the bread baked from it to a domesticated animal or a wild animal, it is exempt from challah.26For the mitzvah applies only to dough prepared for human consumption. There is an obligation to separate challah from a dough made for dogs27A dough made without bran being separated from the flour which is thus usually not intended for human consumption [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:8)]. which is eaten by the shepherds.28Since the shepherds also intend to partake of it, it is considered as intended for human consumption and challah must be separated from the entire dough, even from the portion intended for the dogs. A dough made by a gentile is exempt from challah.29Menachot 67a derives this from the fact that Numbers 15:20, the prooftext for the obligation of challah, speaks of "the first of your dough," i.e., the dough of a Jew and not of a gentile.
If a gentile and a Jew were partners in a dough and the portion owned by the Jew was large enough to be liable for challah, it is liable for challah.30The Radbaz maintains that the Jew may separate challah from the entire dough, even from the gentile's portion.
When a gentile separates challah even in Eretz Yisrael, it is not challah. Instead, we inform him that he does not have to [observe this mitzvah. The dough separated] may be eaten by a non-priest.31Because there is no holiness associated with it.Why do we not suspect that maybe the dough belonged to a Jew and he gave it to a gentile so that it will be exempt?32I.e., the Jew thought that if he gave the dough to a gentile to prepare, it would be exempt and the gentile desired to separate challah from it. The Radbaz states that although generally we do not suspect that a prohibition is being violated, there is room to do so in this instance, because otherwise, why would the gentile think of separating challah. Because if a Jew wanted to exempt himself he could do so by making his dough smaller than the required measure.33As stated in Halachah 15.
[The following laws apply when a person] mixes flour from wheat34Or any other of the five species of grain mentioned in Halachah 2. and rice flour35The Turei Zahav 324:9 states this law applies to rice and not to other species, because rice takes on the flavor of wheat. and makes a dough: If it has the flavor of grain, challah must be separated from it.36This applies even if quantitatively, there is more rice than wheat. For the wheat is considered as dominant.The Ra'avad states that this ruling applies only when there is enough wheat in the dough to establish an obligation. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that the Rambam does not make such a distinction. The difference of opinion between them centers on the interpretation of the Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 3:5). The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 324:9) quotes the Rambam's wording without any further qualification. There is a similar disagreement between the Rambam and the Ra'avad with regard to matzah made from wheat and rice. See Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 6:5. If not, it is exempt. Even if one placed yeast37Yeast is singled out, because a small amount of yeast can affect an entire dough. from wheat38The Ra'avad states that this applies when the yeast is taken from a dough from which challah had not been separated. The Radbaz, however, states that it is possible that the Rambam does not accept that conclusion. In this instance as well, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 324:10) quotes the Rambam's ruling without further qualification. into a dough from rice, one is obligated to separate challah from it if it has the flavor of wheat. If it does not have that flavor, it is exempt.
There is an obligation to separate challah in all [the following instances]:39All of the instances mentioned in the first clause of the halachah are not bread in the simple sense. Nevertheless, they are all considered as dough within the context of this mitzvah. a dough that was kneaded with wine, oil, or honey,40Even though no water was mixed into it [Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 329:9)]. or with boiling water, or one in which spices where placed, water was boiled and flour was placed inside of it and a dough was kneaded. [And challah must be separated when] dough was baked whether in an oven or [in a pit] in the earth,41Since ultimately the dough was baked, the fact that the flour was boiled first is not significant (Siftei Cohen 329:8). whether in a frying pan or a deep pan, whether first one attached the dough to the frying pan or the deep pan and then heated them with fire from below until the loaf was baked or one heated them first and then attached the dough.If, however, one made a dough to dry it in the sun alone or to cook it in a pot, it is exempt from challah, for [dough cooked] in the sun is not bread whether it was kneaded with water or other liquids.42Similarly, dough boiled in water is not considered as bread, but as cooked food. Similarly, roasted grain that was kneaded whether with water or honey and which is eaten without being baked is exempt, for the obligation of challah applies only to a dough that will ultimately be baked as bread for human consumption.
When a dough was first kneaded to make a dough to be cooked in the sun and then the person completed making it for a loaf of bread, or he began making it to bake bread and completed it to cook it in the sun and similarly, when roasted flour was kneaded to bake a loaf of bread, there is an obligation to separate challah.43As long as there was an intent to use the dough for bread at one stage in its preparation, challah must be separated.
When bread was baked to be used for kutach,44A mixture of whey and bread crumbs used as a dip. the manner in which it is made indicates the intent. If it was made as cakes, there is an obligation to separate challah.45This shape indicates that he may change his mind and serve the cakes as bread. If he made it in strips, it is exempt from challah.46This indicates that he is not intending to serve the strips as bread, but will indeed crumble them and use them for kutach.
What is the minimum measure of dough from which we are obligated to separate challah? An entire omer of flour,47Our Sages derived this measure as follows: Numbers 15:19 states: "You shall separate the first of your dough as challah." As Exodus 16:16 relates the amount of manna allotted to each individual in the desert was an omer. Hence we use that as the size of the required measure of dough (Eruvin 83b). whether from one of the five species or from all five together, for they are all combined to reach the minimum measure.What is the measure of an omer? One fifth [of a kab] less than two kabbin. A kab is four lugim and a log is four revi'iot.48A revi'it is approximately 86cc according to Shiurei Torah and approximately 150 cc according to Chazon Ish. Thus a log is 344 or 600 cc, a kab 1376 or 2400 cc, and the measure of the dough from which challah must be separated is 2500 (because the above figures are approximations) or 4320 cc. A revi'it is the volume of a cube two fingerbreadths by two fingerbreadths by a height of two and seven tenths fingerbreadths. A fingerbreadth refers to the width of a thumb.Thus an omer is a measure that is ten fingerbreadths by ten fingerbreadths by a height of approximately 3 and one ninth fingerbreadths. Similarly, a cube with each side six and seven ninths fingerbreadths produces a measure of an omer.How much does this measure contain? The volume of 43 and 1/5 eggs. This is equivalent to the weight of 86 2/3 selaim of Egyptian wheat flour.49Shiurei Torah writes that a blessing should be recited when separating challah from a dough made from 3 pounds and 10 ¾ ounces of flour and one should be stringent and separate challah from a dough made from 2 pounds and 10.1 ounces of flour. This is equivalent to 520 zuz of Egyptian zuzim at present. A measure that comprises such a weight of wheat is used universally to measure for the separation of challah.
It is forbidden for a person to make his dough less than the minimum measure50I.e., less than the measure described in the previous halachah. in order to free it from the obligation of challah.51This applies even though he is ritually impure and he knows that he will be separating the dough to have it burnt (Challah 2:3). The Turei Zahav 324:17 and the Siftei Cohen 324:25 emphasize that this applies only when the person's intent in making the loaf small is that he will not have to separate challah. If he has another intent, his actions are not sanctioned. When a person separates challah from a dough that is smaller than the prescribed measure, his actions are of no consequence and the dough is ordinary dough as before.When a person made a dough that is less than the prescribed measure, baked it, and put the loaf in a basket, baked another loaf52Which was also less than the prescribed measure. and put it in the basket, and [continued doing this] until a measure from which challah [must be separated] was collected in the basket, the basket joins them together [as a single entity, establishing an obligation for] challah.53This applies even though the loaves themselves are not joined together. One of the examples of the separation of challah with which many are familiar - the separation of challah from matzah - employs this principle. He must separate challah from the bread. This is derived [from the prooftext mentioned above]: "When you partake of the bread of the land." [The verse] teaches that one should separate [challah] from [bread] that is baked. An oven, [however,] does not join loaves together [to create an obligation to separate] challah.54I.e., if small loaves are baked together in an oven, but taken out separately, there is no obligation to separate challah.
If [small] loaves were joined together and a quantity equal to the measure of challah was gathered together, there is an obligation to separate challah.55Even though at the time the dough was made, there was not a sufficient quantity to require the separation of challah. [This applies] even if they are not placed in a basket [together].56The fact that they are joined is sufficient for them to be considered as a singled entity. If one baked loaves a little bit at a time and gathered together the entire quantity on a board that does not have a cavity,57In contrast to the basket mentioned in the previous halachah. there is a doubt regarding [the matter].58Pesachim 48b mentions an unresolved difference of opinion concerning this question among the Sages. If [the obligation to separate] challah is of Rabbinic origin,59Like the challah separated in the present era, as stated Chapter 5, Halachah 5. one is not obligated to separate it until they are gathered in a container with a cavity.60For we follow the principle: When there is a doubt regarding a Rabbinic obligation, we rule leniently (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh).The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 325:1) writes that if one places the bread on a board and then covers it with a cloth, there is an authority who requires the separation of challah. The Siftei Cohen 325:5 questions why the Shulchan Aruch uses the expression "there is an authority...," in as much as this principle is universally accepted.
When flour was not sifted, but instead kneaded together with its bran, since the entire measure of the flour61I.e., the flour together with the bran, even though the flour alone is not of sufficient quantity to require challah to be separated. comprises an omer, there is an obligation [to separate] challah.62For a poor person will eat bread made from coarse flour containing bran (Shabbat 76b). If, however, one removed the bran from the flour and then completed the [required] measure of dough by returning the bran to the flour, there is no obligation to separate challah.63The Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 2:6) explains that this is derived from Numbers 15:21 that speaks of "your dough," i.e., the way dough is ordinarily made.
When a baker64According to the Rambam, this halachah pertains to a baker and not to ordinary individuals. The laws pertaining to them are mentioned in the following halachah. makes a dough to become yeast and divide it up,65To sell to others to use the yeast to leaven other doughs without this dough being baked. there is an obligation [to separate] challah, for if it is not sold, he will use it as bread. If, however, one makes a dough to divide it while dough,66So that he will be baking smaller portions and not be obligated to separate challah. it is exempt.
[The following law applies when] women67I.e., private individuals who will use the yeast for themselves and not for commercial purposes. give flour to a baker to make yeast. If none of them individually [gave enough flour to make a dough] that comprises the required measure - even though [the dough made from the flour which] they all [gave] does - it is exempt.68Because the dough is not being made to be baked as bread, but to be divided as dough. Since it is being made for private individuals, the Rambam maintains that there is little likelihood that they will change their minds and have it baked. Even though the women did not give their flour to the baker together, the fact that he made a dough from them would have caused an obligation for challah had the intent been to bake the dough. Moreover, the Rama (Yoreh De'ah 326:3) rules that if the women consent to having their flour mixed in a larger dough, an obligation to separate challah is created.The Ra'avad maintains that if one woman makes dough to use as yeast, the law mentioned with regard to a baker in the previous halachah applies to her and she is required to separate challah. Here the leniency is granted because several women are involved. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh argue against the Ra'avad's conclusion and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 326:2) states that the stringency applies to a baker and not to an ordinary person.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
[The following laws apply when] there are two doughs that when combined comprise the measure that obligates the separation of challah, but neither comprises that measure alone should they touch each other and become attached to each other.1The Radbaz emphasizes that touching each other is not sufficient; the two doughs must become attached. See Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 325:1). If they belong to two individuals,2Who are not partners (Siftei Cohen 326:1). they are exempt from challah even though they are of the same type of grain.3See the following halachah which distinguishes between doughs made from one type and those made from two. See also Chapter 6, Halachot 16-17, which deal with the issues mentioned in this and the following halachot. [The rationale is that] we assume that the two people object [to the combination of their doughs].4Thus even if they were kneaded together, since they were intended to be separated, they are considered as distinct entities. If it is known that they would not object to the combination of their doughs, they are considered as one.
[Different rules apply if] the two belonged to one person. If they were from one type [of grain], they are combined and challah is obligated to be separated from them. If they are from two types, they are not combined. [The rationale is that] we assume that one person does not object [to the combination of his doughs].5Since they both belong to him and are of the same type of grain, why would he object to their combination?This, however, applies only when the two doughs are types that would normally be mixed together. If they would not be normally mixed, even if they are owned by one person, this principle does not apply [Shulchan Aruch and Rama (Yoreh De'ah 326:1)]. If he objects [to their combination and endeavors] that one dough not touch the other or become mixed with it, they are not considered as one, even if they are of one type of grain.
What is meant by the statement that if they belonged to one person and were from the same type [of grain] they are combined? When a dough from wheat touches6And becomes attached. This applies to all the other instances when touching doughs are mentioned in this chapter. a dough from spelt, they are combined.7Although they are from different species, since they are of the same general type (for the doughs made from the two are similar, see Chapter 8, Halachah 4), they are combined. If it touched [a dough from] another type of grain,8I.e., barley, oats, or rye. they are not combined.9Despite the fact that if the different species of grain are mixed in the same dough, they are combined, as stated in the following halachah. Similarly, if a dough of barley touches a dough of spelt,10Although spelt is often associated with wheat (ibid.), its dough can be combined with that of rye. oats, or rye, or doughs of spelt, oats, or rye touch each other, they can be combined.11The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 324:2) mentions the Rambam's perspective as a minority ruling, favoring the opinion of Rabbenu Asher who maintains that rye can be combined with barley and with spelt, but not with oats or wheat. And oats can be combined with barley and spelt, but not with rye or wheat.
A dough from grain from one year should not be combined with a dough from grain from the previous year even though they are of the same species. [This is a decree,] lest people say that terumah may be separated from new grain for old grain.12See Hilchot Terumah 10:18. A person should not separate [the challah] from the middle of the two.13I.e., taking a portion of both of the two doughs. This advice was given by Rabbi Yishmael (Challah 4:4). Instead, he should bring another dough - either from this year or the previous - and combine it with them to complete the required measure.14I.e., placing the doughs of new grain on either side of the dough of old grain or the doughs of old grain on either side of the dough from new grain. Since the person will see that he is adding an extra dough, he will not err and think that one may separate terumah from new grain for old grain [Kessef Mishneh; Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 324:8); see Halachah 6]. The Radbaz offers a different explanation.When does the above apply? When one dough touches another. If, however, one mixes flour from the species of grain and makes a single dough from one of them, the five are combined to comprise the measure of dough required for challah, as we explained.15Chapter 6, Halachah 15.
When there is a dough that is less than the required measure on one side and another dough less than the required measure on the other side,16The two doughs on the sides are of the same type of grain and together, they comprise the required measure. and a dough that is exempt from challah in the middle - e.g., a dough of rice, a dough of terumah [flour] or from terumah [flour] that was mixed with ordinary flour, or a dough from a gentile17See Chapter 6, Halachot 2-4, 9-10, which mention the exemption of these doughs. - [the doughs] are not combined even though they touch each other.18I.e., the two external doughs touch the middle dough. If, however, the two external doughs are touching, challah must be separated from them. [The rationale is that] an entity that is exempt from challah separates in the middle.
When, by contrast, there is a dough from which challah was separated between them, [the two outer doughs] can be combined, because originally, there was an obligation to separate challah from the dough in the center.19In all the instances mentioned in this halachah, the governing principle is that even if the dough in the center cannot be combined with those on the side (as explained in Halachot 1-4), since it is fit to require the separation of challah, it does not prevent the doughs on the side from being combined. Similarly, if a dough that was consecrated was in the center, they are combined, [because that dough] is fit to be redeemed20This is speaking about a dough that was not consecrated until after it was made. If it was consecrated before it was rolled together, it is not fit to be redeemed. See Chapter 8, Halachot 6-7. [at which point,] there will be an obligation to separate challah from it. Similarly, if there was a dough of another type of grain, a dough belonging to another person, or a dough from a different year between them, the doughs on the sides are combined [to comprise an obligation to separate] challah.
There were two doughs, each one of them less than the minimum measure for challah. One separated challah from each of them. Afterwards, they touched each other and [the combined doughs] comprise the [required] measure. There is an obligation to separate challah [from the combined doughs], for the challot separated originally are of no consequence.21As stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 16.
Two gentiles22In contrast to two Jews or a Jew and a gentile, as explained in the following halachot. made a dough comprising the required measure [for challah]23Since they were gentiles (see Chapter 6, Halachah 8) at the time the obligation to separate challah could have taken effect, the mitzvah of challah is not relevant to them at all . Hence, the exemption because the dough was made with the intent that it be divided into small portions (see ibid. 19) is not significant. and divided it. Afterwards, they converted24If, however, they divided the dough after they converted, there is no obligation to separate challah even if they added to the dough. For in such an instance, they would be comparable to the two Jews mentioned in the following halachah (Rambam LeAm). and after the conversion, each one added to his portion until it comprised the [required] measure. There is an obligation [to separate] challah. [The rationale is that] there was no time that it was of the size obligating [challah] while they were gentiles, because each was to receive less than the required measure.25Hence we do not say - as is said with regard to the following halachah - since the dough was exempt at the time when it could have been obligated, it cannot become obligated again.
If, however, two Jews made [a dough] in the above manner and then, they divided it and each one of them added to his portion26The Siftei Cohen 326:8 emphasizes that for this law to apply the addition must be less than the size that obligates the separation of challah. until it comprised the required measure, it is exempt. [The rationale is that] there was a time when there would have been an obligation [to separate challah from the original dough]27Had it belonged to one person. and they were exempt at that time, because the dough was made to be divided.28And since the obligation was not incurred at the time it could have been incurred originally, it cannot be incurred afterwards.The Ra'avad objects to this ruling. He admits that it appears to have a source in the Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 3:4), but argues that logically, it is hard to distinguish this from a situation where a person made a dough smaller than the required size and then attached it to a dough of the required size (see Chapter 6, Halachah 16). Hence, he rules that both Jews should separate challah from the dough after they increased its size.The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's ruling, differentiating between the two instances by explaining that when a dough is smaller than the required size, it has never reached a state where the obligation to separate challah relates to it. In contrast, in the instance described here, the dough was of the size that obligates the separation of challah and it was exempted. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 326:4) quotes the Rambam's view.
[Different rules apply when], by contrast, the dough was owned by a gentile and a Jew in partnership and they divided it.29The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that this is speaking about a situation where the two had not originally intended to divide their dough and then decided to divide it. Had they originally intended to divide it, it would be necessary to separate challah from the portion belonging to the convert as well. If, afterwards, the gentile converted and then added to his portion and the Jew added to his portion until each one of them completed the measure that requires the separation of challah, there is an obligation to separate challah from the dough of the Jew,30In contrast to the situation mentioned in the previous halachah, the dough was not originally intended to be divided. Hence, since the gentile has a portion in it, while it is whole, it is not considered as if the mitzvah of challah relates to it. Thus the Jew's portion of the dough was never of the size that requires the separation of challah and when he increases its size, an obligation is created (Radbaz). but the dough of the gentile31I.e., the convert. is exempt.32Since originally, the gentile's involvement in the dough caused his portion to be exempted, when he adds to it, it is not liable, based on the principle explained above. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that there is an obligation to separate challah from both doughs. For just as the mitzvah of challah is not considered as relating to the Jew's dough, it also does not relate to the gentile's dough. Hence, when he adds to it after his conversion, the obligation takes effect. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh favor the Rambam's understanding and it is quoted as halachah by Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 330:6).
[The following laws apply when a person] takes yeast from a dough from which challah was not separated and places it in a dough from which challah was separated. He should bring a second dough that - together with this yeast - will comprise a measure that obligates the separation of challah and combine it with the dough from which challah was separated.33This is preferable to separating challah from the dough with which the yeast was mixed, because a) it will represent a saving for the person separating the challah, since he will not be separating challah a second time; b) it is not desirable to separate challah from the first dough, because the obligation to separate challah from it is Rabbinic, not Scriptural, as will be explained. He should then separate from the second dough the appropriate measure of challah for it and for the yeast. [In this manner,] he is separating [challah] from [dough] that is in the same place.34As is required (Chapter 5, Halachah 14). That is why the second dough must be combined with the first dough into which the yeast was placed. If he does not have a second dough, the entire [first dough] is considered as tevel. He should separate challah for the entire amount.35The combination of the yeast and the dough. [The rationale is that] when tevel36The yeast. is mixed with its own type,37And yeast and dough are considered of the same type. even the slightest amount causes the mixture to become forbidden.38This is a Rabbinic decree, according to Scriptural Law, the presence of tevel is also nullified when there is a majority of permitted substances. Our Sages considered tevel as a devar sheyeish lo matirin, a prohibition that could be released, since once the necessary separations are made, the prohibition no longer exists. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:6. Hence, he is not considered to be separating challah from dough that is obligated for that which is exempt (Siftei Cohen 324:20).
A dough from which challah has not been separated is like ordinary produce and not like challah with regard to the laws of ritual purity. As will be explained in the appropriate place,39Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTuma'ah 11:2, 15. impurity of the second degree does not bring about impurity of the third degree with regard to ordinary produce.40It does, however, have such an effect with regard to terumah and challah.It is permitted to cause ordinary produce to contract ritual impurity in Eretz Yisrael.41See Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 16:9. There the Rambam differentiates between produce from which the appropriate agricultural separations have been made and produce from which they have not been made (as in the present instance). If the separations have already been made, one may bring it into direct contact with ritual impurity. If they have not been made, one may only "cause it to contract ritual impurity," i.e., indirectly. Therefore when there are two doughs, one that is ritually impure and one that is ritually pure, one may take [a portion of dough]42Which is ritually pure. equivalent to the measure of challah to be separated from both of them from a dough from which challah was not separated and place it in the center close to the pure dough. He should then extend a portion of the impure dough the size of an egg43Challah 2:8 gives this suggestion, but speaks of taking less than the size of an egg of the impure dough, for in that manner, the other dough will not become impure. to the pure dough44Causing it to touch it. This will cause the pure dough to become ritually impure (see Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 6:18). Nevertheless, this is not significant, because - as the Rambam stated - there is no prohibition against causing food to become ritually impure. so that he will be able to separate challah45The dough set aside to be separated as challah does not become ritually impure, because until it becomes consecrated as challah, it does not become impure because it was touched by dough that was impure to the second degree. And before it is consecrated as challah, it is lifted up and no longer in contact with the source of ritual impurity. To clarify this, the Rambam began this halachah: "A dough from which challah has not been separated is like ordinary produce and... impurity of the second degree does not bring about impurity of the third degree with regard to ordinary produce" (Radbaz). from the dough in the same place.46Ordinarily to separate challah for two doughs in the same place, it is not necessary for them to touch. Nevertheless, since one should not separate challah from dough that is ritually pure for dough that is ritually impure (Chapter 5, Halachah 14), in this instance, they must be touching.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, based on Challah 2:8, but the Radbaz explains the Rambam's position as above.
A person may make a pure dough and refrain from separating challah from it, setting it - or a portion of it - aside to continuously separate challot from other doughs with it until the dough set aside becomes challah in its entirety,47I.e., the person would consider an appropriate portion of the dough set aside as challah for a given dough and would continue doing this for future doughs until the entire dough that was set aside became challah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 4:6)]. provided [the dough set aside] does not become spoiled to the point that it is no longer fit for human consumption. [This applies] even if the doughs became impure. Once the dough is no longer fit for human consumption, [challah] cannot be separated with it.When does the above apply? When there is a question whether or not challah has been separated from the doughs for which he is separating challah.48E.g., two witnesses stated that challah had been separated from the dough and two other witnesses state that it was not separated. [The rationale is that] challah of a doubtful status49Here the demai is being used differently than its ordinary meaning. For unlike the tithes, it is taken for granted that the common people separate challah just as they separate terumah (Radbaz; see Chapter 8, Halachah 14). may be taken from the pure dough for the impure as an initial preference50Generally, the initial preference is not to separate challah from dough that is ritually pure for dough that is ritually impure (Chapter 5, Halachah 14). and the two need not be in the same place.51And generally, they must (ibid.).

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
When a person separates challah from flour, it is not challah.1It is permitted to be eaten by a non-priest. Rashi (Kiddushin 46b) explains that the rationale for this law is that the prooftext requiring the separation of challah mentions "your dough," i.e., the obligation is incurred only when dough is made.The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 327:1) clarify that this law applies when the person desires that the flour be considered as challah while it is still flour. If, however, he stipulates: "May it be considered challah when a dough is made from it," when it is made into a dough, his statement takes effect. [The flour given] the priest is like stolen property in his possession2The priest is obligated to return it to the person who gave it to him. This applies even if the one who gave it is a Torah scholar who knows that flour cannot be separated as challah. Although one could assume that he was giving the flour to the priest as a gift, it must be returned lest the priest think that it was challah and not separate challah from the dough he makes from it (Kiddushin 46b; Turei Zahav 327:1). and there is an obligation [to separate] challah from a dough [made from] the remainder [of the flour].3Since the first separation is of no consequence. If the flour set aside [mistakenly] as challah is an omer in measure4I.e., it was of the measure from which we are required to separate challah. and a dough was made from it, one must separate challah from it as [is necessary with regard to doughs made] from any ordinary flour.
When should challah be set aside? When one adds water and mixes the flour with the water, he should set aside [a portion as] challah from the first portion that is kneaded, as [indicated by Numbers 15:20:] "From the first of your dough."5The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, stating that it is undesirable to separate challah in this manner, for as indicated by Halachah 4, the obligation to separate challah has not taken effect yet. Based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Pesachim 3:3), the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that the statements in this halachah are a safeguard against the dough becoming ritually impure. From the time the water is mixed with the flour, it is permitted to separate the challah and one may do so if he is worried that the dough will become ritually impure. It is, however, preferable to wait until the dough is thoroughly mixed as stated in Halachah 4. Certainly, this applies in the present era when there is no need to take safeguards against ritual impurity [Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 327:3)][The above applies] provided a measure of flour equal to an omer6I.e., it was of the measure from which we are required to separate challah. that has not become mixed with water does not remain in the kneading trough.7For then the dough made from that flour would have a separate obligation. When, by contrast, there is less than that measure, it is considered as ancillary to the initial dough. If he stipulates: "This is challah for the dough, for the yeast, and for the flour that remains. When it all becomes one dough, the portion set aside will become sanctified as challah," it is permitted.8This applies even if an omer of flour remains. Since he can easily mix the dough, he can make a stipulation that will take effect when he actually mixes it together. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 327:2) states that it is desirable to teach women who separate challah to make this stipulation.
If the person left the dough [intact] until it was all kneaded and mixed together and separated [the challah] afterwards, [the delay] is of no consequence. If he does not separate challah while the mixture is a dough, but bakes the entire dough, he should separate [challah] from the loaf, as we explained.9Chapter 6, Halachah 16.
When does the obligation [to separate] challah from dough take effect? When the wheat [flour] was rolled into a ball and [all of] the flour becomes mixed with it or when the barley [flour] was made into a single mass and formed one block. One may snack from the dough until the wheat [flour] was rolled into a ball or the barley [flour] was made into a single mass.10After the obligation to separate challah takes effect, however, it is forbidden to snack from the dough. It is considered as tevel and one is liable as stated in the following halachah. The laws pertaining to wheat [flour] pertain to spelt [flour] and those pertaining to barley [flour] pertain to oat and rye [flour].11For spelt flour has characteristics similar to wheat flour, and rye and oats to barley.
Once the wheat [flour] was rolled into a ball or the barley [flour] was made into a single mass, one who partakes of it before challah was separated is liable for death [at the hand of heaven], because it is tevel.12See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:19; Hilchot Ma'aser 1:5; 9:2. Therefore, if there is a Scriptural obligation [to separate] challah from the dough, a person who partakes of it is liable for lashes, as is anyone who partakes of tevel.13Hilchot Sanhedrin 18:1. This applies when he is given a warning before transgressing. If the obligation is Rabbinic in origin, [a person who partakes of the dough] is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct.
When a dough from ordinary flour becomes mixed with flour that is terumah14And thus challah need not be separated from it. before [all the flour] was rolled into a ball, it is exempt [from the obligation of challah].15As stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 4. This applies only in the present era when the obligation to separate challah is Rabbinic in origin (Radbaz). When it becomes mixed with it after it was rolled into a ball, there is an obligation [to separate challah].16Because the obligation to separate challah from the dough had already taken effect.Similarly, if a person consecrates a dough or declares it ownerless17There is no obligation to separate challah from dough that is consecrated. Once, however, the consecrated dough is redeemed, challah must be separated. When a person makes dough from flour that was ownerless which he acquired, he must separate challah from it. See Chapter 6, Halachot 3 and 5. before it was rolled into a ball and then redeemed it or took possession of it and rolled it into a ball - alternatively, he consecrated it or declared it ownerless after it was rolled into a ball18In which instance, the obligation to separate challah had already taken effect before it was consecrated or declared ownerless. - there is an obligation [to separate] challah.
If he consecrated it before he rolled it and it was rolled in the possession of the Temple treasury and afterwards, he redeemed it, it is exempt. For at the time the obligation would have taken effect, [the dough] was exempt.19Because it was consecrated.
Similarly, if a gentile gave [flour] to a Jew to make a dough for him and then gave him [the dough] as a present. If he gave it to him [as a present] before it was rolled into a ball, he is liable.20Because the obligation to separate challah took effect when the dough belonged to the Jew. [If he gave it to him] after it was rolled into a ball, it is exempt.21For at the time the obligation to separate challah was to take effect, the dough belonged to the gentile and was exempt.
[The following laws apply when] a convert joins the Jewish faith. If he had a dough that was rolled into a ball before he converted, it is exempt.22Because at the time the obligation to separate challah was to take effect, the convert had not converted and was not obligated to separate challah. If it was rolled afterwards, there is an obligation [to separate challah]. If there is a doubt [concerning the matter], there is an obligation, [because eating bread from which challah was not separated] is a transgression punishable by death [at the hand of heaven].23The Rambam adds this explanation (based on Chullin 134a), because generally, we would follow the principle: "When one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him" (see Chapter 9, Halachah 13). Nevertheless, in this instance, because of the severity of the transgression, challah should be separated. The Turei Zahav 330:3 and the Siftei Cohen 330:8 note that in the present age, when there is a question whether of not challah has been separated, one is exempt, for at present the observance of the mitzvah of challah is Rabbinic in origin. On this basis, the Sifei Cohen questions why this law is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 330:5), If a non-priest [unknowingly] partook of this challah that was separated due to such a doubt or the like, he is not liable to add a fifth [when making restitution].24Since there is a doubt concerning the matter, the person must make restitution for the challah, because whenever there is a question with regard to Scriptural Law, we rule stringency and require him to make restitution so that he can gain atonement. There is, however, no such obligation with regard to the additional fifth, because it was never definitely established that he was liable.
When a question arises concerning the ritual purity of a dough before it was rolled together as a ball,25And thus, the obligation to separate challah has not been established. Hence, the principle that we are allowed to cause ordinary produce to become impure is applied. he should prepare [the dough] in a state of ritual impurity.26For in this way, he will have defined the ritual state of the challah. For it is permitted to make ordinary produce impure in Eretz Yisrael. The challah should then be burnt.27As stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 4.If, after a dough was rolled into a ball, a doubtful situation arose concerning its ritual purity which, were it to be ascertained that it was definitely impure, would convey ritual impurity of Scriptural origin, its [preparation] should be completed in a state of ritual purity. [The rationale is that with regard to] any circumstance where impurity would be imparted to ordinary produce were one certain that it transpired, our Sages decreed that if there is a doubt that it transpired, a dough upon which the obligation to separate challah already fell should not intentionally be made impure, for that obligation has already taken effect.28We are forbidden to cause challah mandated by Scriptural Law to contract ritual impurity (Hilchot Terumah 12:1). In this instance, since the challah has not been separated, that prohibition would not be violated. Nevertheless, since the obligation to separate challah has been established, it is preferable to be stringent. Instead, the challah [separated] is a tentative state; it is not eaten,29Lest it be impure. Thus a priest who partakes of it would be transgressing, as stated in Hilchot Terumah 7:3. nor is it burnt.30Lest it be pure. In which case, it would be forbidden to destroy it unnecessarily. See Hilchot Terumah 12:3.
As an initial preference, a person should not prepare his dough in a state of ritual impurity.31This refers to dough prepared in Eretz Yisrael when the obligation to separate challah was of Scriptural origin. See Hilchot Terumah 12:1. See also Radbaz. Instead, he should be careful and endeavor to purify himself and his utensils so that he can separate challah in a state of ritual purity. If he is more than four mil32A Talmudic measure roughly equivalent to a kilometer. from water [fit for an immersion],33I.e., a mikveh or stream in which he can purge himself from impurity. Compare to Hilchot Tefilah 4:2-3 which makes a distinction whether the water is before him or behind him. See Kessef Mishneh. he should prepare [the dough] in a state of ritual impurity and separate impure challah.
A loaf to serve as challah34I.e., a loaf to be set aside and used as challah for loaves to be baked in the future. should not be prepared in a state of ritual purity for a common person.35Lest over time he cause it to become impure. The person making the loaf is thus enabling the common person to transgress the prohibition against making challah impure. A loaf of ordinary produce may, however, be made in ritual purity [for him].36By making the dough pure, the doughmaker is required to separate challah in a state of ritual impurity. That is problematic, because the common person may cause it to become ritually impure. Nevertheless, as will be explained, certain provisions are enacted to allow such a dough to be made.What is implied? A chaver37A person who is careful in his observance of the laws of ritual impurity. may mix the dough and separate an appropriate measure of challah from it. He then places [the challah] in a utensil made from dung, stone, or clay, which do not contract ritual impurity.38See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 6:2, Hilchot Keilim 1:6, et al. Thus even if the common person would touch the utensil, it would not become impure. When the common person comes, he should take both of them, the dough and the challah. We tell him: "Be careful not to touch the challah, lest it become tevel again."39This warning is not true, for once challah is separated, a dough never becomes tevel again. Nevertheless, we assume that the common person will not know the law and will be careful not to touch the dough, because of this warning. We are not concerned about the dough itself, because one is permitted to cause ordinary produce to contract ritual impurity, as stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 12. Why is this allowed?40I.e., it is not desirable, because ultimately, there is the possibility that the challah will become impure. So that the person making the dough could earn his livelihood.
The wife of a chaver may sift and strain [flour] together with the wife of a common person.41Although the common person's wife is presumed to be ritually impure, nevertheless, since the flour is dry, it is not susceptible to ritual impurity. Hence even if she would touch it, it would not present a difficulty [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 5:9)]. This leniency is allowed only as an expression of "the ways of piece" (Sh'vi'it, loc. cit.). Once water has been mixed with the dough, however, she should not help her, because [the wife of the common person] makes her dough while ritually impure.42I.e., needless to say, the wife of the chaver should not let the wife of the common person help her, for her dough would become ritually impure. She should not even help the wife of the common person for the reason stated by the Rambam. Similarly, one should not knead or array dough with a baker who bakes his dough in a state of ritual impurity. [The rationale is that] one should not reinforce the hands of transgressors.43And preparing dough in a state of ritual impurity was considered a transgression in the Talmudic era when the laws of ritual impurity were observed. One may, however, transport bread with him to a bakery.44For then the baking process has already been completed.
When a person purchases bread from a baker who is a common person in Syria45Which is considered an intermediate level between Eretz Yisrael and the Diaspora with regard to many of the agricultural laws. With regard to its status for challah, see Chapter 5, Halachah 8.Certainly, this law applies in Eretz Yisrael where eating bread from which challah was not separated is punishable by death at the hand of heaven. We do not suspect a baker of being willing to cause a fellow Jew to violate such a transgression. Nevertheless, the above applies only when the baker says that he has separated the challah. If he does not make such a statement and he is a common person, even in Eretz Yisrael, the purchaser must separate challah as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 1 (Radbaz). and [the baker] tells him: "I separated challah," [the purchaser] does not need to separate challah because of the doubt.46I.e., he can rely on the baker. Just as the entire Jewish people47Even the common people. in Eretz Yisrael were not suspect [to ignore the separation of] the great terumah, so too, in Syria, they were not suspect [to ignore the separation of] challah.
When a person purchases [bread] from a baker in the Diaspora, he must separate challah because of the doubt involved.48We are speaking about a baker who is a common person. Even if he says that he separated challah, his word is not accepted (Radbaz). If, however, he purchases from a private person49Even if he is a common person. - and needless to say, if he enjoys his hospitality - he is not required to separate challah because of the doubt.50We assume that a common person is careful about what he eats himself - and what he serves from his kitchen. It is only when selling retail that his integrity is suspect.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
It is a positive commandment for anyone1I.e., other than a priest or Levite (see Halachah 8). who slaughters a kosher domesticated animal to give a priest the foreleg, the jaw, and the maw,2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 143) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 506) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Chulin 134b states that the priests merited these gifts in recognition of the heroism of Pinchas in stopping the Jews' lewd behavior with the Midianite women. as [Deuteronomy 18:50] states: "This is the judgment [due] the priests...." These are universally known as "presents."This mitzvah is practiced at all times, whether at the time the Temple is standing or not, whether in Eretz Yisrael or in the Diaspora,3This is a matter of debate among the commentaries. The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:21) quote the Rambam's view, but also mention the opinion of Rashi and Rabbenu Meir of Rutenberg who maintain that this mitzvah is not practiced in the Diaspora. They conclude that this latter view is observed. The Sefer HaChinuch, loc. cit., writes that in the abstract, he agrees that the law should be observed in the present era as well, but "we do not have the power to compel the butchers to observe it." See also the Responsa of the Chatam Sofer, sec. 301, where he writes that he would observe this mitzvah. with regard to ordinary animals but not consecrated ones.
There is an obligation to separate the above-mentioned presents from all consecrated animals that had a permanent blemish4These blemishes are listed in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, ch. 7, Hilchot Issurei Mizbeach, ch. 2. before they were consecrated and were redeemed.5Since they are permanently blemished at the time of their consecration, it is obvious that they will ultimately be redeemed and used for ordinary purposes, not as a sacrifice. Hence it is never considered that their actual bodies became consecrated. Once they are redeemed, they are like any ordinary property. Hence the obligation to separate the presents falls upon them (Radbaz). If, by contrast, they had a temporary blemish6Such blemishes are listed in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeach 2:7. before their consecration or they were consecrated when they were unblemished, but afterwards, they became blemished,7Even permanently. and they were redeemed, they are exempt from these presents.8In such a situation, the consecration of the animal encompasses its actual body. The rationale is that in the first instance mentioned in this clause, the blemish is not permanent. Hence, it does not block the consecration. And in the second instance, the blemish comes after the consecration already took effect. And since the consecration affected the actual bodies of the animals, it continues to have an effect even after the animals have been redeemed. They are considered as pesulei hamukdashim and are exempt from this obligation (Radbaz, based on Bechorot 15a).
If there is an unresolved doubt whether an animal is a firstborn,9A sheep that had not given birth before gave birth to two offspring, a male - which would be separated as a firstborn - and a female which would not - and it is not known which of them was born first. See Hilchot Bechorot 5:1. Alternatively, a firstborn animal became mixed together with other animals [Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:20). there is certainly an obligation to give the presents [from it to the priest].10A priest to whom a firstborn animal is given is not obligated to separate the presents and give them to another priest. In the instance described above, the Israelite who is the owner of the animal may retain possession of it, for we follow the principle: "When one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him." Thus since a priest cannot prove that the animal was a firstborn, it remains the property of the owner. Nevertheless, he must give the presents to a priest based on the rationale presented by the Rambam. [The rationale is:] If it is a firstborn, it must be given to a priest in its entirety. If it is not a firstborn, the presents must be given to a priest.If a question arises with regard to the status of two animals11E.g., a sheep that had not given birth before gave birth to two males. Thus one of them is certainly the firstborn and must be given to a priest. The question is which one. Hence the weaker one is given to the priest and the other one remains the property of its owner, but may not be slaughtered until it receives a disqualifying blemish (Hilchot Bechorot, loc. cit.). and a priest took one because of the doubt, the second one is exempt from the presents. [The rationale is that] it is considered as an animal which a priest acquired and then gave to its owners, because of its blemish.12I.e., in exchange for giving the priest the weaker animal, the priest forfeits his claim on the other animal. Hence, although there is a possibility that it is an ordinary animal and the presents must be given to the priest, to obtain those presents, the priest is required to prove that claim and he cannot. Hence, the owner may retain possession.If, however, there is an unresolved doubt whether an animal is the tithes of the herd,13Which the owner must offer as a sacrifice (Hilchot Bechorot 6:4). Were this to be the case, he would not be required to give the presents to a priest. it is exempt in all situations. [The rationale is that] when one desires to expropriate property from a colleague,14In this instance, the priest desires to expropriate the presents. the burden of proof is on him.15I.e., we cannot obligate him to give the presents to a priest, because unlike the firstborn, the priest has no claim to the animal as a whole.
When an animal that was consecrated and then disqualified because of a blemish16It is exempt from the obligation to separate the presents as stated in Halachah 2. became mixed with other animals - even one with 100 - if one person owns all of them,17Our translation is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text differs slightly. they are all exempt [from the obligation of the presents]. [The rationale is that the status of] each one is doubtful and when one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him.18In this instance, the priest desires to expropriate the presents. If one person was slaughtering all the animals, only one [set of] presents is exempt.19Because he knows that only one animal was consecrated and then disqualified.
We are required to separate presents only from a kosher domesticated animal,20If, however, he slaughters a kosher wild animal (e.g., a deer) or a kosher fowl, he is not required to give the presents to the priest. [as indicated by Deuteronomy, loc. cit., which] states: "If it be an ox or a sheep."21More particularly, the Hebrew term seh can refer either to a sheep or a goat. If a hybrid is born from a sheep and a goat, there is an obligation for presents to be given.22For even though it is a hybrid, it is definitely a domesticated animal and hence, there is an obligation for presents to be given. We separate all23Not only half. the presents from a ko'i24Generally - and indeed, this interpretation is indicated by the standard published text of Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 1:13 - a ko'i is defined as: "a mixed species that comes from the mating of a kosher domesticated animal and a kosher wild beast." Accordingly, the Tur (Yoreh De'ah 61) questions the Rambam's ruling for it appears to contradict his own statements in the continuation of this halachah. Rav Yosef Caro (in his Kessef Mishneh to the Mishneh Torah and his Beit Yosef to the Tur) explains that the Rambam understands the term ko'i as referring to an independent species that we do not know whether to classify as a domesticated animal or as a wild beast. He maintains that the proper version of Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot is "any animal whose classification as a domesticated animal or as a beast is doubtful is a ko'i" and he maintains that Hilchot Shechitah 14:4 serves as proof of this interpretation. even though its status is undetermined.When a male deer mates with a goat and it gives birth, there is an obligation [to give] half the presents [to a priest]. [This is derived from the above prooftext]: "If it be... a sheep," i.e., even if it is only part sheep.25Chulin 132a explains that since it is only part sheep, only part of the presents are granted. We do not take the species of the father of the animal into consideration. [When, by contrast,] a male goat mates with a deer, the offspring is exempt from the presents.26For, as in the previous law, we do not take the species of the father of the animal into consideration. Although this matter is not determined definitively, since "when one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him," the priest cannot claim the presents definitively either (Siftei Cohen 61:10).
Whether a person slaughters an animal for consumption by non-Jews, by animals, by dogs, or for medical purposes, there is an obligation [to give] the presents.27Presents need not be separated when an animal is killed without ritual slaughter - or when the ritual slaughter is performed improperly and the animal is forbidden to be eaten (Tosefta, Chulin 9:1). Nevertheless, if the slaughter is performed properly, the presents must be given to a priest, regardless of the reason for which the animal was slaughtered. This is derived from a comparison to the covering of the blood after the slaughter of an animal (Ra'avad).
There is an obligation [to separate the presents from] an animal belonging to partners, as [the above prooftext] states: "those who slaughter28The use of the plural term implies that the law applies even if there are many for whom the animal is being slaughtered (see Chulin 136a). the animal."
When a person purchases an animal with the produce of the Sabbatical year, he is obligated to [give] presents [to a priest].29For even though that produce must be destroyed at the appropriate time, while it is in a person's possession, it is his personal property. See Bechorot 12b.Priests and Levites are exempt from the presents, as [the above prooftext] states: "from the people." It is questionable whether the Levites are considered as part of "the people" or not. Therefore [the presents] are not taken from them.30As above, when one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him. And it is impossible for a priest to prove that the Levite is obligated.From Chulin 131a, it is obvious that a Levite does not have the right to receive presents (Siftei Cohen 61:12). If, however, a priest took them, he need not return them.31For now they are in the possession of the priest. He may therefore retain them, for the Levite cannot prove that he is exempt.The Rambam's view is cited by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:23). The Rama maintains that since the law is that a priest is not entitled to take it, if he takes it by force, he is required to return it. This difference of opinion reflects a divergence on an issue of a greater scope. See Hilchot Bechorot 5:3, where the Rambam rules that when there is a question concerning whether an animal is a firstborn or not, a priest is not permitted to take possession of it. If he takes possession of it, however, it is not expropriated from him. In that instance as well, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 315:1) follows the Rambam's approach and the Rama differs.
When does the above32That the priests are exempt from giving presents. apply? When one slaughters for his own sake. [Different laws apply to] a priest who is a butcher, who slaughters [animals] and sells them in the marketplace. We grant him two or three weeks.33During which he is allowed to keep the presents for himself. Afterwards, we expropriate the presents from him and grant them to other priests.34Since he sells the meat, he is acting on behalf of others and they are not absolved from the obligation of giving the presents. See the gloss of Rav Yosef Korcus who debates whether this is a Scriptural Law or a Rabbinic decree.If he established a butcher shop to sell meat, we do not wait at all. Instead, we expropriate the presents from him immediately. If he refrains from giving them, we place him under a ban of ostracism35See Hilchot Talmud Torah, ch. 6. until he gives them.
A person who slaughters an animal for the sake of a priest or a gentile is exempt from [the obligation to give presents].36We are speaking about a situation where the animal belongs entirely to the priest or the gentile. It is the ownership of the animal, not the identity of the slaughterer which is significant. Since neither the priest nor the gentile would be required to give these presents, a slaughterer who acts on their behalf is also exempt.A person who enters into a partnership with a priest [in the ownership of an animal] must mark his portion, so that he will leave the presents in the portion of the priest. If he does not mark his portion, he is obligated [to give] these presents, because the fact that the priest is his partner is not a matter of public knowledge.37Hence, if he does not give a priest the presents, people will suspect him of withholding them. Accordingly, if the priest was standing with him in the butcher store and dealing and negotiating with him,38And thus it is evident that they are partners. he is not required to mark [his portion].39The Tur (Yoreh De'ah 61) differs with the Rambam, explaining Chulin 133a,b (the Rambam's source) differently. In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Caro elaborates in support of the Rambam's interpretation (even though at the outset, he states that the interpretation of the Tur appears more appropriate to the simple meaning of the passage. In his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:25), he follows the Tur's interpretation.When a person enters a partnership with a gentile [in the ownership of an animal], he need not mark his portion.40And we nevertheless assume that the presents were in the gentile's portion. [The rationale is that] as a rule, a gentile will speak excessively and inform everyone that he is [the Jew's] partner, even if [the Jew] is not present at the time of the sale.
[If, when negotiating a partnership agreement41Rashi (in his commentary to Chulin 132a, the source for the Rambam's ruling) and similarly, the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:29) interpret this as referring to a sale and not a partnership agreement. regarding the ownership of an animal,] a priest stipulates to [his partner, an Israelite,] that they are partners with the exception of the presents, the presents belong to the priest. Since the priest stipulated "with the exception of...," he left himself the portion of [the animal containing] the presents. Hence, they are his.42Even if they were not marked [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 10:3)].If, however, the priest told the Israelite: "...on the condition that the presents are mine," the presents belong to the Israelite and he may give them to any priest he desires. Even though [the priest] stipulated that they were his, [the animal] is not exempt from [the obligation to give] the presents.43The Radbaz explains that the rationale is that his stipulation runs contrary to the Torah - for the Torah requires that the presents be given - and whenever a person makes a stipulation that runs contrary to Torah law, the stipulation is nullified. Hence, it is as if the stipulation was never made and the priest's partner must separate the presents as stated in the previous halachah. For by saying "on the condition that...," he did not leave himself [the ownership of] the presents. Since he did not leave himself a share in their ownership, he did not acquire them through this stipulation.44The commentaries note an apparent contradiction between the Rambam's ruling here and his ruling in Hilchot Ma'aser 6:19 where he states:When a priest sells a field to an Israelite and tells him: "[I am selling it] on the condition that the tithes from it belong to me forever," they belong to him. [The rationale is that] saying "on the condition that" is tantamount to setting aside for himself [the portion of the field] where the tithes [grow].Although there are explicit Talmudic sources for both rulings, their logic appears contradictory. Among the resolutions offered is that here, the Rambam is speaking about the ownership of an animal, while in Hilchot Ma'aser, he is speaking about landed property and the principles of ownership are different in these two instances.
If a priest was a partner in [the ownership of] the head, he is exempt from [giving] the jaw. If he is a partner in the front leg, he is exempt from the fore leg. If he is a partner in the digestive organs, he is exempt from the maw.45The new concept taught by this halachah is that one can be exempt from part, but not all, of the presents.If the priest told [the Israelite]: "The entire animal is mine, but the head is yours," he is obligated to give the jaw, for the portion that must be given belongs to the Israelite.
[The following laws apply when] a gentile converts and he is in the process of having an animal slaughtered. If it was slaughtered before he converted, he is exempt.46Because at that time, he was not obligated, as stated in Halachah 10. If [it was slaughtered] after he converted, he is obligated. If there is a doubt concerning the matter, [we follow the principle]: When one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him.47Hence, the convert may retain possession of the presents. As mentioned in the notes to Chapter 8, Halachah 9, when a similar situation arises concerning challah, the Rambam rules that the convert is liable to separate the dough. Nevertheless, a distinction between the two can be made because of the severity of that prohibition.
It is permitted to partake [of the meat] of an animal from which the presents were not separated. [The situation] is not analogous to tevel48In which instance, it is forbidden to partake of the produce until the terumah and the tithes are separated. [The rationale is that] the presents due to be given the priests are separate and distinct.49In contrast to the produce where the terumah and tithes must be separated from the produce as a whole. It is forbidden for an Israelite to partake of the presents themselves without the permission of a priest. If he transgresses and partakes of them, damages them, or sells them, he is not liable to make financial restitution.50I.e., he has no legal obligation to make financial restitution. In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Caro questions whether the person has a moral and spiritual obligation to make restitution and in his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:15), he rules that he does. [The rationale is that] this is money that has no known plaintiff.51There is no one priest who can claim that the presents are his and they must be returned to him, for until they are given, the owner has the right to give them to any priest he desires. A person who purchases them - even though he is forbidden to do so - is permitted to partake of them, because when the presents to the priests are stolen, the theft effect a change in ownership.
If one tells a butcher: "Sell me the digestive organs of a cow," and there were presents52I.e., the maw. among them, [the purchaser] should give them to a priest,53For they belong to him. but [the seller] need not decrease the price [accordingly].54Since it was obvious that the maw was among the organs he purchased, the purchaser should have realized that it was not included in the price. Instead, he was paying him for the remainder of the meat (Kessef Mishneh). If [the purchaser] bought [the organs] by weight, he should give them to the priest and deduct their value from the butcher's [due].55Since the maw did not belong to the butcher - for it must be given to the priest - he had no right to sell it (ibid.). See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 10:4) which states that it is forbidden to buy the presents, because by doing so, one would be aiding theft.
When a person sends meat to a friend and there were presents56I.e., some of the organs that have to be given the priest. in [the parcel], the recipient need not be concerned that [the sender] transgressed and stole them.57For we do not suspect that a person sinned. Instead, the recipient assumes that the sender purchased the presents from a priest; alternatively, there were no priests in the area and he followed the advice given in the following clause.In a place where there are no priests,58And thus there is no one to give the presents to. one should determine their financial value and partake of them, [so as not to cause] a priest a loss.59For if he sets them aside, they will spoil. There is no difficulty in doing so, for the presents are not consecrated at all. He should then give the money to any priest he desires.
If a person wants to give the presents to only one priest, he may do so. If he wants to divide them [and give them to several], he should not give half the maw or half the foreleg to one [priest]. Instead, he should give the foreleg to one, the maw to another, and the jaw to two others. [This is inferred from Deuteronomy 18:4]: "And you shall give it to him," i.e., give him a portion that is a significant present.60See the notes of Rav Kapach to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 10:4). There he writes that the original version of the Rambam's Commentary did not contain this law, but the later version did. If [he is giving presents] from an ox, he may divide them into portions,61For even a portion of the organs of an ox are of a significant size. provided each portion is a significant present.
What is meant by the foreleg? The right foreleg,62The Turei Zahav 61:1 states that this is derived from the fact that the prooftext speaks of "the foreleg," i.e., the important one. An animal's foreleg is comprised of three bones. According to the Rambam, the lower two are given to the priest. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 10:4). The portion from the upper-joint until the ankle joint; two limbs, one connected with the other. The jaw refers to the jaw bones until the large ring of the protrusion of the gullet with the tongue between the bones.63Chulin 134b states that one should take the jaw until the place where the animal is slaughtered. See the accompanying diagrams. All of this is given to the priest.
[When giving the jaw and the foreleg to the priest,] we do not pour boiling water on the hide [to remove the hair], nor do we skin it. Instead, we give it to [the priest] with its skin and wool. [We give a priest] the maw with the fat upon it64This fat is forbidden to be eaten (Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 7:6). and the fat within it. The priests have already accepted the custom of leaving the fat of the maw for the owner.65Chulin 134b explains that this is an act of generosity on the part of the priests. Since the presents are their personal property without any sanctity at all, they can do with them as they see fit. From the wording of the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:4), however, it appears that this custom is not universally accepted.
A women of the priestly family may partake of the presents even if she is married to an Israelite, because they are not consecrated. Moreover, her husband may partake of the presents for her sake.A challalah,66In Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 19:1 it describes a challalah as a woman born from relations forbidden to the priesthood or a woman who is forbidden to the priesthood who engaged in relations with a priest. by contrast, may not partake of the presents, because challalim67The term challal refers to the offspring of relations forbidden to a priest. are not in the category of priests.68Hence, just as the presents may not be given to a challal, they may not be given to a challalah.The concept that challalim are not priests applies in many contexts. See Hilchot Nesiat Kapayim 15:5, Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 19:5, Hilchot Terumah 6:7, et al. If a priest desires to sell the presents, to give them as gifts, even to a gentile, or to feed them to the dogs, he may, for they are not consecrated at all.69The Siftei Cohen 61:5 states that a priest should not give or sell them to gentiles or feed them to dogs unless they are no longer fit for human consumption.
[The following rules apply when there is] a priest whose friends [continually] give him presents. If he desires to transfer ownership of them to a friend who is an Israelite,70The Rambam's source (Chulin 133a) mentions that the recipient of these presents must be a Torah scholar. The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 61:14) also mention that point. Apparently, the Rambam thinks that it is not an absolute necessity. he may, even though they did not enter [the priest's] domain. Thus [the priest's] friends may slaughter [their animals] and give the presents to the Israelite who acquired them. [This applies] provided the Israelite is in difficult straits and does not have the means to buy meat and the priest who transfers the meat to him is his friend. If, however, the priest is the Israelite's attendant or his hired worker or employee, he may not transfer ownership [of the presents] until they enter his domain.71Once they are given to him, however, there are no restrictions on what he may do with them. [This is a safeguard,] lest he compel him to do so.
A priest should not grab the presents, nor should he even request them verbally. Instead, if he is given them72Turei Zahav 61:12 states that this is derived from the word "and you shall give" in the prooftext. Implied is that the presents should be given. They should not be taken by the priests on their own initiative. in a respectful manner, he may take them.73See parallels in Hilchot Terumah 12:18. When there are many priests at the slaughter house, the modest ones withdraw and the gluttons take them. [Even though] a priest is modest, [if] it is not known that he is a priest, he should take [the presents] to let it be known to everyone that he is a priest.The priests should only eat the presents as they are roasted, with mustard on them,74If, however, a priest prefers to eat them in another manner, he may. It is not an obligation to partake of them in the manner described (Tosafot, Chulin 132b). for [Numbers 18:8] states [that the gifts to the priests75This verse does not speak about the presents of meat explicitly, but rather the portions of the sacrifices given to the priests. Nevertheless, the concepts can be derived one from the other. See Rashi, Chulin, loc. cit.. were given them]: "for distinction." Hence, [they should] be eaten in a manner befitting a king.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
It is a positive commandment to give a priest the first shearings [of an animal],1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 144) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 508) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Deuteronomy 18:4] states: 'Give him the first shearings of your flock.' Levites are considered like Israelites with regard to this mitzvah.2I.e., as opposed to the presents described in the previous chapter, the Levites are required to separate these shearings. There is no minimum measure for these shearings according to Scriptural law. According to Rabbinical Law, one should not give less than a sixtieth. It applies only in Eretz [Yisrael],3But not in the Diaspora. Thus it resembles terumah - for both are called "first" and hence share similarilities in many laws - and not the presents of meat. Although the Mishnah (Chulin 11:1) states that this mitzvah also applies in the Diaspora, according to the Rambam, the halachah does not follow that view.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 333:1) follows the Rambam's view. The Tur and the Rama state that theoretically, this mitzvah should also be observed in the Diaspora, but in practice, that view is not followed. whether the Temple is standing or not like the first of the grain.4I.e., terumah. See Hilchot Terumah 1:1. It applies to ordinary animals, but not to consecrated ones.
What is implied? A person consecrated animals for the Temple treasury5I.e., needless to say this law would apply if the animal was consecrated for the sake of sacrifice on the Altar, for in that instance, the animal is forbidden to be shorn and it is forbidden to work with it. Moreover, even if the animal is consecrated only for the sake of the Temple treasury, in which instance, it will ultimately be redeemed for personal use, since while it is consecrated, it is not "your sheep,' as the Rambam continues to explain, there is no obligation to give its first shearings. and then sheared them. Is he obligated to redeem them and give [the first shearings] to the priests? Or if one consecrated an animal with the exception of its shearings, is he obligated in the first shearings? It is written [ibid.]: "your sheep,' [i.e., the obligation applies only to "your sheep.'
There is an obligation [to give a priest] the first shearing of any consecrated animals6I.e., even if the animal was consecrated only for the sake of the Temple treasury, as above, these laws apply. The rationale is that a blemished kosher animal that is consecrated to the Temple treasury is redeemed with the intent to be used as a sacrifice. that possessed a permanent blemish before they were consecrated and were [then] redeemed.7Since it was blemished at the time it was consecrated, the animal was never fit to be offered on the altar. Hence, the consecration never affected the actual physical substance of the animal. Accordingly, once it is redeemed, it is considered as an ordinary animal and its first shearings must be given to a priest If, however, they were consecrated before they were blemished or it had a temporary blemish before it was consecrated,8Since the temporary blemish will be healed, it is considered as if did not exist. and afterwards, it received a permanent blemish and it was redeemed, it is exempt from the first shearing.9Since when consecrated, the animal was fit for sacrifice, the consecration affected its physical substance. Hence, even after it was redeemed, it is not considered as an ordinary animal and it is exempt from the first shearings. See the parallel in Chapter 9, Halachah 2.
The only animals whose first shearings we are obligated [to give a priest] are sheep, both male and female, for their wool is fit [to make] garments. If their wool was stiff and not fit for [making] garments, they are exempt from the first shearings, for this present is given to the priest for the sole purpose of providing him with garments.10Rav Yosef Corcus explains that the Rambam (based on one of the opinions in Chulin 137a) is referring to the priestly garments which are made from wool and linen. For, otherwise, goats' wool is also fit to make ordinary garments. This explanation is also quoted by Siftei Cohen 333:2. The intent is not, however, that the first shearings should be used only for priestly garments, for as the Rambam states in the following halachah, the first shearings were given to the priests for their personal garments.
Since the Holy One, blessed be He, granted [a priest] the terumot which provide him with bread and wine11According to the Rambam, the terumot also include oil and other fruits. and He granted him the presents of meat12Described in Chapter 9. and the sacrificial meat of the Temple for meat,13I.e., the portions of the sin offerings, guilt offerings, and peace offerings which are granted to the priests. He provided them with the first shearings for their garments and [restitution for property] stolen from a [childless] convert,14See Hilchot Gezeilah, Chapter 8. devotion offerings,15See Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim, Chapter 6. ancestral fields [that were consecrated and not redeemed],16Which becomes the property of the priests; see Hilchot Arachin VaCharamim4:19. and the redemption of the firstborn,17See Chapters 11 and 12. for their expenses and for their other needs. [These are granted to the priests,] because they are not granted an ancestral portion of the land, nor a share in the spoils of war.18See Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel, Chapter 13, with regard to both these points.
If [a sheep's] wool was [naturally] red, black, or brown, there is an obligation [to give the priest] the first shearings. If, however, the wool was shorn and dyed, before it was given [to a priest], he is exempt from the first shearings.19He is considered to have acquired the wool because he made a significant change in its nature. This ruling applies after the fact. As an initial preference, it is forbidden to make such a change [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Chulin 11:3; Rav Kappach's edition)]. If one bleached it before he gave it [to the priests], he is obligated to set [the wool] aside after he bleaches it.20For this is not considered as a significant change. When a person pulls out the wool of ewes by hand instead of shearing it, he is obligated in the first shearings.
There is an obligation [to separate] the first shearings from hybrids [of sheep],21The Radbaz explains that this law depends on the concept stated in Halachah 4: If the wool of a hybrid (the offspring of a sheep or a goat) is soft, the first shearings must be separated. If not, it is exempt. a ko'i,22As mentioned in the notes to Chapter 9, Halachah 5, the Rambam understands the term ko'i as referring to an animal which our Sages were unable to classify as a domesticated animal or a wild beast. and a sheep that is mortally ill.23For the animal is alive at present and the removal of its wool is considered as shearing. If, however, one shears a dead sheep, he is exempt.24The Kessef Mishneh explains that this is derived from the very definition of the mitzvah, 'the shearing of the sheep.' A dead sheep is not considered a sheep and cutting its wool is not considered as shearing.
When a person sets aside the first shearings and they are lost, he is responsible to make restitution until he gives them to the priest.25The Radbaz questions why the first shearings are different than all the other presents given to the priests where such a law is not found. He explains that the other presents involve grain and meat and a granary or a slaughter house are not located at a great distance from the residential area of a city. Hence, it is not very difficult for a priest to go and collect them. Sheep, by contrast, may not be allowed to pasture near residential areas. Hence, since it is far more difficult for a priest to collect them, the Torah made the owners responsible for the shearings.When a person says: 'Let all of my shearings be considered as the first shearings,' his words are of consequence.26Chulin 136b notes that in this respect, although they are also called "the first," the first shearings are different from terumah and challah. With regard to these separations, if one designates his entire crop as terumah or his entire dough as challah, his statements are of no consequence. The Radbaz explains that the term terumah - and challah is also called terumah - implies elevating one portion of a group from another portion. Hence, there must always be something left behind. The term 'the first shearings' does not have such a connotation.Rav Yosef Corcus notes that Chulin 136b associates this ruling with the Rabbi Ila'ai's opinion that the first shearing applies in the Diaspora as well as in Eretz Yisrael. Thus there is an apparent contradiction between the Rambam's ruling here and his ruling in Halachah 1 that the mitzvah of the first shearing applies only in Eretz Yisrael. Rav Yosef explains that the Rambam's ruling in Halachah 1 is based on custom and not on the acceptance of the opinions that differ with Rabbi Ila'ai.
A person who purchases the shearings of a gentile's sheep after the gentile has shorn them is exempt from the first shearings.27This point is obvious. The Rambam (and his source, Chulin 138a) mention it only because of the contrast to the following laws. Rashi, however, interprets that passage differently. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 333:7) follows the Rambam's understanding, while the Tur and the Rama follow Rashi's view. When he purchases [the gentile's] sheep for their shearing,28I.e., he never becomes the real owner of the sheep; he acquires them only for the right to shear their wool. he is obligated even though the wool grew in the gentile's domain and the sheep are returned to the gentile after the shearing. Since the shearer is Jewish and the shearings belong to him, he is obligated. For the obligation takes effect only at the time of shearing.
[The following laws apply when] a person purchases the shearings of a fellow Jew. If the seller left a portion of his sheep to shear,29And that portion contains the minimum measure mentioned in Halachah 13. the seller is obligated to separate from [the shearing of] the remainder [the appropriate amount] for the entire [flock. This applies] even if the seller has not begun to shear [his sheep.30Since the seller has not begun shearing the sheep at all, it would seem reasonable to say that each person should give the first shearings from his portion. Nevertheless, the ruling is not so. The rationale is that we operate under] the assumption that a person will not sell the presents to be given the priests.31And thus they remain in his portion. Selling these presents is prohibited and we assume that the person would not desire to transgress. If [the seller] did not leave any [sheep to shear], the purchaser is obligated to separate [the first shearings].32Chulin 138a explains that the seller tells the purchaser: 'I did not sell you the first shearings. The money I took from you is for the remainder of the wool that is not the priest's portion. I merely gave you the opportunity to give the presents to the priest of your choice."
[A different rule applies it] there are two types of shearings, e.g., white wool and brown wool, or wool from males and wool from females, and one sold one and retained possession of the other. Both [the purchaser and the seller] should give the first shearings, [the purchaser] on what he purchased and the seller on what he retained.33Even though one may separate the first shearings from one type of wool for another type as evident from Halachah 15, in this instance, since the two types are owned by two separate people, each should separate the first shearings from his own wool.
When a convert converts and he possesses sheep that are being shorn and it is not known whether they were shorn before he converted or after he converted, he is exempt. [The rationale is when] one desires to expropriate property from a colleague,34I.e., the priest desires to expropriate the first shearings from the owner. See the parallel in Chapter 9, Halachah 13. The Radbaz explains that this ruling follows the principle: When there is a doubt concerning a prohibition, we rule stringently. When there is a doubt concerning financial matters, we rule leniently. the burden of proof is upon him.
How many sheep must there be for [a flock] to be obligated for the first shearings? No less than five,35Chulin 11:1 derives this from a non-literal interpretation of II Samuel 25:18. provided their shearings is not less than the weight of 60 sela36A sela is approximately 20 grams in contemporary measure.Chulin 11:2 states that this measure is required, for only then will the gift to the priest be significant, for it will be possible to make a small garment from it. and the shearings of each one will not be less than the weight of 12 sela. If the shearings of one of them is less than the weight of twelve sela, [the flock] is exempt from the first shearing, even if [the wool of] the five of them weighs 60 selaim or more.
Partners are obligated in [the mitzvah of] the first shearings, provided each one's share is equal to the minimum measure [mentioned above]. It: however, there are only five sheep belonging to two partners, they are exempt.37I.e., the Rambam follows the opinion (Chulin 135a) that the partnership is not recognized as a single entity. Hence, it is necessary for the share of each of the partners to comprise at least the minimum amount. The Kessef Mishneh notes the parallel to Chapter 6, Halachah 20.
The mitzvah is to set aside the first shearing at the outset.38The Radbaz states that this is implied by the very term 'the first of.' If, however, one set it aside in the middle or at the end, he fulfilled his obligation.When a person owns five sheep, but [did not shear them together, i.e.,] he had one shorn alone and sold its wool, and then had another shorn alone and sold its wool, and then a third, etc., all of these are combined [to obligate him in the mitzvah of] the first shearing,39Because at the time he sheared the first sheep, he possessed a flock of the minimum size. The Rama (Yoreh De'ah 333: 12) states that this applies even if he sold some of his sheep after shearing them. even if this takes place over the course of several years. He may separate from the new shearings for the old shearings and from [the shearings of] one type of sheep for another.40One should not, however, separate the shearings of inferior sheep for those of superior sheep [Rama (Yoreh De'ah 333:12)]. If, however, he had one sheep, he sheared it and set aside its shearings, purchased a second sheep and set aside its shearings, [and continued doing so until he sheared five sheep], their shearings are not combined.41Because at the time he sheared the first sheep, he did not have a flock of the minimum size.
When a person has several shearings from the first shearings that he desired to divide among the priests, he should not give any priest less than the weight of five selaim of white wool, enough to make a small garment.The intent is not that he should whiten it and give it to them. Instead, he should give each of them [at least enough] unrefined wool to produce five selaim42Five selaim is 100 grams in contemporary measure. This measure of wool was sufficient to fashion a sash (avneit) for a priest (Chulin 138a). or more of wool after it has been whitened. [This is derived from Deuteronomy 18:14:] 'Give it to him,' i.e., give him a significant present.
The first shearings are ordinary property in every regard. Therefore, I maintain that they may be given to a woman of the priestly family even if she is married to an Israelite like the presents of meat.43See Chapter 9, Halachah 20. It appears to me that they are governed by the same laws.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 80) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 392) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This obligation was established in commemoration of the slaying of the Egyptian firstborn before the Exodus. for every Jewish man2I.e., the obligation is incumbent on the baby's father, not his mother, as stated in the following halachah. to redeem his son who is the firstborn of his Jewish mother, as [Exodus 34:19] states: "All first issues of the womb are mine" and [Numbers 18:15] states: "And you shall surely redeem a firstborn man."
A woman is not obligated to redeem her son,3The P'nei Meivin, Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 226, infers from the wording "a woman is not obligated," that she may do so if she desires. Eidut LiYisrael states that this is the common custom if the child does not have a father. for one who is obligated to redeem himself is obligated to redeem his son.4The Rambam's wording implies that the obligation is incumbent on the son. Nevertheless, as a newborn, the son cannot fulfill it and so, the obligation becomes his father's. See the Minchat Chinuch (mitzvah 392), the Siftei Cohen 305:11, Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XI, p. 44ff., and others who debate whether the mitzvah is primarily the father's or the son's. This difference is not merely theoretical. Among the practical question that result is: If the father did not redeem the son until the son was thirteen, who has the fundamental responsibility to observe the mitzvah, the father or the son? If the father transgressed and did not redeem his son, when he comes of age,513, at which age he is obligated to observe the mitzvot. See Minchat Chinuch, loc. cit., who discusses a situation where the son redeemed himself beforehand. he is obligated to redeem himself.6The Rama (Yoreh De'ah 305:15) states that a silver plaque should be placed around the child's neck as a reminder that he has not been redeemed. See also Halachah 11. The Sifei Cohen 305:20 states that this is not practical. In many instances, the silver plaque will become lost before the child comes of age and he will not be aware of the responsibility incumbent upon him. Instead, it is preferable that the redemption be performed by the Jewish court. Eidut LiYisrael also mentions that if the child's grandfather is alive, there are opinions that he should perform the redemption.
If it is necessary to redeem both the person himself and his son, he should redeem himself first and then his son.7For the mitzvah incumbent on his own person takes precedence (Kiddushin 29a,b). If he only has enough [money] for one redemption, he should redeem himself.
If [a father] had to redeem his son and the time arrived for him to make a festive pilgrimage [to Jerusalem] and he does not have the resources for both, he should redeem his son and then make the pilgrimage. [This is alluded to in Exodus 34:20:] which states: "You shall redeem all your firstborn sons" and afterwards [continues]: "Do not behold My countenance8I.e., make a pilgrimage to the Temple to behold the Divine presence. empty-handed."9Even though he could possibly redeem his son afterwards, and he will not be able to make this pilgrimage again, the redemption of his son takes precedence.
A person who redeems his son should recite the blessing: "[Blessed are You...] who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the redemption of a son."10This follows the Rambam's rulings in Hilchot Berachot 11:11 where he writes that a person who performs a mitzvah involving his own person should praise God who "commanded us to...." If the mitzvah involves others, by contrast, the blessing should conclude "commanded us concerning...." The commentaries, however, note that in ibid.:12 and in Hilchot Milah 3:1, the Rambam writes that one who circumcises his own son should recite the blessing concluding "to circumcise...," for the mitzvah is incumbent on his own person. Seemingly, this should also apply with regard to the redemption of a son.It is possible to resolve the question as follows: The mitzvah of redeeming the son is primarily the child's. Hence, the father uses the form "concerning...." The mitzvah of circumcision, by contrast, is primarily the father's. Hence he uses the form "to...." Afterwards, he recites the blessing Shehechiyanu11This blessing is recited as an expression of thanks whenever one performs a mitzvah infrequently (Hilchot Berachot 12:9). Even though one recited this blessing at the child's circumcision, it should be recited again at his redemption, for the two are separate mitzvot to be performed at separate times (Radbaz). Similarly, as an expression of thanks, it is customary to mark the redemption with a celebratory feast. This feast is considered a seudat mitzvah, a feast associated with a mitzvah. and then gives12For the blessing should precede the observance of the mitzvah. [the money for] the redemption to the priest. If [a son] redeems himself, he should recite the blessing: "[Blessed... who commanded us] to redeem the firstborn"13For he is certainly performing a mitzvah involving himself. The Rambam's ruling is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:10). The Tur and the Rama rule that even in such a situation, the conclusion of the blessing should be "...concerning the redemption of the firstborn." and he should recite the blessing Shehechiyanu.
This mitzvah is practiced in every place and at all times.14I.e., its observance is not limited to Eretz Yisrael, nor to the time when the Temple is standing. For how much should the son be redeemed? Five selaim,15Shiurei Torah defines this as 101 or 96 grams of pure silver. as [Numbers 18:16] states: "And those to be redeemed: from one month you shall redeem [according to the valuation of five silver shekalim]." [The redemption may be paid] in silver16We have translated kessef as "silver" and not "money" to allude to the concepts stated below. or in articles worth silver, i.e., movable property that is of financial worth like the shekalim are. Therefore one may not redeem [a firstborn] with landed property or with servants. Nor may promissory notes [be used], because they are not of inherent worth.17This includes not only promissory notes given by a particular individual, but also the fiat currencies of the present day, for such currency does not have any inherent value. In practice, silver coins are almost always used for the redemption of the firstborn. If one redeemed a firstborn with these, he is not redeemed.18And he must be redeemed again.
When a father writes to a priest that he is obligated to give him five selaim, the obligation takes effect,19As stated in Hilchot Mechirah 11:15, when a person undertakes a financial obligation, even though according to law he was not liable, he is bound by his commitment. but the son is not redeemed.20This applies even if he actually pays him the five selaim, for that money is being paid to satisfy the obligation he voluntarily undertook and not to discharge the obligation the Torah placed upon him (Bechorot 49b).The Turei Zahav 305:2 and the Siftei Cohen 305:3 explain that according to Scriptural Law, the commitment is effective in redeeming the son. Nevertheless, our Sages ruled that it is unacceptable lest a person attempt to redeem his son with promissory notes from other people. If he gives him a utensil that is not worth five selaim in the market, but the priest accepts it as if he was given five selaim, the son is redeemed.21In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Caro debates this ruling at length and in his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:5), he rules that the utensil must be worth five selaim to a person in a given situation. If, however, there is no way that it would be considered as worth five selaim, the son is not redeemed. The Turei Zahav 305:5 and the Siftei Cohen 305:5, however, maintain that the Rambam's words should be understood simply. If he divides the five selaim among ten priests,22Giving each a half-sela. whether at once or one after the other, he fulfils his obligation.23The Pitchei Teshuvah 305:10 states that it is not desirable to redeem one's son in this manner. As an initial preference, one should give all five selaim to one priest, at one time.
If the priest desires to return [what was given for] the redemption to [the father], he may. He should not, however, give it to him with the intent that he return it. If he did so, and [the priest] returned it, his son is not redeemed.24Since the father expected the present to be returned, it is as if he never really intended to give it to the priest (Bechorot, loc. cit., Radbaz). This applies only when the priest actually returns what he was given, for if he does not return it, we assume that after the fact, the father consents that the priest retain possession and as a result, the son is redeemed. [Instead,] he must give it to him with the resolution that he is giving him a present without any reservations. Afterwards, if the priest desires to return it, he may return it.25When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:8) states that the priest should not frequently return what is given to him for the redemption. It should only be done occasionally, when the father is poor. Similarly, if he gives it to him as a present with the stipulation that it be returned, his son is redeemed.26A present given with the intent that it be returned is considered as a valid present (Kiddushin 6b). Thus the father's gift was within the limits of law. Hence, it is acceptable. In the first instance, by contrast, since the present was not given wholeheartedly, it is as if it was never given. Nevertheless, receiving the redemption as a present with the stipulation that it be returned is frowned upon by our Rabbis. The Shulchan Aruch describes a priest who does so as having "transgressed."
The priests and the Levites are exempt from the redemption of their firstborn, as evident from a logical deduction: If they served as the redemption of the Israelites firstborn in the desert,27See Numbers 3:45 which commands "Take the Levites in place of all the firstborn of the children of Israel." certainly, they themselves are exempt.
An Israelite who is born to a woman of the priestly or Levite family28I.e., the father is an Israelite and thus the son is an Israelite. is exempt, for this matter is not dependent on the father, but rather on the mother, as [indicated by the phrase]:29The commentaries have noted that there is no exact verse in the Torah that corresponds to the Rambam's wording. Similar phrases are found in Exodus 13:2 and Numbers 3:12. "the first issue of the womb in Israel."
When a woman of the Levite family was impregnated by a gentile, her son is exempt.30The identity of the father does not change the status of the mother or the child and it is just as if the child was from a Jewish father. See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 15:3. If, however, a woman of the priestly family was impregnated by a gentile, her son is obligated,31I.e., he is obligated to redeem himself when he comes of age, for as stated in Halachah 2, there is no obligation for a woman to redeem her son. There are authorities who maintain that, in the present age, the Jewish court should redeem such children, for it is possible that when the child comes of age, he will not be aware of the mitzvah and will fail to observe it. for his mother was disqualified from the priestly family because of relations with the gentile.32Such relations - even if she is raped - caused her to be deemed a zonah and she is disqualified from the priestly family. Her children do not bear its holiness, nor does she have any of the rights granted to its members (Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:1).
When a priest fathers a son who is a challal33The children born from relations between a priest and a woman forbidden because of the unique prohibitions incumbent upon the priests, as explained in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 19:3-6. and the father dies within 30 days [of the son's birth], the son is obligated to redeem himself,34I.e., if the son is the first issue of his mother's womb. because the father did not acquire the redemption.35I.e., were the father to have lived until the son was 30 days old, there would have been an obligation to redeem the child. Nevertheless, since the father was a priest - and the fact that he entered into a forbidden relationship does not disqualify him from the priesthood - it is considered as if he paid himself and the child was redeemed (Turei Zahav 305:17). If [the father] dies after 30 days [have passed], the son is not obligated to redeem himself, because the father acquired the redemption.36Because he died after the obligation took effect, as indicated by Halachah 17.
If a maidservant was freed - or a gentile woman converted - while she was pregnant and then she gave birth,37For the first time, as obvious from the following halachah. since he was born in holiness,38I.e., as a Jew. [the child] is obligated [to redeem himself] even though he was not conceived in holiness, as [indicated by] the phrase:39I.e., the father is an Israelite and thus the son is an Israelite. "the first issue of the womb in Israel." For this child is the first issue of a womb in Israel. If it is not known whether the woman gave birth before she converted or afterwards,40Implied is that we do not rely on her word alone. [we follow the principle:] When one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him.41The priest is considered as if he desires to expropriate property - the five selaim of the redemption - from the child. Since the priest cannot prove that the child was born as an Israelite, the child is not obligated. See parallels in Chapter 9, Halachah 13, and Chapter 10, Halachah 12.
When a gentile woman or a maidservant gave birth and then converted or was freed and then gave birth again, [the second child] is exempt,42As the Radbaz mentions, this child may be considered as the father's firstborn and receive a double share of his inheritance. Nevertheless, in this context, he is not considered as a firstborn. as [indicated by] the phrase "the first issue of the womb," and this is not [the woman's] first issue of the womb.43Even though it is her first Jewish child.Similar concepts apply when a son is born after a nefal.44A stillborn, aborted, or miscarried fetus. Whenever the mother is ritually impure due to birth because of a nefal,45See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 10:1 which states: "Every woman who gives birth is impure like a niddah, even if she did not suffer uterine bleeding. [This applies whether] a woman gives birth to a living child or one which is stillborn, and even if she miscarries [and discharges a fetus]." The remainder of that chapter mentions different questionable circumstances involving such miscarriages. a son born afterwards is not considered the first issue of the womb. Whenever a nefal does not cause the mother to be ritually impure due to birth,46In the instances mentioned, the embryo that was miscarried is not given the halachic status of a fetus and none of the laws applying to childbirth apply. e.g., a woman who miscarries and the issue resembles a fish or a grasshopper,47See ibid. 5:15. a woman who miscarries on the fortieth day [after conception],48ibid. 10:2. or the like, a son born afterwards is [under obligation] to the priesthood and must be redeemed.
When a fetus in a woman's womb was cut up and removed limb by limb, a son born afterwards is not considered to be "the first issue of her womb."49Even though it was removed from the womb piece by piece, the mother is considered impure as if she gave birth (Ibid.:6) and the subsequent child is not considered as a firstborn. When the head of a fetus that was carried for eight months emerged alive50From the Rambam's wording, the commentaries have inferred that if the baby emerges dead, a boy born next is considered as the mother's firstborn. The rationale is that a baby born in the eighth month is considered as if it would never be a viable birth. This ruling is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:23). and then was withdrawn back to the womb where it died - or the head of a stillborn fetus that was carried for nine moths emerged and then was withdrawn - and afterwards the [twin] brother [of the fetus] emerged as [a viable] birth, the viable birth is not considered the first issue of the womb, for [all subsequent births] became exempt with the [emergence of] the head of the first [fetus]. As soon as its forehead emerged, it exempted those born afterwards.51For the emergence of the forehead is considered as birth in several halachic contexts (e.g., Hilchot Nachalot 2:2).
When a baby is born by Caesarian section, both it and the next birth are exempt: the first because it did not emerge from the womb,52And the Torah obligated only the first issue of a woman's womb. and the second, because it was preceded by another birth.53These concepts also apply with regard to the definition of a firstborn with regard to the inheritance (ibid.:11).
When does the obligation for redemption take effect? When the baby completes 30 days of life,54I.e., as soon as the thirty-first day begins. These days are counted from sunset to sunset and not from hour to hour. It is customary to redeem the son on his thirty-first day of life, because one should not delay the observance of a mitzvah. If, however, the thirty-first day is the Sabbath or a festival, the redemption is performed at the earliest possible opportunity afterwards. as [Numbers 18:16] states: "And those to be redeemed should be redeemed from the age of a month." If the son died within the thirty days - even on the thirtieth day - or it became mortally ill,55Treifah, the Hebrew term used by the Rambam, is interpreted as referring to an ailment that will cause the person to die within a year. there is no obligation [to pay the priest] five selaim.56For the obligation to redeem the child never took effect. If he gave the priest [the money for] the redemption beforehand, he should return it.57For that gift is not effective in redeeming the child, as stated in the following halachah. If the baby died after its thirtieth day, the father is obligated to redeem him.58When quoting this law, the Rama (Yoreh De'ah 305:12) states that the father must also recite the blessing for the redemption. He does not, however, recite the blessing Shehechiyanu. If he did not give [the money to the priest], he should.
[The following rules apply when] one redeems his son within 30 days of his birth: If he tells [the priest]: "I am redeeming him at this time," his son is not redeemed.59Because the obligation to redeem him has not taken effect. This ruling applies even if the coins remain in the priest's possession until after the thirtieth day. For the redemption to take effect, the priest must return the money to the father and then he must give it to him again. See Siftei Cohen 305:18. If he tells him that [the gift should take effect] after 30 days, his son is redeemed even if the coins no longer exist after 30 days.60There is a difference of opinion concerning this issue in the Talmud (Bechorot 49a,b). The Rambam's ruling follows the position of Shmuel, even though Rav differs and rules that the son is not redeemed. Although ordinarily, in such differences of opinion, the halachah follows Rav with regard to questions involving Torah prohibitions, in this instance, the Talmud explicitly states that the halachah follows Shmuel. There is, however, a question regarding the proper version of the Talmudic text and the Rambam's ruling does not follow the standard published version (Radbaz). The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:13) quotes the Rambam's ruling, while the Rama rules that if the money no longer exists, the redemption is not effective.
If there is a doubt whether a son is obligated to be redeemed or not, he is exempt. [The rationale is that when] one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him.61As explained above, the priest is considered as if he desires to expropriate property - the five selaim of the redemption - from the father. The rationale is based on the fact that the money is presently in possession of the father. There are commentaries who maintain that if the priest would seize the five selaim, he would be entitled to retain possession of them, because the father would now have to prove that he is not obligated and that is likewise impossible. They support this conclusion with the Rambam's ruling in Hilchot Bechorot 5:3 that if there is an animal whose status is unclear and there is a doubt whether it is a firstborn, should a priest seize possession of it, we do not expropriate it from his property. Others, however, differentiate between the two instances, explaining that in Hilchot Bechorot, the priest has seized a specific entity concerning which an unresolved doubt exists. In this halachah, by contrast, although there is a question whether the father is under obligation to the priest, the money that the priest seizes definitely belongs to the father. Hence, it must be returned (Machaneh Ephrayim, Hilchot Zechiyah, sec. 8; see also Radbaz to Halachah 21). If a father dies within 30 days [of his son's birth], we operate under the assumption that the son was not redeemed unless he brings proof from his father that he redeemed him62In the manner described at the conclusion of the previous halachah. This is an uncommon occurrence. Hence, unless there is specific knowledge that the father redeemed him in this manner, we assume he did not. before he died. If the father died after 30 days [following the son's birth], we operate under the assumption that he was redeemed63For we assume that the person fulfilled the mitzvah incumbent upon him at the earliest possible opportunity. unless he informed us that he was not redeemed.64I.e., he made such statements on his deathbed [Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:14)].
When a person's wife has never given birth and she gives birth to a male and a female, but it is not known which emerged first,65Thus there is a question whether the son must be redeemed or not, for if the female emerged first, the son need not be redeemed. there is no obligation to give the priest anything.66Since there is a doubt concerning the obligation, the burden of proof is on the priest, as stated in Halachah 19. Not only does this apply with regard to the father, the son is under no obligation to redeem himself when he comes of age. This is the underlying principle governing many of the situations described in the following halachot.If she gave birth to two males, even if it is not known which is the firstborn, [the father] must give five selaim to the priest.67For one of his sons is certainly a firstborn and hence, he is required to redeem him. Although the father does not know which of his sons he is redeeming, he is obligated to perform the redemption (Radbaz). If one of them dies within 30 days, [the father] is exempt, [based on the principle, when] one desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him].68For the father can claim that the son who died was the firstborn and since he died within 30 days of his birth, there is no obligation to redeem him, as stated in Halachah 17. If the father died - whether he died within 30 days of the birth of his sons or afterwards, whether the sons divided his estate69In which case, each of the sons could argue that perhaps the other was in fact the firstborn and hence, he is not required to give toward the redemption. This ruling represents a reversal of the Rambam's opinion from his ruling in his final version of his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 8:3). [Apparently, the issue was one that the Rambam debated back and forth, because his earlier version of that text does not mention an exemption.] The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:265) quotes the Rambam's ruling here. The Tur and the Siftei Cohen 305:30 rule that the sons are exempt if the father died before the passage of the 30 days. The rationale they give is that each of the sons can claim that the obligation is on the other. or not - five selaim should be given from the estate to the priest, because an obligation was already established upon the estate.
[The following rules apply when a man has] two wives who have not yet given birth and they give birth to two sons and [the father] gives ten selaim to the priest [within 30 days of their birth].70For their redemption in the manner stated in Halachah 18. If one dies within 30 days and he had given [the ten selaim] to one priest, he should return five selaim to him.71For there is no obligation to redeem a son who died before he reaches the age of 30 days. If he gave the money to two priests,72Giving each five selaim for one of the sons, without specifying which one. he cannot expropriate the money from them, since he did not specify which son he is redeeming and each can tell him: "Have my colleague refund you."73I.e., each priest can maintain that he received the redemption for the son that is alive and it is the other priest who is required to return the funds.
When a man has two wives who have not given birth yet and they give birth to a male and a female or two males and a female [and it is not known which mother gave birth to which child and which is the order of the children's births], he should give five selaim to a priest. [The rationale is that] it is impossible that among them there will not be one male who is the first issue of the womb.74In the second instance, however, he need not redeem both sons, because it is possible that his daughter's birth preceded the birth of one of them. Thus with regard to that child, we follow the principle stated in Halachah 19.
[In the above situation, if the women] give birth to two females and a male or two males and two females and it is not known which was born first, the priest is not entitled to anything. For [with regard to each mother], it is possible to say a female was born first and then a male.75Although two mothers and two pairs of children are involved, the situation is abstractly the same as that described in Halachah 20.
[When a man has] two wives, one who has already given birth and one who has not yet given birth, and they give birth to two sons who become mixed together, he must give five selaim to a priest.76For the woman who had not given birth previously obviously gave birth to a firstborn son. The fact that his identity is unknown is not significant. If one of the sons dies within thirty days, the father is exempt.77Because it is possible that the firstborn died and therefore, there is no obligation if he dies within thirty days of his birth. If the father died,78Whether within 30 days of the sons' birth or afterwards, as in Halachah 20. See, however, note 68. five selaim should be paid from his estate.79Although the entire sum could not be expropriated from either of the sons - for each one could claim that it is the other who is liable - it can be expropriated from the estate. For the father was certainly obligated and that obligation is transferred to his estate.
[In the above situation, if the two wives] gave birth to a male and a female or two males and a female, the priest is not entitled to anything. For it is possible to say that the woman who did not give birth yet gave birth to a female first and then a male and the one who had given birth already gave birth to a male.80The commentaries question the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that seemingly the instance here is analogous to the case described in Halachah 30. What difference does it make if the two women mentioned are the wives of one man or two? The Radbaz explains that since we are speaking about one man with two wives and one is exempt, we assume that the exemption will continue unless it is indicated otherwise.
When there are two men who have wives who had not yet given birth and they both gave birth to males and they became mixed together,81So that it was not known which woman was the mother of which child. each father must give five selaim.[The following rules apply if] they both gave [that amount] within thirty days and then one of the sons died within that time. If they gave the money to two priests, they cannot expropriate it from them.82For, as in Halachah 21, each priest can claim that he received the redemption for the son who is presently alive. If they both gave it to the same priest, one should write a document giving power of attorney to the other and then the one with power of attorney should expropriate five selaim from the priest.83The priest owes one of the two five selaim, but there is no way of determining which one. Thus if each approached him and demanded money individually, he could avoid paying, claiming that the father must prove that it was his son that died. When, however, he is approached by the two fathers in a single claim, he has no recourse other than to pay [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 8:5)].
[In the above situation, if the women] gave birth to a male and a female and they became mixed together, the fathers are exempt84Because there is no way it can be proven who is the father of the male and thus responsible for his redemption. and the son is obligated to redeem himself.85I.e., when he attains majority. For there is no question that he is a firstborn (Turei Zahav 305:23). Similar [laws apply when] a woman who has not given birth previously does not wait after [being divorced from] her [first] husband three months [before marrying] and gives birth [to a child, whose lineage is doubtful]. It is not known whether he is the first [husband's] son having been born after nine months or the last husband's son, having been born after seven. Both fathers are exempt86The priest owes one of the two five selaim, but there is no way of determining which one. Thus if each approached him and demanded money individually, he could avoid paying, claiming that the father must prove that it was his son that died. When, however, he is approached by the two fathers in a single claim, he has no recourse other than to pay [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 8:5)]. and the son is obligated to redeem himself.87Because there is no way it can be proven who is the father of the male and thus responsible for his redemption.
[In the above situation, if the women] gave birth to two females and a male or two females and two males, the priest is not entitled to anything.88Because it is impossible to prove that a male was born first. See Halachah 23. From the Rambam's wording, it could be inferred that different rules apply when the women gave birth to two males and one female. It would appear that according to the Rambam, each of the males would have to redeem himself when he comes of age. The Tur (Yoreh De'ah 305) rules that in such a situation, the sons are exempt. See Turei Zahav 305:24.
[The following laws apply when] there are two wives of two men and one gave birth previously and one did not [and they gave birth and the infants became mixed together]. If they gave birth to two males, the father whose wife had not given birth previously must give five selaim to a priest.89Even though the identity of his son is not firmly established, his wife definitely gave birth to a firstborn son and he is obligated to redeem him. If they gave birth to a male and a female, the priest does not receive anything.90For there is no way of proving that the woman who had not given birth previously was the mother of the male. Hence, the exemption is granted not only to the father, but also to the son when he comes of age.
[In the above situation, if the women] gave birth to two males and a female, the man whose wife had not given birth previously should give five selaim. The rationale is that his exemption implies a compounded doubt. For if his wife gave birth to a male only, he is obligated. And if she gave birth to a male and a female, he is obligated unless she gave birth to the female first. Since the probability of this is distant, he should give the money for the redemption.91More specifically, there are five possibilities regarding this situation:a) the woman who had not given birth before gave birth to one male (and the other woman gave birth to a male and a female);b) she gave birth to two males (and the other woman gave birth to a female);c) she gave birth to a male and then a female (and the other woman gave birth to a male);d) she gave birth to a female and then a male (and the other woman gave birth to a male);e) she gave birth to a female (and the other woman gave birth to two males).Since her husband would be obligated in the first three of these situations, he is considered as obligated, because of the higher probability.As mentioned in the notes to Halachah 25, there is a difference of opinion among the commentaries with regard to the rulings in the two halachot. The Ra'avad reverses the Rambam's ruling in both instances, maintaining that here, the father is exempt and there, he is obligated. And the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 305:31) rule that he is exempt in both instances. These differences of opinion depend on textual differences in the versions of Bechorot 49a and differences in the interpretation of that passage.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
It is a positive commandment1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 81) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 22) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. for every Jewish man2In contrast to the mitzvah of redeeming one's firstborn son, this obligation is incumbent on both males and females. to redeem the first [male]3If, however, the first issue of the donkey is female, it need not be redeemed. issue of a donkey with a seh. If he does not desire to redeem it, it is a mitzvah for him to behead it,4Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 82) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 23) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Ra'avad objects to this being considered as a separate mitzvah. In Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., the Rambam explains that he considers the two as separate mitzvot, because Bechorot 13a refers to them as such and draws a parallel between these mitzvot and the mitzvot of yibbum and chalitzah which are accepted as separate mitzvot.Bechorot 10b explains the rationale for this mitzvah, since the owner caused a priest a loss (by not redeeming the firstling donkey), the Torah decreed that he suffer financial loss. In his Moreh Nevuchim, loc. cit., the Rambam explains that this mitzvah is a safeguard to insure that the mitzvah to redeem the firstling donkeys is observed. as [Exodus 13:13] states: "The first issue of a donkey you shall redeem with a seh.5The Hebrew term seh can refer either to a sheep or a goat, as stated in Halachah 8. If you do not redeem it, you shall decapitate it."These two mitzvot apply in all places and at all times.6I.e., its observance is not limited to Eretz Yisrael, nor to the time when the Temple is standing. The mitzvah of redemption takes precedence over the mitzvah of beheading [the donkey].7I.e., the initial preference is to redeem the animal rather than behead it.
The seh with which it is redeemed is given to the priest, as [Numbers 18:15] states: "All first issues of the womb... and the firstborn of an impure animal you shall redeem."8The verse establishes an association between the redemption of a firstborn son and the redemption of a firstling donkey. Just as the money for the firstborn is given the priest, so to, the seh for the firstling donkey is given him (Radbaz). Nevertheless, as evident from Halachot 5-6, the association is not complete in all of its particulars.
The "impure animal" mentioned in the verse refers only to donkeys.9The Rambam clarifies this because from a simple reading of the verse, one might infer that all the firstborn of impure animals must be redeemed. Although all firstborn humans must be redeemed and all firstborn kosher animals must be sacrificed and/or given to a priest, among non-kosher animals, it is only among donkeys that the firstborn is designated as unique and requiring redemption. In his Moreh Nevuchim, Vol. III, ch. 39, the Rambam explains that this mitzvah is also connected with the commemoration of the exodus when God slew the Egyptian firstborn. It is associated with donkeys and not other beasts, because donkeys are a necessity in an agricultural society. Rashi (Exodus 13:13  focused on different dimensions of this concept, stating that donkeys are used as an analogy for the Egyptians, and b) the donkeys assisted the Jews in their redemption, for they carried the wealth of Egypt upon them.
It is forbidden to benefit from the first issue of a donkey until it is redeemed. If it is sold before it is redeemed, the money received for it is forbidden.10The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, asking: "Why can he not give the money he received for the donkey to the priest? Why is it forbidden?" After all, it is permitted to redeem the donkey for its value (Halachah 11).The Radbaz explains that if the person would desire to pay the donkey's worth to the priest he could. Here, however, he sold the donkey and once, it was sold the money he received is forbidden. Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:8) quotes the Rambam's ruling. The Rama states that if the seller notifies the buyer that it is the first issue of a donkey, stipulates that the buyer will redeem it with a seh, and states that he is selling him the difference between the value of the seh and the value of the donkey, the sale is permitted If it died before it was redeemed or it was decapitated, it should be buried, because it is forbidden to benefit from it even after its decapitation, since it was not redeemed. Therefore if he did not redeem it, but instead gave the first issue of the donkey itself to the priest, it is forbidden for the priest to benefit from it until he redeems it with a seh and takes the seh for himself11I.e., the priest sets aside a seh and redeems the donkey with it. He then takes the seh as his own. or he decapitates it and buries it.The priests are suspect regarding this matter.12For they say: "Why should I redeem it when I am entitled to keep the seh with which I redeem it?" (Sifei Cohen 321:6). Hence, it is forbidden for an Israelite to give the first issue of a donkey to a priest unless the priest redeems it in his presence.
When a person set aside [a seh] for the redemption of a donkey and it died before he gave it to the priest, he is not liable to replace it.13As soon as the seh was set aside, the holiness of the donkey is transferred to it. Hence, when the seh dies, it is considered that the priest's property died and the owner is not under any further obligation (Rashi, Bechorot 9a). Instead, he should give the corpse to the priest to benefit from.14For the seh already became the priest's property [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 1:4)]. If the first issue of the donkey dies after it was redeemed, he should give the seh to the priest.15Again since the redemption is already a fait accompli, the priest deserves the seh regardless of what happens to the donkey. It is permitted to benefit from [the donkey's corpse,] because it has been redeemed.
From when is he obligated to redeem [a firstling donkey]? From the time it was born16The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:1) states that the mitzvah is "to redeem it immediately, so as not to postpone the observance of the mitzvah." until it reaches the age of 30 days.17In this, we see a difference between the redemption of a firstling donkey and that of a firstborn son. For the son must be redeemed after 30 days, not before (Chapter 11, Halachah 17). After 30 days, if he desires to decapitate it, he may [still do so]. If he desires to redeem it, he may. All that was involved was a delay in fulfilling the mitzvah.
If he does not desire to redeem [the firstling donkey], he should decapitate it with a butcher's hatchet18Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 1:7). from behind,19This is implied by the Hebrew term erafto that is connected to the Hebrew oref, meaning "neck." One must decapitate the animal, severing its neck (ibid.). as [Exodus 13:13] states: "If you do not redeem it, you should decapitate it." One may not kill it with a staff, a reed, an axe, or a saw, only with a hatchet. One may not place it in a room and lock the door until it dies, for [the verse] states: "And you shall decapitate it."
We may not redeem [a firstling donkey] with a calf,20The (Turei Zahav 321:3 notes that, as stated in Halachah 11, one may redeem the firstling donkey for its value. Hence, if one tells a priest that by giving him a calf or the like, he is redeeming the donkey for its value, the redemption is effective. a wild beast, a slaughtered seh, nor an animal that is deathly ill, nor with a hybrid, nor with a ko'i,21See Chapter 9, Halachah 5, and notes, with regard to the definition of this term. as [ibid.] states: "Redeem it with a seh." [The term] seh refers to a sheep or a goat that is alive.
One should not redeem [a firstling donkey] with a seh that resembles another species. If one redeems it in that manner, the redemption is effective.22For even if it does not appear to be a seh, it is of that species. Bechorot 12a raises this question and does not resolve it. Hence, as an initial preference, one should not use such an animal, but after the fact, it is acceptable (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh).The Rambam's opinion is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:3), but the Tur and the Rama differ and maintain that the status of such a redemption is questionable. One may use a ben pekua23This term refers to an animal that was being carried as a fetus when its mother was slaughtered and remained alive despite that slaughter (see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 5:14). The Rambam's opinion is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:4), but the Tur and the Rama differ and maintain that the redemption is invalid. for the redemption, but not a consecrated animal that was disqualified [and redeemed], for [Deuteronomy 15:22] equates such animals with "the deer and the hart." Just as a deer and a hart may not be used for this redemption,24As stated in the previous halachah. so too, a consecrated animal that was disqualified may not be used.
One may redeem [a firstling donkey] with a seh, whether a male or female, whether blemished or unblemished, whether small or large.
When a seh was purchased with money that came from the sale of produce of the Sabbatical year,25See Hilchot Shemitah VeYoval, ch. 6, which explains the laws governing the use of money received for the sale of the produce of the Sabbatical year in detail. it should not be used to redeem a donkey that is definitely a firstling.26The sheep purchased with money from the sale of produce of the Sabbatical year is considered as the produce of the Sabbatical year itself. And the produce of the Sabbatical year should not be used for the purchase of a non-kosher animal (ibid. 6:10). It may, however, be used to redeem a donkey whose firstling status is questionable.27As stated in Halachah 21, when redeeming a donkey whose firstling status is questionable, it is necessary to separate a sheep, but one does not have to give it to the priest. Hence, using a sheep for this process is not considered analogous to the purchase of a non-kosher animal with the produce of the Sabbatical year.If [the owner of a firstling donkey] does not own a seh to redeem it, he may redeem it for its value,28See the Minchat Chinuch (mitzvah 22) who concludes that when the owner does possess a seh, he must redeem the donkey with the seh rather than pay its value. paying its worth to a priest.29See the Or Sameach and the Minchat Chinuch (loc. cit.) who question whether, after the fact, the redemption of a firstling donkey is effective if one gave less than its worth. One might argue that the priest receiving the article could say: "For me, this is worth the value of the donkey." Indeed, Hilchot Arachin 7:8 states that when one redeems consecrated property for less than its value, the redemption is valid. This position, however, is not accepted by all authorities. Compare to Chapter 11, Halachah 7. The Torah did not mention a seh to be stringent with him,30And require that a sheep be given, regardless of the difficulty involved. but rather to be lenient with him, i.e., if he possessed a firstling donkey worth ten selaim, he could redeem it with a seh that is worth a dinar.31A dinar is equivalent to one fourth of a sela. [The rationale is that the redemption of the firstling donkey] should not be considered more stringent than [the redemption of] consecrated property which may be redeemed with its monetary value.
When does the above32That a firstling donkey should be redeemed for its value or for a seh. apply? When the value of the firstling donkey was three zuzim33A zuz is equivalent to a dinar. or more. If, however, its worth was less than three zuzim, it may be redeemed only with a seh or with three zuzim.34The Rambam's ruling is based on his interpretation of Bechorot 11a. Rashi and the Ra'avad offer a different interpretation of that passage. In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Caro questions the Rambam's ruling, stating that the Ra'avad's interpretation appears closer to the version of the Talmud we possess. Nevertheless, in his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:5), Rav Yosef Caro quotes the Rambam's view. A generous person should not give less than a sela, a parsimonious person should give half a sela and an average person, three zuzim.
When a person redeems a firstling donkey belonging to a colleague, the redemption is effective,35Note the Minchat Chinuch (loc. cit.) who questions whether the mitzvah is incumbent on the owner of the donkey and the person is thus acting as the owner's agent or whether the mitzvah to redeem it is incumbent on the Jewish people as a whole and any person has the right to observe. There would be a practical difference between these two views if the owner protested against the other person redeeming his firstling donkey. but the donkey belongs to its owner.
Priests and Levites36The Rama (Yoreh De'ah 321:19) states that this also applies to women of the priestly and Levitical families. Nevertheless, this applies only to the donkeys that they personally own. Those owned by their husbands are liable. are exempt from the redemption of a firstling donkey, as [Numbers 18:15] states: "The firstborn of man and the firstborn of an impure animal you shall redeem."37I.e., the initial preference is to redeem the animal rather than behead it. All of those who are obligated to redeem a firstborn human are obligated to redeem the firstborn of an impure animal. Those who are exempt from redeeming a firstborn human38And the priests and Levites are exempt from the redemption of their firstborn, as stated in Chapter 11, Halachah 9. are exempt from redeeming the firstborn of an impure animal.
When a person purchases the fetus of a donkey belonging to a gentile or sells the fetus of his donkey to a gentile - although he is not allowed to do so39This refers to the second clause. He is forbidden to sell his firstling donkey as a fetus to a gentile, for by doing so, he exempts himself from the mitzvah of redeeming it and thus causes the priesthood a loss. There is, however, no prohibition against purchasing a firstling fetus owned by a gentile (Radbaz). - he is exempt from [redeeming] the firstborn. We do not penalize him for such an act.If the gentile was a partner40In general, it is forbidden to enter into a partnership with a gentile (Hilchot Shiluchim VeShutafim 10:5). In particular, this applies in the present instance, for he is depriving the priesthood of the presents due them. Nevertheless, he is not penalized for doing so. in the mother or the firstborn - even if he only owned a thousandth share - the animal is exempt.41For, as the Rambam concludes, the firstling donkey must belong entirely to a Jew. Should [the gentile own] only one limb or organ of the fetus or the mother42The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:20) state that, in this regard, the laws that apply to a firstling donkey are the same as those applying to the firstborn of a kosher animal and they are discussed in sec. 320 which deals with that subject.There the Tur asks why is it necessary for the Rambam to speak of the limbs of an animal when he already mentioned that any small percentage of a partnership in the animal disqualifies it. The Kessef Mishneh explains that in this clause, the Rambam is speaking about an instance where the gentile is not a partner in the entire animal. He owns only a portion of the particular limb or organ in question. Hence, it is necessary to clarify that even in such an instance, he is exempt. - e.g., its forefoot or its hindfoot, even its ear, any limb or organ that if cut off would cause the animal to be disqualified as blemished - it is exempt from [the obligations of] a firstborn. If, however, the portion belonging to the gentile would be cut off, the animal would not be considered as blemished for the altar,43I.e., if such a blemish were to exist in a kosher animal. These blemishes are mentioned in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeach, ch. 2. he is obligated.44For the portion owned by the gentile is not significant.Similarly, one who receives a donkey from a gentile to care for on the condition that they divide the offspring45This was a common practice in the Talmudic era. A person would give a colleague a donkey (or other animal) to raise. As payment for raising it, he is given a half share in the donkey's offspring. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 1:1). or a gentile received [a donkey] from a Jew on that condition, they are exempt from [the obligations of] the firstborn, as [indicated by Exodus 13:2]: "The first issue of the womb within the children of Israel, in humans and in animals." [Implied is that] it must entirely belong to an Israelite.
When a convert converts and it is not known whether his donkey gave birth before he converted46In which case he would be exempt from redeeming its firstborn. or afterwards,47In which case he would be obligated. he is obligated to decapitate it48When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:18) does not mention the option of decapitation, implying that even in this instance, redemption is the preferable option. or redeem it.49This instance is different from that involving the presents of meat given to the priests (Chapter 9, Halachah 13). The rationale is that in this instance, the owner is forbidden to benefit from the firstling donkey unless he redeems it. Hence, he must redeem it rather than risk that transgression. Moreover, as the Rambam proceeds to explain, he does not suffer any loss through this redemption. If he redeems it with a seh, the seh belongs to the convert, [because we follow the principle]: When a person desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is upon him.50A priest who is claiming that he is entitled to the seh for the redemption would have to prove that the conversion took place before the donkey was born. The owner is allowed to keep the seh, for there is no holiness associated with it. The question is only one of monetary law and is governed by the principle stated by the Rambam.
When a gentile separates a firstling donkey, he should be informed that he is not obligated [to redeem it].51We inform him, lest he think that the Jews are lax in the observance of sanctified aticles (Sifei Cohen 321:13). It is permitted for him to use its shearings and to work with it.52For the mitzvah only applies to the Jewish people.
When a cow gives birth to an offspring resembling a donkey or a donkey gives birth to an offspring resembling a horse, it is exempt. [This is derived as follows. Twice53Exodus 13:13, 34:20. the Torah states:] "The first issue of a donkey you shall redeem with a seh and the first issue of a donkey...." By mentioning "the first issue of a donkey" twice, [the Torah] indicates that both the mother and the offspring must [resemble] donkeys. If such an offspring has some of the identifying marks of a donkey, there is an obligation to redeem it.54The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 315:6) is more lenient, stating that there is a doubt whether it must be redeemed.
When a donkey had not given birth before and it gives birth to two males, [the owner] should give a lamb to a priest.55Even though he does not know which one is the firstborn, one of them obviously is. Hence, an obligation exists. If it gives birth to a male and a female [and it is not known which was born first], a lamb should be set aside to remove its holiness so that it will be permitted to benefit from it, for perhaps the male was born first.The lamb that is set aside belongs to the owner and not to the priest. [We follow the principle]: When a person desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is upon him.56A priest who is claiming that he is entitled to the seh for the redemption would have to prove that the male donkey was born first.
When two donkeys that have not given birth yet give birth to two males, [the owner] should give two lambs to a priest. [If they give birth to] a male and a female or two males and a female, he should give one lamb to the priest.57For it is only certain that one of the males was the firstborn. The female could have been born before the second one. See Chapter 11, Halachah 22. Although there is a possibility that the second donkey gave birth to a male first, there is no probability that it did so. Hence the Rambam does not require that a lamb be separated for it. The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:14) maintain that since there is a possibility that the second male is also a firstborn, the owner should separate a lamb to remove the possibility of any holiness being attached to the donkey, but he may keep the lamb as his own.
[If these donkeys] gave birth to two females and a male or [even] two males and two females, the priest does not receive anything.58Because there is no probability that the donkeys gave birth to a male first. In each instance, it is possible that the donkey gave birth to a female before the male. Moreover, [the owner] need not [even] set aside a lamb that he can keep for himself. [The rationale is that] there are many doubts involved: Maybe one gave birth to a male and the other gave birth to two females. Or perhaps one gave birth to a female and the other to a male and then a female or a female and afterwards a male. Similarly, there are many doubts when two males and two females were born.59The Ra'avad and other commentaries question the Rambam's logic and ruling, because this is not the usual instance of a sefek-sefeka. When the situation is analyzed, the only real question is: Was the male born after a female or not? Hence since there is a doubt it would seem appropriate for a lamb to be separated (and kept by the owner) to remove the possibility of the donkey being holy. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 321:14) follows the Rambam's view, while the Tur and the Rama require that a lamb be set aside. As Sifei Cohen 321:11 writes, since the owner will not suffer a loss by separating a lamb, why shouldn't he?If there were two donkeys - one had given birth previously and one had not - and they gave birth to two males and they became intermingled, [the owner] should give one lamb to the priest.60For one of the males is definitely a firstborn. If they gave birth to a male and a female, he should separate a lamb for himself and he need not give it to the priest, because its status is doubtful.61For perhaps the donkey that gave birth previously gave birth to the male. [Hence, we follow the principle]: When a person desires to expropriate property from a colleague, the burden of proof is upon him.
Similarly, when a person purchases a donkey from a gentile and it gives birth to a male, but it is not known whether it gave birth previously or not, he should redeem it with a seh - which he may keep - because its status is doubtful.
When a person possesses ten lambs - each of them having been separated because of a first issue of a donkey of a doubtful status - they are considered as ordinary property in every context.62The fact that originally, there was a claim against them is not significant. Since the owner is allowed to maintain possession, as stated in the above halachot, there is no difference between these lambs and the remainder of his property. They should be tithed like other animals.63See Hilchot Bechorot, ch. 6, which describes this mitzvah. Since these lambs are ordinary property and are not consecrated, they must be tithed. One of them should be separated as the tithes and the others remain his property, as they were previously.
When an Israelite possesses at home ten donkeys whose status as firstlings is definite which he inherited from his maternal grandfather who was a priest who in turn inherited them from his maternal grandfather who was an Israelite, he should separate ten se'in for them.64For since, they originally belonged to an Israelite, there is an obligation to redeem them. They, however, [may be kept] as his own65His grandfather, the priest, would not have to give the lambs he set aside to redeem them to another priest, because he himself is entitled to them. He bequeaths that right to his grandson, the Israelite. Hence he may keep them as his own. and, hence, he is obligated to tithe them.66For they are not consecrated.
