=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
“The words of Kohelet, son of David, king in Jerusalem” (Ecclesiastes 1:1).“The words of Kohelet, son of David, king in Jerusalem.” This is what the verse said, inspired by the Divine Spirit, [written] by Solomon, king of Israel: “Have you seen a man diligent in his labor? He will stand before kings” (Proverbs 22:29). There was an incident involving Rabbi Ḥanina ben Dosa, who saw the residents of his city taking up vow offerings and gift offerings to Jerusalem. He said: Everyone is taking up vow offerings and gift offerings to Jerusalem; will I not take anything up? What did he do? He went out to the wilderness [outside] of his city and noticed a certain stone there. He broke it, he chiseled it, and he polished it. He said: I take it upon myself to bring it up to Jerusalem. He sought to hire laborers, and five people came before him. He said to them: ‘Will you take up this stone to Jerusalem for me?’ They said to him: ‘Give us five sela and we will take it up to Jerusalem.’ He sought to give it to them, but he did not have anything in his possession at that time. They left him and went on their way.The Holy One blessed be He arranged for five angels [to appear] to him in the guise of men. He said to them: ‘Will you take up this stone [to Jerusalem] for me?’ They said to him: ‘Give us five sela and we will take your stone up to Jerusalem for you, provided that you join us [in carrying the stone] with your hand and finger.’ He joined them with his hand and finger, and they found themselves standing in Jerusalem. He sought to give them their payment but he did not find them. He entered the Chamber of the Hewn Stone1The seat of the Sanhedrin. and asked after them. They said to him: ‘It appears that ministering angels took your stone up to Jerusalem,’ and they read this verse in his regard: “Have you seen a man diligent in his labor? He will stand before kings [melakhim].” Read, in his regard: “He will stand before angels [malakhim].”Rabbi Simon said in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Ḥalafta: This is analogous to an adviser who achieved prominence in the royal palace. The king said to him: ‘Ask for whatever [you want and] I will give it to you.’ That adviser said: If I request silver, gold, or fine gems, he will give it to me; garments, he will give me. But I will request his daughter, and everything will be given to me along with his daughter. So, “In Givon, God appeared to Solomon in a nocturnal dream. God said: Ask, what shall I give you?” (I Kings 3:5). Solomon said: If I request silver, gold, and gems, He will give them to me. But I will request wisdom, and everything will be included. That is what is written: “Grant your servant an understanding heart” (I Kings 3:9). The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘You requested wisdom and did not request wealth, glory, or the lives of your enemies; therefore, wisdom and knowledge are given to you, and thereby, I will grant you wealth, property, and glory as well.’ Immediately, “Solomon awoke and behold, a dream” (I Kings 3:15). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: The dream was upheld:2The phrase “and behold, a dream” is interpreted to mean that when Solomon awoke he understood that the dream was real and was being fulfilled. A bird would tweet and he would know what it was tweeting about, a donkey would bray, and he would know what it was braying about. Immediately, “he came to Jerusalem and he stood before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and he sacrificed burnt offerings and he prepared peace offerings and he made a feast for all his servants” (I Kings 3:15). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: From here [it is derived] that one makes a feast when completing the Torah.3The Torah includes all wisdom. Immediately, the Divine Spirit rested upon him and he composed these three books: Proverbs, Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes; that is what is written: “The words of Kohelet, son of David.”
Another matter, “the words of Kohelet, son of David” – three prophets, because their prophecies were matters of rebuke, their prophecy is attributed to them. These are: “The words of Kohelet”; “the words of Amos” (Amos 1:1); “the words of Jeremiah” (Jeremiah 1:1).4This stands in contrast to, for example, the beginning of the book of Joel, which states: “The word of the Lord that came to Joel son of Petuel.” God does not attach His name to negative matters.Why was his name called Jeremiah? It is because in his days, Jerusalem became desolate [irmeia]. Amos, why was his name called Amos? Rabbi Pinḥas said: It is because his tongue was encumbered [amus]. The people of his generation said: The Holy One blessed be He overlooked all His creations and rested His Divine Presence only on this stutterer with a severed tongue? Kohelet, why was his name called Kohelet? It is because his words were stated in an assembly [hak’hel], as it says: “Then Solomon assembled” (I Kings 8:1). Rabbi Aḥa in the name of Rav Huna: One group would enter as another group was exiting, to hear Solomon’s wisdom. That is what the queen of Sheba said to him: “Happy are your people, happy are these servants of yours” (I Kings 10:8), and it is written: “There came from all the peoples to hear Solomon’s wisdom” (I Kings 5:14).He was called by three names: Yedidya, Kohelet, Solomon. Rabbi Yehoshua says seven: Agur, Yakeh, Lemuel, Itiel.5In addition to Yedidya, Kohelet, and Solomon. Shmuel said: The most primary and authentic among them are Yedidya, Kohelet, Solomon. Rabbi Shmuel concedes regarding these [other] four, but they were epithets given to Solomon, and they were given to be expounded: Agur, as he was filled [agur] with matters of Torah. Yakeh, as he would expel [heki] his words, like this basin that at times is full and at times is emptied; so, Solomon, at times he studied Torah and at times he would forget it.6This was when his heart strayed from following God. Lemuel, as he spoke [nam] to God [El] in his heart and said: I can increase7Horses, wives, and money, see Deuteronomy 17:16–17. and not sin. Itiel, as he said: God is with me [iti El] and I am able.8To marry numerous women.“Son of David” – king, son of a king, wise man, son of a wise man, a righteous man, son of a righteous man, a nobleman, son of a nobleman.Rabbi Yudan in the name of Rabbi Alexandri: This ox, until its tendons are cut, it can be suspended by even one tendon. Once its tendons are cut, numerous ropes and numerous nails are needed to suspend it. So too, until Solomon sinned, he would depend on his own merit, but once he sinned, he was dependent on the merit of his fathers; that is what is written: “[However, I will not tear away the entire kingdom; I will give one tribe to your son] for the sake of David, My servant” (I Kings 11:13). Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: Happy is one who was privileged to reign in a place of royalty. There it is written: “[Og, king of Bashan,] who dwelled in Ashtarot in Edre’i” (Deuteronomy 1:4), but here, “king in Jerusalem,” in a place of royalty.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
“I said in my heart: Come now, I will experiment in joy, and see goodness; and, behold, it too is vanity” (Ecclesiastes 2:1).“I said in my heart: Come now, I will experiment in joy” – Rabbi Pinḥas and Rabbi Ḥizkiyya in the name of Rabbi Simon bar Zavdi: Rabbi Pinḥas said: “I will experiment [anasekha]” and I will experiment;1The midrash is interpreting the word anasekha to mean anaseh ko, I will experiment with this, and when experimenting one generally investigates different options (Matnot Kehuna). I will try matters of Torah and I will try matters of heresy. I will flee [anusa] from matters of heresy to matters of Torah, “and see goodness,” the goodness of Torah. “And, behold, it too is vanity” – the verse should have said only: “And behold, it too is joy,”2As the verse states “I will experiment in joy.” and you say: “And, behold, it too is vanity”? Rabbi Ḥizkiyya said in the name of Rabbi Simon bar Zavdi: All the Torah that you study in this world is vanity relative to the Torah in the World to Come, as in this world, a person studies Torah and forgets. But, regarding the World to Come, what is written there? “I placed My Torah in their midst” (Jeremiah 31:32).And the Rabbis say: The evil inclination will melt before the good inclination.3They interpret the word anasekha to mean “will melt” [yinatekh] (Matnot Kehuna). “And see goodness” – the goodness of the World to Come. Rabbi Yona in the name of Rabbi Simon bar Zevid: Any serenity that a person sees in this world is vanity relative to the serenity of the World to Come, as in this world, a person dies and bequeaths his serenity4His prosperity, which facilitates his serenity in this world. to another, but regarding the World to Come it is written: “They will not build and another inhabit” (Isaiah 65:22).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
“For everything there is a season, and a time for every purpose under the heavens” (Ecclesiastes 3:1).There was a time for Adam the first man to enter the Garden of Eden, as it is stated: “He placed him in the Garden of Eden” (Genesis 2:15). And there was a time to depart from there, as it is stated: “He banished the man…” (Genesis 3:24). There was a time for Noah to enter the ark, as it is stated: “Come…to the ark” (Genesis 7:1). And there was a time to emerge from there, as it is stated: “Emerge from the ark” (Genesis 8:16). There was a time for the [mitzva of] circumcision to be given to Abraham, as it is stated: “You shall observe My covenant” (Genesis 17:9). And there was a time for his descendants to be circumcised, [and for many] of them to be circumcised [at once. This occurred] in two places, once in Egypt and once in the wilderness, as it is stated: “All the people who departed were circumcised [and all the people born in the wilderness…were not circumcised]” (Joshua 5:5).1Joshua saw to their circumcision.“And a time for every purpose under the heavens” – there was a time for the Torah to be given to Israel. Rav Beivai said: It was time for a certain thing that was located above the heavens to now be given under the heavens. What is that? It is the Torah, as it is stated: “God spoke all these matters, saying” (Exodus 20:1).

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
“I returned and saw all the oppressions that are performed under the sun; and behold the tears of the oppressed, and they have no one to comfort them; and their oppressors possess power, but they have no one to comfort them” (Ecclesiastes 4:1).“I returned and saw” – Rabbi Yehuda, Rabbi Neḥemya, and the Rabbis: Rabbi Yehuda says: These are the children who, due to the iniquities of their fathers, are taken during their lifetimes in this world. In the World to Come, they stand on the side of the group of the righteous, and their fathers stand on the side of the group of the wicked. They say before [God]: ‘Master of the universe, did we not die only due to the iniquities of our fathers? Let our fathers enter [the group of the righteous] on the basis of our merits.’ He says to them: ‘Your fathers sinned after you died, and their sins condemn them.’ Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai [said] in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi:1The commentaries note that the words “ben Levi” appear to be out of place given that Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai was a tanna and preceded Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi, a second-generation amora. It would make more sense for Rabbi Yehuda to be citing Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya, a tanna who preceded Rabbi Yehuda. Whenever classical rabbinic literature cites Rabbi Yehoshua without identifying which one, it is assumed to be Rabbi Yehoshua ben Ḥananya. At that time Elijah the prophet, may he be remembered for good, will sit and teach them a defense, and say to them: ‘Say before Him: Master of the universe, which attribute is greater, the attribute of beneficence or the attribute of punishment? Say that the attribute of beneficence is greater and the attribute of punishment is lesser. We died due to the iniquities of our fathers. If the attribute of beneficence is greater, all the more so our fathers should come to us.’ [God] will say to them: ‘You have advocated well; they will come to you,’ as it is written: “They shall live with their children and return” (Zechariah 10:9), [teaching] that they return from descending to Gehenna and they are rescued due to the merit of their children. Therefore, every person is obligated to teach his son Torah, so that he will save him from Gehenna.Rabbi Ḥanina interpreted the verse regarding those executed by the monarchy, who come to the life of the World to Come even though they do not confess.2Those wrongfully killed by ruthless governments enter the World to Come even if they are unable to confess their sins before death. Rabbi Binyamin interpreted the verse regarding those who engage in Torah disingenuously.3The reference is to those who use their falsely derived status to oppress others (Rabbi David Luria). The entire people think they are well versed in Bible, but they are not well versed in Bible; well versed in Mishna, but they are not well versed in Mishna. He is clad in his caftan with phylacteries on his head.4He strikes the pose of a righteous individual even though he is not righteous. “And behold the tears of the oppressed, and they have no one to comfort them” – the Holy One blessed be He said: It is incumbent upon Me to exact retribution from them, as it is stated: “Cursed is one who performs the labor of the Lord deceitfully” (Jeremiah 48:10).The Rabbis interpreted the verse regarding the nations of the world. “And behold the tears of the oppressed, and they have no one to comfort them” – The Holy One blessed be He said: It is incumbent upon Me to contend with them, as it is written: “Their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of hosts is His name; He will champion their cause” (Jeremiah 50:34).Daniel the tailor interpreted the verse regarding mamzerim. These [the oppressed] are the mamzerim themselves, and who is it [who oppresses him]? It is the one who engaged in relations with a woman who is forbidden to him and begot him. What sin did this one [the mamzer] commit, and what is his connection to it? Rabbi Yehuda ben Pazi said: Even the mamzer enters the World to Come, as it is written: “And behold the tears of the oppressed...” The Holy One blessed be He says: In this world they are unfit [to enter the community], but regarding the future, Zechariah said: I have seen it and they are pure gold, as it is stated: “And behold a candelabrum entirely of gold…and there are two olives upon it [with its bowl [gulah] at its top]” (Zechariah 4:2). Two amora’im [explain the latter phrase of the verse]; one says: Its exile [gola] and one says its Redeemer [go’ala]. The one who says gola, it is the exile in Babylon and the exile of the Divine Presence with them.5Thus, the phrase “its gulah at its top” means that God is with them in their exile. The one who says go’ala, it is redemption, as it is written: “Our Redeemer, the Lord of hosts is His name” (Isaiah 47:4), and it is written: “The one who breaks out will go up before them…[with the Lord at their head]” (Micah 2:13).

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
“There is an evil that I have seen under the sun, and it is prevalent among men” (Ecclesiastes 6:1).“There is an evil that I have seen under the sun.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Ami said: This is the thought of swindlers, like one who mixes water into wine, poppy oil into [olive] oil, spring water into honey, donkey milk into balsam oil, sap into myrrh, grape leaves into valuable pollen, water dyed red into fish brine, vetch into pepper, [or one who uses] a scale beam that is long on one side and short on the other side. Regarding all these, Rabbi Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said: Woe is me if I say it, and woe is me if I do not say it. If I say it, perhaps the swindlers will learn [new techniques for swindling]. If I do not say it, the swindlers will say: The Torah scholars are not conversant in our handiwork.1And therefore they will engage in swindling all the more. Ultimately, he said it, “for the ways of the Lord are straight, the righteous walk in them [and the transgressors stumble in them]” (Hosea 14:10).2This teaches that truth must be stated, even if it will cause sinners to commit more transgressions.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
“A good name is better than fine oil, and the day of death than the day of one's birth” (Ecclesiastes 7:1).“A good name is better than fine oil.” Fine oil descends,1See Psalms 133:2. a good name ascends.2See Genesis 12:2. Fine oil is temporary, a good name is eternal. Fine oil is finite, a good name is infinite. Fine oil costs money, a good name is free. Fine oil is for the living, a good name is for the living and for the dead. Fine oil is for the wealthy, a good name is for the poor and the wealthy. Fine oil wafts from the inner chamber to the banquet hall, a good name carries from one end of the world to the other end. Fine oil falls on a corpse and putrefies, as it is stated: “Flies of death putrefy and ferment blended oil” (Ecclesiastes 10:1). A good name falls on the dead and does not putrefy, as it is stated: “He went up and stretched himself upon the boy […and the lad opened his eyes]” (II Kings 4:35).3Elisha’s righteousness, which earned him a good name, allowed him to revive the dead. Fine oil falls on water and disperses, a good name falls on water and does not disperse, as it is stated: “The Lord said to Jonah and it spewed Jonah out” (Jonah 2:11). Fine oil falls onto fire and burns, a good name falls on fire and does not burn, as it is written: “Then…they emerged [from within the fire]” (Daniel 3:26).4The reference is to Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya.Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Simon said: We have found those with fine oil who entered a place of life and emerged burned, and those with a good name who entered a place of death and emerged alive. Nadav and Avihu5They had been anointed with the anointing oil. entered a place of life and died.6Nadav and Avihu, who had been anointed to the priesthood with the anointing oil, entered the Tabernacle and were killed (see Leviticus 10:1–2). Ḥananya, Mishael, and Azarya entered a fiery furnace and emerged alive. Therefore, it is stated: “A good name is better than fine oil…”
The Rabbis say: The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Go and appoint a High Priest for Me.’ [Moses] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, from which tribe?’ He said to him: ‘From the tribe of Levi.’ [Moses asked:] ‘With what will I anoint him?’ He said to him: ‘With the anointing oil.’ At that moment, Moses was joyful; he said: ‘My tribe is so beloved before the Holy One blessed be He.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘By your life, it is not your tribe, but it is your brother’ – that is what is written: “And you, bring [Aaron your brother] near to you” (Exodus 28:1). His anointing with the anointing oil, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “You shall take the anointing oil […and anoint him]” (Exodus 29:7). However, his service is not service and he has liability unless the names of the tribes are engraved on his heart, as it is written: “Aaron will bear the names…[of the children of Israel…upon his heart]” (Exodus 28:29). The Holy One blessed be He said: ‘The names of the tribes are dearer to me than the anointing oil with which priests and kings are anointed.’Rabbi Neḥemya said: The Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘Go and appoint a High Priest for Me.’ [Moses] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, from which tribe?’ He said to him: ‘From the tribe of Levi.’ [Moses asked:] ‘With what will I anoint him?’ He said to him: ‘With the anointing oil.’ At that moment, Moses was joyful; he said: ‘My tribe is so beloved before the Holy One blessed be He.’ The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘By your life, it is not your tribe, but it is your brother; that is what is written: “And you, bring [Aaron your brother] near to you” (Exodus 28:1). His anointing with the anointing oil, from where is it derived? It is as it is stated: “You shall take the anointing oil […and anoint him]” (Exodus 29:7). However, his service is not service and he has liability unless the names of the tribes are engraved on his two shoulders, as it is written: “Aaron shall bear their names before the Lord upon his two shoulders as a remembrance” (Exodus 28:12). “Six of their names [on one stone and the names of the six that remain on the other stone]” (Exodus 28:10). Rav Beivai said: Had they been missing one letter they would not have served their purpose. Rabbi Oshaya taught: Even one dot.Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai taught: There are three crowns; the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of kingship. The crown of priesthood, Aaron merited it and took it. The crown of kingship, David merited it and took it. The crown of Torah is available for [all] generations. Anyone who acquires Torah it is as though he acquired [all] three of them. Anyone who did not acquire Torah, it is as though he did not acquire any of them.Rabbi Bon said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥmani: We found that the Holy One blessed be He went a distance that takes five hundred years to traverse to make a name for Himself, as it is written: “[Who is like Your people, like Israel…] whom God went to redeem to Himself for a people and to make a name for Himself […nations and their gods]” (II Samuel 7:23). Rabbi Yosei HaGelili said: A nation and its gods.7He interprets the end of the verse to mean that God redeemed Israel despite the fact that there were idolaters among them who took their gods with them. Rabbi Akiva said to him: You have rendered the sacred profane. The Israelites said before the Holy One blessed be He: ‘You redeemed Yourself, as it were, as it is stated: “Whom You redeemed for Yourself from Egypt, nations and their God”’ (II Samuel 7:23).8According to Rabbi Yosei HaGelili, this would be translated as “their gods.” It is written: “Whom God went [halakh] [to redeem] for Himself [a people]” (I Chronicles 17:21), and later it says: “Whom God went [halekhu] [to redeem for Himself for a people]” (II Samuel 7:23). Halakh, this is the Holy One blessed be He; halekhu, this is Moses and Aaron.9The term halekhu is plural, and therefore the midrash interprets it as referring to Moses and Aaron. Thus, the verse means that Moses and Aaron were emissaries God sent to accomplish this objective.
Rabbi Shimon ben Yoḥai said: A good name is more beloved than the Ark of the Covenant, as the Ark of the Covenant went only three days, as it is stated: “And the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord traveled before them [three days’ journey to seek out a resting place for them]” (Numbers 10:33), and a good name goes from one end of the world to the other end. From where do we derive it? It is from David, as it is stated: “The name of David went out to all the lands; and the Lord imposed fear of him upon all the nations” (I Chronicles 14:17). A good name is more beloved than priesthood and kingdom, as priesthood and kingdom lapsed, and a good name does not lapse.The disciples of Rabbi Abba and Abba Tzidoni said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman: The tribes are more beloved in their death than in their lifetimes, as during their lives, it was not stated: “Six of their names,” while after their deaths, it is stated: “Six of their names” (Exodus 28:10).10It was only after their deaths that remembrance of their names became a source of merit for their descendants.Rabbi Yehuda said: Miriam and Yokheved were the midwives of the Israelites. As it is written: “The name of one was Shifra and the name of the second was Pu’a” (Exodus 1:15). Shifra, this is Yokheved, who would tend to [mishaperet] the children. Alternatively, it is because she procreated [shepara verava].11She gave birth to Moses at the age of one hundred and thirty. Alternatively, it is because the Israelites procreated due to her. Alternatively, it is because they bettered [shiperu] [the Israelite women] with mitzvot and good deeds. Alternatively, Shifra [is the name given her] as praise [of her character], as it is stated: “With His breath the heavens were calmed [shifra]” (Job 26:13).Pu’a, this is Miriam, as she would make a comforting sound [po’a] to the woman, and the child would emerge. Alternatively, Pu’a, as she would cry [po’a] and weep over her brother Moses who was cast into the Nile, as it is stated: “His sister stood at a distance” (Exodus 2:4). Alternatively, Pu’a, as she revealed [hofia] the actions of her brother.12She prophesied about him before he was born (Etz Yosef). Alternatively, as she stood boldly [pa’at] before Pharaoh and said to him: ‘Woe to you on the Day of Judgment.’It is taught: A man is called by three names; one that his father and his mother called him, one that others called him, and one that he is called in the book of his lineage.13The book that the Holy One blessed be He wrote, which spans the time from Creation until the culmination of all the generations. One’s name in that book expresses the purpose for which one was created (Midrash HaMevo’ar).
Rabbi Pinḥas said: Man is beloved by his name, but I would not know which of them. Solomon came and explained: “A good name is better than fine oil, and the day of death than the day of one's birth.”14It is his name at the end of his life, when he dies, that is most important. When a person is born, one counts to his death. When he dies, one counts his life. When he is born everyone is joyous; when he dies, everyone weeps. But that should not be so; rather, when a person is born no one should be joyous, as they do not know the challenges and actions that will confront him, and whether he will be righteous or wicked, good or bad. When he dies, they should rejoice that he passed away with a good name and departed from the world in peace. This is analogous to two ships at sail in the Mediterranean Sea; one was leaving the port and one was entering the port. Regarding the one leaving the port, everyone rejoiced, and regarding the one leaving the port, they did not rejoice. There was one clever person there. He said to them: ‘I see matters to the contrary. Regarding the one leaving the port, they should not rejoice with it, because they do not know what challenges will confront it, how many days it will be challenged, how many storms it will encounter. When it enters the port, everyone should rejoice that in entered in peace.’ Similarly, when a person dies, everyone should rejoice, and praise him that he passed away in peace from the world with a good name. That is what Solomon said: “And the day of death than the day of one's birth.”You find that when the righteous are born no one is aware of it, and when they die, everyone is aware of it. When Miriam was born, no one was aware of it and when she died, the spring vanished, and everyone was aware. The spring publicized her death.15A spring of water miraculously accompanied Israel through the wilderness, on Miriam’s account. When she died, the spring disappeared and the people thirsted for water (Ta’anit 9a). When Aaron the High Priest was born, no one was aware of it, and when he died, the clouds of glory vanished, and everyone was aware. The cloud publicized his death. When Moses our master was born, no one was aware of it, and when he died, everyone was aware. The manna publicized his death. When Joshua was born, no one was aware of it, and when he died, everyone was aware, as it is stated: “They buried him on the border [of his inheritance]…north of Mount Gaash” (Joshua 24:30). The Rabbis say: We reviewed the entire Bible and we did not find a place named Mount Gaash. Rather, what is Mount Gaash? [It is a reference to the fact that] because they were preoccupied [nitga’ashu]16They were involved in settling the land. and were negligent in performing acts of kindness to Joshua,17They did not express their respects for him when he died. the Holy One blessed be He sought to quake and spew [lehagish] lava upon them in order to destroy them. [They were preoccupied] because the Land of Israel had been distributed and its distribution was too dear to them; this one was involved in his field, that one was involved in his vineyard, this one was involved in his olive grove, that one was involved in his charcoal. They were all involved in their labor, and that is why the Holy One blessed be He sought to quake the world upon them. Therefore, everyone was aware of it, and his death was publicized.When David was born, no one was aware of it, but when he died everyone was aware of it, as it is stated: “When Hadad heard in Egypt that David lay with his fathers, [and that Yoav, commander of the army, had died]” (I Kings 11:21). Rabbi Pinḥas said: Is laying not death?18Why does the verse use two different expressions for death with regard to David and Yoav? Rather, for David, who was king, [the term] lying is written;19This is a less direct and therefore more respectful term than the term death. for Yoav, who was commander of the army, [the term] death is written. Alternatively, is laying not death? Rather, for David, who was anointed with the anointing oil, [the term] lying is written; for Yoav, who was not anointed with the anointing oil, [the term] death is written. Alternatively, is laying not death? Rather, for David, who died in his bed, [the term] lying is written; for Yoav, who was killed, [the term] death is written. Alternatively, is laying not death? Rather, for David, whose sons inherited his position, [the term] lying is written; for Yoav, whose sons did not inherit his position, [the term] death is written. Therefore, everyone was aware of it when David died, as Solomon publicized his death.20By inheriting David’s position.When Samuel was born, no one was aware of it, but when he died everyone was aware of it, as it is stated: “Samuel died and…all Israel eulogized him” (I Samuel 25:1). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: The parable says: One who is bitten by a snake, a rope frightens him.21Since the people had almost been destroyed due to the insufficient honor they accorded Joshua upon his death, they were very careful to pay the proper respects when Samuel died (Matnot Kehuna). Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: They gave him his due, as it is stated: “He went each and every year and circulated in Beit El, [Gilgal, and Mitzpa, and he judged Israel in all those places]” (I Samuel 7:16).22Since he made himself available to the people in so many different places, they all accorded him respect. One verse says: “Samuel died” (I Samuel 25:1), and one verse says: “Samuel had died” (I Samuel 28:3).23Whey does the book of Samuel report Samuel’s death in two separate locations? Rabbi Asi said: “Samuel had died,” certainly [informs of his] death. “Samuel died,” the matters are stated only with regard to Naval, as it is stated: “Samuel died…there was a man in Maon” (I Samuel 25:1–2).24In chapter 28, the book of Samuel reports the death of Samuel as its own event, and recounts the people’s eulogies for him. In chapter 25, the book mentions Samuel’s death in passing in order to provide context for the incident involving Naval, who threw a celebration at this time and was stingy toward David. Rabbi Shmuel bar Naḥman said: Everyone was mourning and clapping hands [in grief] over the death of the righteous one, and this wicked one [Naval] was making drinking parties. Rabbi Yehuda said: This is to teach you that anyone who repudiates acts of kindness, it is as though he repudiates the fundamental doctrine.25The reference is to the doctrine of belief in God. Naval refused to bestow kindness on David, and of him it is said: “The scoundrel [naval] says in his heart: There is no God” (Psalms 14:1) (Matnot Kehuna). But King David, may he rest in peace, what would he do? He would perform acts of kindness for everyone. He would say thus: Even a killer, or one who was killed, even a pursuer, or one who is pursued, I perform acts of kindness for him as I do for the righteous. That is what is written: “But I, in Your mercy I trust; my heart will rejoice in Your salvation, I will sing to the Lord, because He has been kind to me [gamal alai]” (Psalms 13:6).26Because I have accepted the responsibility of performing acts of kindness [ole gemilat ḥesed], I will merit to rejoice in God’s salvation (Matnot Kehuna).

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
“Who is like the wise man, and who knows the meaning of a matter? The wisdom of a man illuminates his face, and the boldness of his face is changed” (Ecclesiastes 8:1).“Who is like the wise man” – this is the Holy One blessed be He, in whose regard it is written: “Wise of heart, mighty in strength” (Job 9:4). “And who knows the meaning of a matter” – for He explained the Torah to Moses. “The wisdom of a man illuminates his face” – Rabbi Shimon said: Great is the ability of the prophets, as they compare the [human] form to its maker,1By portraying God in human terms. as it is written: “I heard the voice of a man between the banks of Ulai” (Daniel 8:16). Rabbi Yudan said: We have a verse that is clearer than that, as it is written: “And upon the likeness of the throne there was a likeness like the appearance of a man upon it, from above” (Ezekiel 1:26). “And the boldness of his face is changed” – He changes from the attribute of justice to the attribute of mercy regarding Israel.
Another matter, “who is like the wise man” – this is Adam the first man, as it is written in his regard: “You are the culmination of perfection” (Ezekiel 28:12). “And who knows the meaning of a matter” – who delineated names for all. “The wisdom of a man illuminates his face” – his beauty illuminates his face. Rabbi Levi said: The curve of the heel of Adam the first man outshone the sun. Do not be astonished, as it is the way of the world that when a person crafts for himself two excellent trays, one for him and one for a member of his household, whose will he craft more beautifully? Will it not be his? So too, Adam the first man was created for the service of the Holy One blessed be He, and the sun was created for the service of man. Is it not right that the curve of the heel of man will outshine the sun? This is so regarding the curve of his heel, all the more so regarding his face.Rabbi Levi [said] in the name of Rabbi Ḥama bar Ḥanina: The Holy One blessed be He tied thirteen canopies for them2Adam and Eve. in the Garden of Eden. That is what is written: “You were in Eden, the garden of God; [every precious stone was your canopy: ruby, topaz and clear quartz, beryl, onyx, and chalcedony, sapphire, carbuncle, emerald and gold]” (Ezekiel 28:13). Reish Lakish said: Eleven. The Rabbis say: Ten. They do not disagree.3They do not disagree about the fact that the verse in Ezekiel, which lists ten precious stones, is the source of the number of canopies that God tied for Adam and Eve. The one who said thirteen interpreted [the phrase] “every precious stone was your canopy,” as three [additional materials]. The one who said eleven interpreted it as one. The one who said ten did not interpret it as any. Yet, after all this praise, [God said to Adam:] “as you are dust” (Genesis 3:19). “And the boldness of his face is changed” – when the Holy One blessed be He said to him: “Did you [eat] from the tree?” (Genesis 3:12),4To which Adam responded by blaming God for giving him Eve, who had given him to eat from the tree. the Holy One blessed be He, too, changed the glory of his countenance, and expelled him from the Garden of Eden.
Another matter, “who is like the wise man” – this is Israel, in whose regard it is written: “It is a particularly wise and understanding people” (Deuteronomy 4:6). “And who knows the meaning of a matter” – as they knew how to expound the Torah, forty-nine interpretations for ritual purity and a corresponding number for ritual impurity.5They could analyze from all angles a question regarding ritual purity, such that they could provide forty-nine rationales for each side of the argument. You find that when the Israelites stood at Mount Sinai and said: “We will perform and we will hearken” (Exodus 24:7), the aura of the supernal Divine Presence was placed upon them. When they sinned,6With the sin of the Golden Calf. they became the enemies of the Holy One blessed be He, as it is written: “And the boldness of his face is changed.”7The word changed [yeshuneh] is interpreted here to mean hated [yesuneh]. The Holy One blessed be He, too, changed matters for them, as it is written: “Indeed, you will die like man” (Psalms 82:7).8By contrast to the status they had before the sin: “I had said: You are divine, like celestial beings, all of you” (Psalms 82:6), but now they will die.
Another matter, “who is like the wise man” – this is the Torah scholar. “And who knows the meaning of a matter” – as he knows how to interpret his learning.9He knows how to arrive at halakhic conclusions. “The wisdom of a man [illuminates his face]” – when he is asked a question and responds; “and the boldness of his face is changed” – when he is asked a question and does not know how to respond.Rabbi Ḥiyya was sitting and teaching: From where is it derived that one cannot substitute for a firstborn?10A firstborn kosher animal has sanctity and must be given to a priest (see Deuteronomy 15:19–23). If one attempts to transfer the sanctity to a different animal, both animals are considered sacred. However, once the firstborn animal is given to the priest, if one attempts to transfer the sanctity to a different animal, the attempt is meaningless, and the second animal is not considered sacred. This is the teaching that Rabbi Ḥiyya was explicating. The face of bar Pedaya glowed. [Rabbi Ḥiyya] said: This one knows what I am sitting and teaching.A certain gentile saw Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai; he saw that his face glowed. He said: ‘This man is one of three things; either he is intoxicated with wine, lends with interest, or raises pigs.’ Rabbi Yehuda ben Rabbi Ilai said: ‘Let despair come upon that man, as I do not have even one of the three. I am not a lender with interest, as it is stated: “Do not lend to your brother with interest” (Deuteronomy 23:20). I am not a raiser of pigs, as it is prohibited for an Israelite to raise pigs, as it is taught there: It is prohibited for a person to raise pigs anywhere.11Mishna Bava Kama 7:7. And I am not intoxicated with wine, as even the four cups of wine that I drink on Passover eve cause my head to ache from Passover until Shavuot.’12Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Ilai did not like wine and would not drink it unless absolutely necessary. [The gentile] said to him: ‘Why does your face glow?’ He said to him: ‘It is my Torah that causes my face to glow, as it is written: “The wisdom of a man illuminates his face…”’Rabbi Abbahu went to Caesarea and he came from there and his face was glowing. His students saw him and ascended and told Rabbi Yoḥanan: ‘This Rabbi Abbahu found a treasure.’ He said to them: ‘Why [do you say so]?’ They said to him: ‘Because his face is glowing.’ He said to them: ‘Perhaps he heard some new Torah.’ They ascended to him and they said to him: ‘What new Torah did the Master hear?’ He said to them: ‘An ancient Tosefta was cited.’ They recited a verse in his regard: “The wisdom of a man…”
Another matter, “who is like the wise man” – this is Moses, in whose regard it is written: “A wise man ascended against the city of the mighty” (Proverbs 21:22).13This is an allusion to Moses ascending heavenward to the stronghold of the angels to receive the Torah. “And who knows the meaning of a matter” – as he explained the Torah to Israel. Rabbi Mana of Shaab said in the name of Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi: For each and every matter that the Holy One blessed be He would say to Moses, He would tell him its ritual impurity and purity.14For each form of ritual impurity He taught Moses, God would also teach him how to return to a state of ritual purity. When he reached the portion of: “Say to the priests” (Leviticus 21:1),15This is the prohibition against priests subjecting themselves to the impurity imparted by a corpse. [Moses] said before Him: ‘Master of the universe, but if they do become impure, in what manner is their purification?’ He did not respond to him. At that moment, Moses’s face changed. When they reached the portion of the red heifer,16Numbers chap. 19. Being sprinkled with the ashes of the red heifer in a specific ritual removes the ritual impurity imparted by a corpse. the Holy One blessed be He said to Moses: ‘That statement that I said to you: “Say to the priests,” and you said to Me: ‘In what manner is their purification,’ and I did not respond to you; this is their purification: “They shall take for the impure from the ashes of the burning of the purification” (Numbers 19:17).’ [Moses] said to Him: ‘Master of the universe, is that purification?’17How can sprinkling ashes remove impurity imparted by a corpse? The Holy One blessed be He said to him: ‘It is a statute, and I issued a decree, and no creature can comprehend My decree,’ as it is written: “This is the statute of the Torah” (Numbers 19:2).

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
“Everything is as it is for everyone; there is one fate for the righteous and for the wicked, for the good, for the pure and for the impure, for one who sacrifices and for one who does not sacrifice; like the good, so is the sinner; one who takes an oath is like one who is apprehensive of an oath” (Ecclesiastes 9:2).Rabbi Shimon bar Abba began: “Everything is as it is for everyone; there is one fate for the righteous” – this is Noah, as it is stated: “Noah was a righteous man, he was faultless” (Genesis 6:9). They said that when he emerged from the ark, a lion bit him and injured him, and he was limping. “And for the wicked” – this is Pharaoh. They said that when Pharaoh came to sit on Solomon’s throne, that he took as payment for his daughter’s marriage contract,1Solomon had married the daughter of Pharaoh (I Kings 3:1). he did not know its mechanism, and a lion bit him and injured him, and he was limping. This one died with a limp, and that one died with a limp; that is: “There is one fate for the righteous and for the wicked.”“For the good” – this is Moses, as it is stated: “She saw him, that he was good” (Exodus 2:2). Rabbi Meir said: “Good” – that he was circumcised. “And for the pure” – this is Aaron, who was engaged in the purification of Israel. “And for the impure” – these are the scouts who spoke slander about the Land and did not enter the Land. These2Moses and Aaron spoke of the goodness and praise of the Land of Israel, and did not enter it.3Thus, “there is one fate for the righteous and for the wicked.”“For one who sacrifices” – this is Josiah, as it is written: “Josiah donated to the members of the people…[for the paschal offering]” (II Chronicles 35:7). “And for one who does not sacrifice” – this is Ahab, who abolished offerings from upon the altar.4He prevented his subjects from taking offerings to sacrifice in Jerusalem. This one died with arrows, and that one died with arrows.“Like the good” – this is David, in whose regard it is written: “And of good appearance” (I Samuel 16:12). Rabbi Yitzḥak said: Of good appearance in halakha, as anyone who would see him would remember his learning. “So is the sinner” – this is Nebuchadnezzar, as it is written: “Redeem your sins with charity” (Daniel 4:24). This one built the Temple5David laid the foundations of the Temple (see Tanḥuma, Aḥarei 1; Etz Yosef). and ruled for forty years, that one destroyed it and ruled for forty years; that is: “One fate.”“One who takes an oath” – this is Zedekiah, as it is written: “[He also rebelled against King Nebuchadnezzar,] who had administered an oath to him [by God]” (II Chronicles 36:13). On what [object] did he administer the oath? Rabbi Yosei said: He administered the oath to him on the covenant.6The covenant of circumcision. Rabbi said: He administered the oath to him on the altar. “Is like one who is apprehensive of an oath” – this is Samson, as it is stated: “Take an oath to me” (Judges 15:12).7The men of Judah sought to bind Samson and deliver him to his enemies, the Philistines. Samson was not afraid of being handed to the Philistines, but sought an oath from the men of Judah that they themselves would not harm him. From the fact that he relied on their oath, it may be derived that Samson viewed taking an oath with the utmost seriousness (Yefei To’ar). This one died with his eyes gouged out, and that one died with his eyes gouged out.Another matter, “for the righteous” – these are Aaron’s sons. “And for the wicked” – this is the congregation of Koraḥ. These entered to sacrifice in dispute and emerged burned, and the sons of Aaron, who did not enter in dispute, [also] emerged burned; that is what is written: “After the death of the two sons of Aaron…” (Leviticus 16:1).
“For anyone who is joined to any of the living there is hope, as a living dog is better than a dead lion” (Ecclesiastes 9:4).“For anyone who is joined [yeḥubar],” Rabbi Aḥa said: “Chooses [yivḥar]” is written. Who will choose the good inclination over the evil inclination? These are the righteous. Who will choose the evil inclination over the good inclination? These are the wicked. “To any of the living there is hope” – even those who extended their hands against God’s dwelling8Those who aided in the destruction of the Temple. have hope.9To avoid Gehenna, if they repented. To resurrect them10In the revival of the dead. is impossible, as they already extended their hand against God’s dwelling, but to eliminate them is impossible because they already repented. In their regard it says: “They will sleep an eternal slumber” (Jeremiah 51:39). The Rabbis say: The minors among the wicked of the nations, they and the armies of Nebuchadnezzar11Those who were forced to participate in the destruction of the Temple but did not do so willfully, or those who repented (Midrash HaMevoar). are not resurrected, and not judged. In their regard it says: “They will sleep an eternal slumber.” Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Each and every drop that the Holy One blessed be He rained on the Generation of the Flood, He boiled it and then rained it on them, as it is stated: “When they are seared they vanish” (Job 6:17); their searing was for eternity.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
“Dead flies spoil and froth a perfumer’s oil; a little folly is weightier than wisdom, than honor” (Ecclesiastes 10:1).“Dead flies spoil and froth a perfumer’s oil” – ben Azai and Rabbi Akiva: ben Azai said: Does one fly that dies not spoil and froth a perfumer’s oil? So too does a single sin that one performs will cause a person to lose much good.Rabbi Akiva expounded: “Therefore, the netherworld has expanded itself, and opened its mouth without limit [ḥok]” (Isaiah 5:14). It is not written ḥukim, but rather “without ḥok,” one who does not have mitzvot to tip the scales in favor of his virtues.1The word ḥok (plural, ḥukim) can mean limit or statute. Rabbi Akiva interprets the verse according to the second meaning, such that the verse means that the netherworld takes a person who is missing just one mitzva that would have tipped the scales in his favor.Those who engage in allegorical interpretations of the Torah say: A person is judged on the basis of the majority of his [deeds]. A person should always assess himself as though he is half virtuous and half guilty; if he performs one mitzva, happy is he, as he tipped his scales in favor of virtue, if he performs one transgression, woe is he, as he tipped his scales in favor of guilt. Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar said: Because the individual is judged on the basis of the majority of his [deeds], and the world is judged on the basis of its majority, with the single transgression that this one [individual] performs, he causes himself and the world to lose much good.
Another matter: “Dead flies spoil [yavish] and froth [yabia] a perfumer’s oil” refers to the congregation of Koraḥ. Yesterday they were vilifying [mavishin] Moses and saying: Moses is not a true prophet, Aaron is not the High Priest, and Torah is not from Heaven, and today2After they were swallowed by the ground, Koraḥ and his congregation declared, from the depths of the earth, that Moses had been correct (see Bemidbar Rabba 18:20; Bava Batra 74a). they are expressing [mabi’im] matters before Moses and saying: Moses is a true prophet, Aaron is the High Priest, and Torah is from Heaven. “Weightier than wisdom, than honor” – this is prophecy; “a little folly”3This is expounded to refer to the punishment of Koraḥ and his congregation, which they received due to their folly. – this is the decree of Moses, who said: “But if the Lord will create a creation [and the ground will open its mouth and swallow them up…then you will know that these men have despised the Lord]” (Numbers 16:30).Another matter: “Dead flies spoil and froth a perfumer’s oil…” refers to Do’eg and Aḥitofel. Yesterday, they were vilifying David with their words and saying: His lineage is flawed; does he not descend from Ruth the Moavite? Today they are expressing matters and are ashamed. “Weightier than wisdom, than honor” – this is the prophecy of David.4David’s former antagonists eventually admitted that he was a worthy king and prophet. “A little folly” – “You, God, bring them down to the pit of destruction…” (Psalms 55:24).Another matter: “Dead flies spoil and froth a perfumer’s oil…” is speaking of the generation of Elijah, who would vilify him with their words and say: “Baal, answer us” (I Kings 18:26). Today they are expressing matters and saying: “The Lord, He is God; the Lord, He is God” (I Kings 18:39). “Weightier than wisdom, than honor” – this is prophecy, this is the prophecy of Elijah. “A little folly” – “Elijah took them down to the Kishon Stream and slaughtered them” (I Kings 18:40).

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
“Cast your bread on the surface of the water, for after many days you will find it (Ecclesiastes 11:1).“Cast your bread on the surface of the water” – Rabbi Beivai said: If you sought to perform charity, perform it with those who toil in Torah study, as water stated here is nothing other than words of Torah, as it is stated: “Anyone thirsty, go to water” (Isaiah 55:1).1This verse is interpreted as using the term water to refer to Torah, as implied by the continuation: “Incline your ear and come to Me, hear and your soul shall live” (Isaiah 55:3). Rabbi Akiva said: When I was coming by sea, I saw a ship that sank in the sea, and I was very sorry about a certain Torah scholar who was on it and [must have] drowned. When I arrived at the province of Kapotkeya, I saw him, that he was sitting before me and asking questions. I said to him: ‘My son, how did you ascend from the sea?’ He said: ‘Rabbi, due to your prayer, each wave cast me to another, and another to another until they caused me to reach dry land.’ I said to him: ‘My son, what deeds do you have to your credit?’ He said: ‘When I boarded the ship, a certain unfortunate man encountered me. He said to me: Perform charity for me, and I gave him a loaf. He said to me: Just as you gave me my life with your gift, so may your life be given to you.’ I read in his regard: “Cast your bread on the surface of the water.”There was an incident involving a certain large ship that set sail in the Mediterranean Sea. The wind took hold of it and brought it to a place where there was no flowing water.2The water currents in that location swirled in such a way that the ship was unable to progress. When they realized that they were in serious trouble, they said: Let us share our supplies. If we die, all of us will die. If we live, all of us will live. The Omnipresent enlightened their eyes and they took a goat, roasted it, and suspended it on the west side of the ship. A great beast came after its aroma and began dragging [the ship] until it cast it into flowing water and they traveled on. When they arrived and entered Rome, they recounted the incident to Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua. They read in their regard: “Cast your bread on the surface of the water.”Bar Kappara was digging3Some commentaries contend that the text should read: Bar Kappara was strolling (Matnot Kehuna; Etz Yosef). on the coast at Caesarea. He saw a ship that had sunk in the sea and a governor ascending from it unclothed. When [bar Kappara] saw him, he approached him, inquired after his welfare, and gave him two sela. What [else] did he do? He took him into his house, fed him, gave him to drink, and gave him an additional three sela. He said to him: ‘A prominent man like you will [need to] spend an additional three sela.’ Sometime later, Jews were incarcerated in Safefasa. They said: ‘Who will go and appease [the authorities] on our behalf?’ They said to each other: ‘Bar Kappara, as he is esteemed by the government.’ He said to them: ‘You know that this kingdom does nothing for free.’ They said to him: ‘There are five hundred dinars here; take them and appease them on our behalf.’ He took five hundred dinars and ascended to the governmental authorities. When the governor saw him, [the governor] stood on his feet and inquired after his welfare. [The governor] said to him: ‘Why did the Rabbi trouble himself to come here?’ [Bar Kappara] said to him: ‘I am requesting from you that you have mercy on these Jews.’ [The governor] said to him: ‘You know that this kingdom does nothing for free.’ [Bar Kappara] said to him: ‘I have with me five hundred dinars. Take them and be appeased in our regard.’ [The governor] said to him: ‘Let these dinars be payment to you for the five sela that you gave me, and [the members of] your nation will be freed in exchange for the food and the drink that you fed me and gave me to drink in your house, and go you in peace, with great honor.’ They read in his regard: “Cast your bread on the surface of the water.”Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua was strolling on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. He saw a ship that was being tossed in the sea, and in an instant, it sank along with everything that was on it. He saw one man who was sitting on one of the planks of the ship. [His plank was tossed] from one wave to another; he ascended to dry land when he was naked, and he hid on the seacoast. It was the season when Jews ascend to Jerusalem for the pilgrimage festival. He said to them: ‘I am from the descendants of Esau your brother. Give me some minimal garments, and I will cover my nakedness, as the sea stripped me bare and I was left with nothing.’ They said to him: ‘May your entire nation be stripped bare in this manner.’ He lifted his eyes and saw Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua strolling among them. He said: ‘I see that you are an elderly and respected man in your nation, and you are wise in the ways of the dignity of people. Perform charity for me and give me a covering, for the sea stripped me bare.’ Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua had on him seven cloaks. He removed one and gave it to him. He led him to his house, fed him, gave him to drink, gave him two hundred dinars, transported him fourteen parasangs, and accorded him great honor until he brought him into his [own] house.Sometime later, the evil emperor died, and they appointed a king in his place. He decreed on that province that all the men were to be executed and all the women to be plundered.4The new king was the man who had been saved from the ship. He issued the decree because the Jews of that province had treated him so poorly in his time of need. They said to Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua: ‘Go and appease them on our behalf.’ He said to them: ‘You know that this kingdom does nothing for free.’ They said to him: ‘There are four thousand dinars here; take them and appease them on our behalf.’ He took them and ascended, and stood at the gate of the royal palace.He said to them: ‘Go and say to the king: One Jewish man is standing at the gate and he wishes to ask after the welfare of the king.’ [The king] said: ‘Bring him in.’ When the king saw him, he threw himself off his throne and fell on his face. He said: ‘What business does my master have here, and why did my master trouble himself to come here?’ [Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua] said: ‘It is so you will have mercy on that province and abrogate that decree.’ He said to him: ‘Is there any untruth written in the Torah?’ He said to him: ‘No.’ He said to him: ‘Is it not written in your Torah: “An Amonite and a Moavite shall not enter into the assembly of the Lord” (Deuteronomy 23:4)? Why? “Because they did not greet you with bread and with water” (Deuteronomy 23:5). And it is written: “Do not despise an Edomite, as he is your brother” (Deuteronomy 23:8). Am I not a descendant of Esau your brother?5The Edomites were descendants of Esau. This man was Roman, and the Sages identified Rome as descendants of the Edomites. But they did not treat me with kindness. One who violates the Torah incurs liability to be executed.’Rabbi Elazar ben Shamua said to him: ‘Even though they have incurred liability toward you, pardon them and have mercy on them.’ He said to him: ‘You know that this kingdom does nothing for free.’ He said to him: ‘I have with me four thousand dinars. Take them and have mercy on them.’ He said to him: ‘Let these four thousand be given to you in exchange for the two hundred that you gave me, and the entire province will be pardoned because of you, in exchange for the food and the drink that you fed me and gave me to drink. Go into my treasury and take for yourself seven cloaks of garments in exchange for the cloak that you gave to me. Go in peace to your people, and I will pardon them because of you.’ They read in his regard: “Cast your bread on the surface of the water.”There was an incident involving a certain man who each day would take one loaf and cast it into the Mediterranean Sea. One day he went and purchased a fish. He cut it open and found a jewel in it. They said to him: This is the man who received a return for his loaves. They read in his regard: “Cast your bread on the surface of the water.”Rabbi Yitzḥak said: There was an incident involving a merchant who was walking along the way along with a certain soldier. As they were walking together they developed a fondness for one another. When they entered the city, [the merchant] brought him in with him, fed him, and gave him to drink. Sometime later this merchant was arrested for selling garments stained with blood.6The suspicion was that he had attacked travelers and stolen their garments. That soldier heard, and he came to him. He said to [the merchant]: ‘What are you doing here?’ [The merchant] recounted the incident to him. [The soldier] said to him: ‘When you go out to be tried, say to them that so-and-so knows to speak in my favor.’ When he went out to be tried, he said: ‘So-and-so knows to speak in my favor.’ They said to [the soldier]: ‘What favorable [considerations] do you know about this [individual]?’ He said to them: ‘The brother of someone who was killed owed me [money], but he did not have anything to give. He gave me his7The garments of his dead brother. garments, and I gave them to this one to sell them for me.’ They said: ‘A trustworthy one received it from a trustworthy one,’ and he was freed. They read in his regard: “Cast your bread on the surface of the water.”Rabbi Elazar ben Rabbi Simai interpreted it regarding Abraham our patriarch. The Holy One blessed be He said to him: You said: “I will take a loaf of bread [and you shall sustain your heart]” (Genesis 18:5); by your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, in the settlement, and in the future. In the wilderness, as it is stated: “Behold I will rain bread down to you from the heavens” (Exodus 16:4). In the settlement, as it is stated: “A land of wheat and barley” (Deuteronomy 8:8). And in the future as it is stated: “There will be an abundance of grain in the land” (Psalms 72:16).You said: “And wash your feet” (Genesis 18:4); by your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, in the settlement, and in the future. In the wilderness, as it is stated: “I will wash you in water…” (Ezekiel 16:9).8The verse means that God cleansed them of the impurity of Egypt. In the settlement, as it is stated: “Wash and be purified” (Isaiah 1:16). And in the future as it is stated: “When the Lord will have washed away the excrement of the daughters of Zion” (Isaiah 4:4).You said: “Please let a little water be taken” (Genesis 18:4); by your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, in the settlement, and in the future. In the wilderness, as it is stated: “Arise, well, [give voice for it]” (Numbers 21:17).9Israel recited this expression of praise and gratitude for the miraculous well that provided water for them in the wilderness. In the settlement, as it is stated: “A land of streams of water…” (Deuteronomy 8:7). And in the future as it is stated: “It will be on that day, the mountains will drip nectar and the hills will flow with milk; all the streams of Judah will flow with water…” (Joel 4:18).You said: “Recline under the tree” (Genesis 18:4); by your life, I will repay your descendants in the wilderness, in the settlement, and in the future. In the wilderness, as it is stated: “He spread a cloud for a screen” (Psalms 105:39). In the settlement, as it is stated: “You shall dwell in booths seven days; every native in Israel shall dwell in booths” (Leviticus 23:42). And in the future as it is stated: “It will be a shelter for shade by day…” (Isaiah 4:6).

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
“Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, before the evil days come, and the years arrive when you will say: I have no desire in them” (Ecclesiastes 12:1).“Remove anger from your heart” (Ecclesiastes 11:10) – Rabbi Levi said: Every lad is hot-tempered, and every hot-tempered one is a fool. Solomon said: Since “childhood and youth are vanity” (Ecclesiastes 11:10), therefore, “remember your Creator [in the days of your youth].” We learned: Akavya ben Mahalalel says: Reflect on three matters: From where you came – from a putrid secretion; to where you are going – to a place of dust, maggots, and worms; and before whom are you destined to give an account and a reckoning – before the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He. Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi of Sikhnin said: Akavya expounded the three of them from one word: Borekha, be’erkha, boraakha.1All these are expounded from the word “your Creator [bore’ekha]” in the verse. Borekha, your pit, this is a putrid secretion; be’erkha, your well, this is maggots and worms;2In the Jerusalem Talmud (Sota 2:2) this statement is reversed to read: Borekha, your pit, this is maggots and worms; be’erkha, your well, this is a putrid secretion. and boraakha, your Creator, this is the King of kings, the Holy One blessed be He. That is why it is stated: “Remember your Creator in the days of your youth” – when you are still in possession of your strength; “before the evil days come” – these are the days of old age; “and the years arrive [when you will say: I have no desire in them]” – this is suffering. Rabbi Ḥiyya bar Neḥemya said: These are the messianic times, when there is neither merit nor liability.
