=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment from the Torah1Sefer Hamitzvot (Positive Commandment 170) and Sefer Hachinuch (Mitzvah 405) count this mitzvah as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to hear the sounding of the shofar2The mitzvah is not the blowing of the shofar, as might be inferred from the verse, but rather listening to the blowing. The blessing recited before the fulfillment of this mitzvah, praising God for commanding us "to listen to the sounding of the shofar (Chapter 3, Halachah 10)," emphasizes this principle.Accordingly, the Rambam writes (Chapter 1, Halachah 8) that a person who blows a shofar without hearing it does not fulfill the mitzvah. Conversely, he writes (Responsum 78) that if the mitzvah were the blowing of the shofar, a person who heard it being blown, but did not blow it himself, would not fulfill his obligation.It must be noted that the published text of the siddur of Rav Amram Gaon states that the mitzvah is "to sound the shofar." Also, concerning the blowing of the shofar in the yovel, the Rambam himself writes that: "it is a positive mitzvah to blow the shofar on the tenth of Tishre... (Hilchot Shemitah V'Yovel 10:10)." on Rosh HaShanah, as [Numbers 29:1] states: "It shall be a day of sounding [the ram's horn] for you."The3Though the ram's horn is not explicitly mentioned in the verse, our Sages derived the requirement as the Rambam explains. shofar, which is sounded both on Rosh HaShanah and for the yovel,4to announce the freeing of the slaves and the return of property, as explained in Leviticus 25:9-13. is a bent5Rams' horns are always bent. This, too, has homiletic significance, referring to the bending over of our proud hearts. (See Rosh HaShanah 26b.) ram's horn.6Rosh HaShanah 16a states that a ram's horn is used to recall the akedah (binding) of Isaac. All shofarot other than that of a ram are unacceptable.7The Rambam's opinion is based on the statement of Rav Levi (Rosh Hashanah 26b), who declares: "The mitzvah of Rosh Hashanah is to be performed with bent [shofarot]," implying the use of a sheep's or ram's horn for that is their natural shape.The Ra'avad, Rabbenu Asher, and many other Rishonim maintain that Rav Levi desired to designate the type of shofar which is most preferable to use, but did not intend to disqualify the horns of other animals. Their view is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 586:1), which states that it is desirable to use the horn of a ram. However, if that is not possible, the horn of any animal may be used. The only exceptions are the horns of a cow and some wild animals whose horns are single, solid entities (Ramban).Even though the sounding of the shofar on Rosh HaShanah8The above verse merely mentions יום תרועה - "a day of sounding" - without stating what must be sounded. is not explicitly mentioned in the Torah [it was derived by our Sages in the following manner]. Concerning the yovel, [Leviticus 25:9] states: "You shall make a proclamation, sounding the shofar... you shall proclaim with the shofar." The oral tradition9Rosh Hashanah 33b explains that just as the "sounding" required by the Torah in the yovel requires a shofar, so, too, the "sounding" on Rosh HaShanah requires a shofar.10An analogy (גזרה שוה) is drawn between the two verses, to teach that the same type of "sounding" is required on both occasions. Thus, since the Torah specifies states that the "sounding" of the yovel is carried out with a shofar, that same instrument is used on Rosh HaShanah.
In the Temple,1As will be explained in the commentary to Chapter 2, Halachah 8, and Chapter 7, Halachah 13, in certain contexts the Rambam interprets the expression במקדש - literally, "in the holy place" - as referring to the entire city of Jerusalem. (See also the Rambam's commentary to the mishnah, Rosh HaShanah 4:1.) However, in the present context, it refers to the Temple alone. Thus, Rosh HaShanah 27a states that the shofar was sounded in this manner only "on the Temple Mount and at the eastern gate." on Rosh HaShanah, they would blow [the shofar in the following manner]: There was one shofar and two trumpets, [one on either] side.2The verse from Psalms mentions "the voice of the shofar," using the singular. In contrast, it refers to "trumpets." The sounding of the shofar was extended,3for greater emphasis while that of the trumpets was shortened, because the mitzvah of the day is performed with the shofar.4Rosh HaShanah 26b contrasts the sounding of the shofar and trumpets on Rosh HaShanah with their being blown on a fast day declared because of unfavorable conditions. On the latter occasion, the sounding of the trumpets was emphasized in keeping with the instructions of Numbers 10:9.Why were the trumpets sounded together with it? Because [Psalms 98:6] states: "You shall sound trumpets and the voice of the shofar before God, the King."5Rosh Hashanah 27a states that the expression "before God" implies: in the Temple. However, in other places6even within Jerusalem on Rosh Hashanah, only the shofar is blown.
At the outset, we should not blow a shofar of idol worship.1For it is not appropriate to use such a shofar for a mitzvah. However, if one sounded it, one has fulfilled his obligation.2The Maggid Mishneh explains that this refers to a shofar belonging to a gentile that was used in the worship of idols, or a shofar which was itself worshiped as an idol. However, as will be explained, if the shofar of idol worship belonged to a Jew or if it was made from the horn of an animal that was sacrificed to an idol, even after the fact, its use is not acceptable. [In contrast,] should one sound a shofar belonging to an apostate city,3עיר הנדחת. Deuteronomy 13:13-19 describes the laws governing a city in which the majority of the inhabitants have turned to idol worship. All the idolaters must be slain and all the homes and property burned. No benefit may be derived from them. (See also Hilchot Avodat Kochavim, Chapter 4.) one has not fulfilled one's obligation.4Rosh Hashanah 28a explains that the difference between a shofar of idol worship and one of an apostate city is that all the property within the latter must be destroyed. Since ultimately this shofar must be burnt, even before it is actually destroyed it is no longer considered to be an existent entity. Thus, we may not use it on Rosh HaShanah, because a shofar used for the mitzvah must be of a specific size - slightly larger than one's hand, as mentioned in Halachah 5 - and a nonexistent entity has no size at all.A shofar of idol worship must also be destroyed. However, should the gentile negate its connection to idol worship before it is acquired by a Jew, it need not be destroyed, as stated in Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:8. Since there is a possibility that it will not have to be destroyed, it is considered to be an existent entity and may be used for the mitzvah.This principle applies only to aspects of idol worship belonging to a gentile. It is impossible to negate the connection between an idol worshiped by a Jew and its forbidden nature. (See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 8:9.) Hence, a Jew's shofar of idol worship may not be used. Similarly, if a Jew has acquired a shofar of idol worship that belonged to a gentile before the latter negated its connection to idol worship, the Jew is no longer capable of negating this connection. Therefore, such a shofar may not be used on Rosh HaShanah.Also, once an animal has been sacrificed to an idol, there is no possibility of negating its connection to idol worship. Hence, its horn may not be used as a shofar.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 586:3-4) quotes all the above laws as halachah. The Ramah relates that certain authorities recommend not using even a gentile's shofar of idol worship unless we know that he negated its connection with idol worship before Rosh HaShanah begins.Concerning a stolen shofar:5one who blows it fulfills his obligation - Though in general, a mitzvah performed with a stolen article is not acceptable (see Chapter 8, Halachah 1; Hilchot Chametz U'Matzah 6:7), this case is an exception... one who blows it fulfills his obligation, because the mitzvah is only to listen to the sound,6Hence, a person who listens to the shofar being blown fulfills his obligation even though the listener does not touch [the shofar]7Based on this statement, the commentaries propose that, according to the Rambam, a person who blows a shofar without putting his lips to it fulfills his obligation. The Ramban (see Maggid Mishneh 1:6) does not accept this view. or lift it up.8Accordingly, after the fact, by hearing such a shofar, one has fulfilled one's obligation, because The laws of theft do not apply to sound alone.9for sound is not a physical entity that can be possessed. Rabbenu Manoach and the Kessef Mishneh cite other examples from Nedarim 13b-15a, where the Sages differentiate between sound and material entities.The Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 3:1) derives this law as follows:Everyone agrees that a stolen lulav is unacceptable. What is the difference between a shofar and a lulav?Rabbi Yosse responded: "Concerning a lulav, [Leviticus 23:40] states: 'You shall take for yourself,' implying that only 'your own' is acceptable. In contrast, [Numbers 29:1] states: 'It shall be a day of blowing for you,' implying that regardless [of the nature of the shofar used, the blowing shall be 'for you']".Rabbi Eliezer explained: "There, [concerning the lulav,] one must perform the mitzvah with the lulav itself. Here, [concerning the shofar,] one performs the mitzvah with its sound."Nevertheless, because a sin is associated with this mitzvah, Ashkenazic custom is that no blessing should be recited before blowing such a shofar (Magen Avraham 586:4).Similarly, a shofar from an10animal consecrated as an... olah offering should not be sounded,11Once an animal is consecrated as an olah offering, no part of its body may be used any other purpose. Therefore, we should not use such a shofar from such an animal for any purpose whatsoever.This halachah applies before the blood from the sacrifice has been offered on the altar. Afterwards, the skin and horns of the animal become the property of the priests and may be used for mundane purposes (Rashi, Rosh Hashanah 28a). but12In Hilchot Me'ilah 5:16, the Rambam writes:Concerning the sound, sight, and smell of consecrated objects: We should not derive benefit from them. However, all the implications of the prohibition against using them for mundane purposes do not apply. if one sounds it, he fulfills his obligation, because the laws of13The prohibitions forbidding use of consecrated articles for mundane purposes... מעילה do not apply with regard to sound alone. If you ask: "Behold, he has derived benefit from hearing [the shofar's] sound?"14Though the laws of מעילה do not apply to sound, there is still a Rabbinic prohibition against benefiting from the sound of consecrated articles. Therefore, one might think that we would be unable to fulfill the mitzvah with such a shofar (Lechem Mishneh). Accordingly, the Rambam explains: - mitzvot were not given for our benefit.15Rashi (Rosh Hashanah, ibid.) states: "the mitzvot were not given to the Jewish people for their enjoyment, but rather as a yoke."This concept has relevance in the ethical, as well as the halachic sphere. In the tenth chapter of Hilchot Teshuvah, the Rambam writes:One who serves [God] out of love occupies himself with the Torah and the mitzvot...for no ulterior motive, not because of fear that evil will occur, nor in order to acquire benefit...The great Sages would command the more understanding and brilliant among their students in private: "Do not be like servants who serve their master for the sake of receiving a gift. Rather, since he is the Master, it is fitting to serve Him"; i.e., serve [Him] out of love.The above is not intended to imply that a person should not feel happy and fulfilled in the service of God. Quite the contrary; indeed, the Rambam concludes these halachot (Chapter 8, Halachah 15) with a description of the importance of happiness in the service of God. However, the intent is that the happiness should be a byproduct and not the goal of the service. We should be totally committed to fulfilling God's will, and the expression of that commitment should generate satisfaction and joy.Based on this concept - that mitzvot were not given for our benefit;a person who vows not to derive benefit from a shofar may use it to blow the teki'ot required to fulfill the mitzvah. - Doing so is not considered a violation of his vow.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 586:5) advises that the person who took the vow should not blow the shofar himself [because many consider that to be a pleasurable experience (Taz)]. Rather, he should hear the teki'ot from a colleague.Also, the Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) notes that if a person specifically states that he vows not to listen to a colleague's teki'ot, he may not hear that person blow the shofar on Rosh HaShanah, because a vow (neder) can also negate a mitzvah. (See Hilchot Nedarim 3:6-8.)Based on this concept, a person who vows not to derive benefit from a shofar may use it to blow the teki'ot required to fulfill the mitzvah.
Regarding a shofar to be used on Rosh HaShanah: It is forbidden to violate the festival laws to obtain it. This applies1not only when obtaining the shofar requires the violation of a melachah (forbidden labor) prohibited by the Torah, but even when the forbidden practice is in the category of sh'vut.2In Hilchot Shabbat 21:1, the Rambam defines sh'vut as a prohibition instituted by the Sages because a particular activity resembles one forbidden as a melachah by Torah law, or because performing it may cause one to perform a melachah.Though these prohibitions are of Rabbinic origin, the Sages reinforced the power of their decrees and equated them with Torah law. Hence, just as one may not violate a melachah forbidden by the Torah to obtain a shofar, so, too, it is forbidden to violate a sh'vut forbidden by Rabbinic law (Kessef Mishneh). [Nevertheless, note the clarification of this principle in Chapter 2, Halachah 6.]How is the above exemplified? If there is a shofar in a treetop or across a river3and that is the only shofar available - one may not climb the tree - lest one accidentally cut off a branch (ibid., 6) - and that is the only shofar available - one may not climb the tree or swim across the water to bring it.4lest one prepare a swimming aid (ibid., 23:5). The Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 32b) mentions other examples of forbidden activities. Needless to say, we may not cut the shofar [from the animal's head]5In his commentary on the mishnah, the Rambam explains that this refers to cutting the horn off with a household knife. Since a craftsman's knife is not being used, cutting the shofar off is not forbidden by Torah law. Nevertheless, the Rambam uses the expression "needless to say," because such an activity bears a closer resemblance to one forbidden by Torah law than those mentioned previously. or perform a forbidden labor6cutting off the horn with a craftsman's knife [to prepare a shofar so that we may blow it].7[to prepare a shofar so that we may blow it]. [The rationale for the above is:] Blowing the shofar fulfills a positive commandment,8as stated in Halachah 1. while [the observance of] the festivals fulfills both a positive and a negative commandment.9In Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 1:2, the Rambam writes:Whoever rests from a melachah categorized as "work" on one of [these days] fulfills a positive commandment, because the Torah describes them as "days of rest"... if one performs a melachah that is not intended to prepare food,... one negates the performance of a positive commandment and transgresses a negative commandment, as [Leviticus 23:8] states: "You shall not perform any servile work." The observance of a positive commandment does not negate the observance of both a positive and negative commandment.10Though the performance of a positive commandment overrides a negative commandment (Yevamot 3b), that applies only when the negative commandment is not reinforced by a positive commandment, as in the case at hand.It is permitted to rinse a shofar with water, wine, or vinegar in order to improve its tone.11It is forbidden to prepare a utensil for use on a festival. (See Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 4:8.) However, this activity is not placed in that category (Rabbenu Manoach). However, as an expression of deference, one should never12i.e., even before Rosh HaShanah use urine [for that purpose], lest one view the mitzvot in a deprecating manner.13The Rambam concludes Hilchot Shechitah (14:16):...lest one view the mitzvot in a deprecating manner, because the deference is not to be granted to the mitzvot in and of themselves, but to the One who commanded us to fulfill them, blessed be He.
The minimum size of a shofar is [a measure] sufficient that one may hold the shofar in one's hands [with the ends] visibly [protruding]1The protrusions are necessary lest one say that a person is producing the sounds by blowing into his hands without a shofar. on either side.2Niddah 26a defines this measure as "an expanded handbreadth." The Beit Yosef notes that, in this context, a handbreadth is defined as four thumbbreadths. Thus, the difference between the width of a thumb and the other fingers accounts for the "expansion." In modern measure, a handbreadth is considered between 8 (Shiurei Torah) and 9.6 (Chazon Ish) centimeters.Should a shofar be cracked lengthwise,3i.e., from its mouth to its end; it is unacceptable.4This is a quote from Rosh Hashanah 27b. The Rabbis have noted that, in contrast to a crack along the shofar's width, in this context no minimum figure is mentioned with regard to the portion of the shofar remaining uncracked. Two contrasting interpretations are offered to explain the difference.Some maintain that as long as the entire length (or the majority of the length) of the shofar is not cracked, the shofar is not disqualified. Others maintain that even the slightest crack along the length of the shofar disqualifies it, because the pressure of the blowing will cause the crack to grow until, ultimately, the entire shofar will be cracked (Rabbenu Asher; Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 586:8).Concerning halachah l'ma'aseh, both the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (586:8) and the Mishnah Berurah (586:43) write that when no other shofar is available, one may rely on the first opinion. Nevertheless, even the latter opinion does not disqualify a shofar that is cracked lengthwise if it is tied firmly so that the crack will not expand, or if the shofar is heated and the crack closed. Some opinions also allow such a shofar to be used if the crack is plugged closed with other substances. Should it be cracked along its width5with the crack extending along the majority of the shofar's circumference (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim ibid., 9), - if a measure equivalent to the minimum size of a shofar remains,6Most authorities require a handbreadth to remain from the crack to the shofar's mouth (Kessef Mishneh). However, the Ba'al Ha'itur maintains that a shofar is acceptable even if the minimum measure remains only from the crack to the end of the shofar. it is kosher.7This applies even if the sound of the shofar is changed because of the crack (Shulchan Aruch, ibid.). It is considered as if it were cut off at the place of the crack.8Hence, the crack does not disqualify it.[Regarding a shofar with] a hole: If it was plugged9In his commentary on the Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 3:5), the Rambam writes that the hole must be plugged. This point is not accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (ibid., 7), which emphasizes that if the hole is not plugged, the shofar is kosher even though its sound has changed. Nevertheless, the Ramah states that if another shofar is available, a shofar with a hole should not be used. with another substance,10i.e., any substance other than a ram's horn; it is unacceptable.11because the sound produced does not come from the shofar alone, but rather from the shofar and the other substance. If it was plugged with its own kind, it is kosher [under the following conditions]:the majority of the shofar remained whole;the plugging of the holes did not alter its sound.12These three conditions are dependent on the Rambam's interpretation of Rosh Hashanah 27b. Rabbenu Asher interprets the passage differently. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) favors the Rambam's interpretation, but states that under difficult circumstances, when no other shofar is available, one may rely on Rabbenu Asher's interpretation.If one [merely] perforated the insides of the horn,13the bonelike tissue inside the horn [but did not remove them,] it is kosher, because a substance of the same kind is not considered an intervening entity.14The presence of a foreign substance inside the shofar would cause it to be disqualified, as stated in the following halachah. However, since this tissue is considered to be part of the horn itself, the shofar is acceptable.The Shulchan Aruch (ibid., 586:15) quotes this law, but also adds that if one removed this tissue from the horn and then hollowed it out, the tissue would be unacceptable for use as a shofar. Should one stick together fragments of shofarot until one has constructed a shofar, it is unacceptable.15Tosafot, Rosh Hashanah 27a explains that this construction is not called a shofar. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid., 10) states that this law applies even if the fragment of the shofar closest to one's mouth is of sufficient size to be considered a kosher shofar itself.
If one made any addition to a shofar1whether from the mouthpiece or from the wider end (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 586:11). - whether of its kind2using a fragment of a ram's horn or from another substance3it is unacceptable. - On the surface, this law appears to be an extension of the principle mentioned in the last clause of the previous halachah. If so, one might question why the Rambam mentions them in two separate halachot. - it is unacceptable.Should one coat it with gold4or any other foreign substance from the inside or at the mouthpiece, it is unacceptable.5for the sound must come from the shofar itself. Though Rosh Hashanah 26b mentions that the mouth of the shofar used in the Temple was coated with gold, the place where the person blowing would put his mouth was not covered. Should one coat it6with gold or any other substance on the outside: If its sound is changed from what it was originally, it is not acceptable.7for then, the sound we hear is a product of both the shofar and the coating, and not the shofar alone.Based on this law, the Ramban advises against making designs in the shofar and coating them with paint or metal, for this may alter the shofar's sound and prevent the teki'ot from being acceptable. If its sound did not change, it is kosher.8All these laws are quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 586:16).Should one place one shofar within another: If one hears the sound of the inner shofar,9i.e., with the further end of the inner shofar protruding beyond that of the outer shofar one has fulfilled one's obligation.10for the outer shofar had no effect on the sound we hear. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 586:20) emphasizes that one may fulfill one's obligation under such circumstances only if the sound of the inner shofar remains totally unchanged. The teki'ot are unacceptable if its sound is altered. If one hears the outer shofar,11i.e., its edge protrudes beyond that of the inner shofar one has not fulfilled one's obligation.12for then, one is hearing the sound of two shofarot. The Torah commanded us to hear one shofar and not two (Tosafot, Rosh Hashanah 27b).Should one widen the narrow portion of the shofar and narrow its wider end, the shofar is unacceptable.13Rosh Hashanah 27b explains the derivation of this law as follows: The terminology which Leviticus 25:9 uses when commanding us to blow the shofar, שופר והעברת, has an additional implication. That expression is also related to the word עבר, meaning "to pass." The manner in which we use the shofar must parallel the manner in which the ram passes by with it on its head.Based on the same principle, our Sages (ibid.) explain that a shofar is unacceptable if it was heated to the point that the horn became soft, and then turned inside out.
If a shofar was long and one shortened it,1It makes no difference whether the portion is cut away from the shofar's mouthpiece or from its wider portion (Mishnah Berurah 586:63). it is kosher.2Tosafot, Rosh Hashanah 27b explains that the necessity of mentioning this law arises from the last clause of the previous halachah. Since we find that the Torah requires us to use the shofar in the same manner as which it was carried by the ram, a special teaching is necessary to inform us that a shofar is acceptable even if it was shortened.The Kessef Mishneh explains that such a shofar is acceptable even it was shortened because of a disqualifying factor which it possessed on the portion which was cut off. If one scraped away the horn3either from the inside - widening the hollow of the shofar - either from the inside or from the outside4scraping away its outer shell - even if one did so to the extent that all that remained was the thin external shell,5even if the sound of the shofar changes (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 586:13; Mishnah Berurah 586:65). it is kosher.6since no change is made in its fundamental shape.Regardless of whether [the shofar's] sound is heavy, thin, or raspy,7Rabbenu Manoach and the Kessef Mishneh translate צרור as "dry," explaining that blowing a shofar causes it to dry out and produce a raspy tone. Hence, it was customary to rinse it with water or wine, as mentioned in Halachah 4. it is kosher, because all the sounds produced by the shofar are kosher.8In his commentary on this clause, Rabbenu Manoach injects a spiritual concept emphasizing how the musical quality of the shofar's tones are not significant, but rather the stirring and rousing nature of the shofar's call which motivates the people to Teshuvah.
When a person sounds a shofar within a pit or within a cave,1Rav Hai Gaon writes that these laws were not merely questions of abstract theory. Rather, they carried practical relevance in the Talmudic period, when the Jews frequently had to perform mitzvot clandestinely, to avoid being observed by the Roman authorities. those standing within the pit or cave fulfill their obligation.2for they hear the shofar's sound alone. Needless to say, both they and the person blowing the shofar must fulfill the conditions outlined in Chapter 2 regarding a person's fulfillment of the mitzvah when hearing the shofar blown by a colleague. Concerning those standing outside: If3all they hear4is the sound of the shofar, they fulfill their obligation.5However, If they hear the sound of an echo,6even if they hear the sound of the shofar together with it, they do not fulfill their obligation.7because another sound is mixed together with the desired sound.Similar principles apply regarding one who blows into a giant barrel. If he hears8The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam does not mention people standing within a barrel, because that is a very unlikely eventuality. the sound of a shofar,9alone, he fulfills his obligation. If he hears an echo,10together with the shofar, he does not fulfill his obligation.11The Taz 587:1 explains that this concept is also relevant for synagogues with poor acoustics. If the people hear echoes together with the shofar's sound, they do not fulfill their obligation.At present, there is a more common application of this principle. A person who hears the shofar through a microphone does not fulfill the mitzvah. In addition to the difficulties involved with the use of the microphone on a festival, there is a more essential problem. The listeners are not hearing the sound of the shofar, but rather a second sound, produced by a different mechanism. The microphone converts the sound waves of the shofar to electronic signals; these are then amplified and converted to a different set of sound waves. Hence, by hearing such a sound, we cannot fulfill the mitzvah obligating us to hear a shofar's call.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
Everyone is obligated to hear1Though the Rambam's statements are based on Rosh Hashanah 29a, he makes a slight emendation, adding the expression "to hear," in order to emphasize that the mitzvah is hearing, not blowing, the shofar. the sounding of the shofar: priests, levites, Israelites, converts,2Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 12:17 states:All the gentiles - when they convert and accept all the mitzvot of the Torah - ...are considered as Jews in every regard. and freed slaves.3Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 14:19 states: "Freed slaves are the same as converts." However, women,4Women are freed from the obligation to perform mitzvot that are linked to a specific time. Nevertheless, based on Rosh Hashanah 33a, the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 589:6 states that we are allowed to blow the shofar for them.The Shulchan Aruch continues that the women should not recite a blessing before hearing the shofar. Those statements are based on the Rambam, Hilchot Tzitzit 3:9 and Chapter 6, Halachah 13 below. The rationale is that the blessing recited before a commandment praises God "for commanding us to..." There is no commandment, either from the Torah or the Sages, requiring women to hear the blowing of the shofar. Hence, they should not recite this blessing.The Ashkenazic concept differs. The Ramah (based on Tosafot, Rosh Hashanah, ibid.) maintains that women may recite a blessing. Since our Sages explained that the women are granted reward for fulfilling these mitzvot, it is obvious that the commandment is relevant to them and they may say "who commanded us." slaves,5i.e., gentile slaves (עבדים כנעניים), who are required to fulfill only the mitzvot for which women are obligated. (See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 12:11, 14:9.) A Jew sold as a slave (עבד עברי) is required to fulfill all the mitzvot. and minors are free of the obligation.6Until a person reaches majority, he is not obligated to perform any of the mitzvot. Nevertheless, when a child reaches an age when he can appreciate the mitzvah, his father is obligated to train him to hear shofar as part of his education. (See Hilchot Nachalot 11:9.)A person who is half slave and half free,7In Hilchot Avadim 7:4, the Rambam explains that a slave can reach this status in one of three ways:a) his owner took money with the intent of freeing half of the slave;b) his master freed half the slave and sold or gave the other half to a colleague;c) a slave belonged to two masters; one freed him and one did not.Such a slave is considered as having two different natures included in the same person. Thus, the aspect of him which is a free man is obligated to hear the shofar, and the aspect which is a slave is not. See also Halachah 3. a tumtum,8an expression meaning "closed one" in Hebrew. It refers to a person whose genitalia are covered by a layer of skin. Hence, this person's gender cannot be determined without this skin's removal. Thus, there is a doubt whether this person is male or female. However, should this layer of skin be removed and the person's gender be discovered, there is no difference between him and an ordinary person of the same gender. (See Hilchot Ishut 2:25.) and an androgynous9a term borrowed from the Greek, in which andro means "man," and gynous "woman." It refers to person who has both male and female sexual organs. The Sages were unsure whether to consider such a person a male or a female. (See Hilchot Ishut 2:24 and also the commentary on the following halachah.) are obligated [to hear shofar].10In the latter two cases, the obligation results from the doubt which exists whether these individuals are male (and hence obligated to hear shofar) or not.
Whoever is not [himself] obligated regarding this matter1i.e., those mentioned in the previous halachah, a שוטה (a mentally unstable individual) and a חרש (a deaf person). In contrast, a blind person is obligated to hear the shofar. cannot facilitate the performance of the mitzvah2by blowing the shofar for one who is obligated.3However, a male who has already fulfilled his obligation to hear the shofar can blow the shofar for a colleague (Rabbenu Manoach). Thus, if a woman or a minor blows the shofar, one who hears does not fulfill his obligation.4Nevertheless, they are allowed to blow the shofar for themselves. (See Halachah 7 and Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 589:6.)An androgynous can facilitate the performance of the mitzvah for one of his kind,5i.e., another androgynous but not for one who is not of his kind.6a normal adult male or a tumtum.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statement, noting that there is a difference of opinion among the Sages (Yevamot 83a) whether an androgynous is considered as half male and half female, or as a unique entity in his own right. The latter opinion is compatible with the Rambam's decision. However, according to the former opinion, it appears that an androgynous would resemble a person who is half slave and half free. As the following halachah states, such a person cannot blow the shofar even for himself, let alone for others.The Maggid Mishneh defends the Rambam's decision, explaining that the Rambam does not consider the difference of opinion in Yevamot as unresolved. Rather, he, as does Rav Yitzchak Alfasi (the Rif), maintains that the halachah follows the latter opinion.Furthermore, the Maggid Mishneh explains that even according to the former opinion, it is possible to differentiate between an androgynous and one who is half slave and half free, the former condition being brought about by God; the latter, by man. A tumtum cannot facilitate the performance of the mitzvah [for anyone], whether of his kind or not of his kind, for7in his case, the doubt is not about the general category, but an individual question about the particular tumtum's nature if [the layer of skin covering] the tumtum's [genitalia] is cut open, it is possible that it will be discovered that the tumtum is a male,8and the teki'ot he blows are acceptable. but it is possible that it will be discovered that the tumtum is a female.9and hence, unable to blow the shofar for a male.
A person who is half slave and half free cannot even facilitate the performance of the mitzvah1by blowing the shofar for himself,2let alone for others, because the aspect of himself which is a slave cannot facilitate the performance of the mitzvah for the aspect of himself which is free.3Every activity performed by such an individual is considered as a combined effort carried out by both aspects of his being. The aspect of his being which is a free man is obligated to hear shofar blown by one who is obligated to perform the mitzvah. Hence, the teki'ot he blows himself include the influence of his slave side, and are not sufficient to facilitate his performance of the mitzvah (Rosh Hashanah 29a).How should he fulfill his obligation? He should hear a free man blow the shofar.4One might ask: Since his hearing the shofar also involves his slave side, how is that hearing sufficient to allow him to fulfill his obligation?The Tzaphnat Paneach explains that there is a difference between hearing the shofar and blowing it. Hearing the shofar is a complete act in and of itself. Hence, since the free side of the person has heard the shofar, he is considered to have performed the mitzvah. In contrast, the blowing of the shofar is merely the preparation for the fulfillment of the mitzvah. Hence, the free side of the person cannot fulfill his obligation by hearing tekiot which were produced by a person whose entire being was not obligated to perform the mitzvah.Based on this explanation, we can understand how such a person fulfills the mitzvah of lulav, for there as well, the act of taking the lulav constitutes rather than prepares for, the fulfilment of the mitzvah.
A person who occupies himself with blowing the shofar in order to learn1without the intention of fulfilling the mitzvah of hearing the shofar does not fulfill his obligation. Similarly, one who hears the shofar2even though he desires to fulfill the mitzvah from a person who blows it casually3without the intention of facilitating his colleague's performance of the mitzvah does not fulfill his obligation.4for he has heard an unacceptable shofar blast (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 589:5).These laws relate to a question of a much larger scope: Must a person who performs a mitzvah have the intention of doing so or not? Rosh Hashanah 32b, which is the source for these decisions, maintains that such intention is necessary. However, other Talmudic sources imply that there is no need for such intention. Whenever a person performs the deed of a mitzvah, he fulfills his obligation, regardless of his intention.On the surface, the Rambam's own decisions regarding this question appear paradoxical. Hilchot Chametz U'matzah 6:3 states:A person who eats matzah without the intention [of fulfilling the mitzvah] - e.g., if gentiles or thieves force him to eat - fulfills his obligation.There, it appears that the Rambam does not require a person to have the intention to fulfill a mitzvah, for in this instance the only reason the person ate the matzah was the coercion of the gentiles.The commentaries attempt to resolve the issue. The Maggid Mishneh states that to fulfill his obligation, the person being forced to eat the matzah must know that today is Pesach, that he is obligated to eat matzah, and that it is matzah which he is eating. Rabbenu Nissim, the Kessef Mishneh, and Rabbenu Manoach follow a different line of reasoning. They differentiate between eating matzah and hearing a shofar. In the former case, a person's body benefits from the activity regardless of his intention. To support this thesis, they draw a parallel to the following passage.Generally, the Torah frees a person from liability if he commits a transgression while being only מתעסק (performing a deed without any thought). However, a person who eats forbidden foods or engages in forbidden sexual relations in this manner is liable, because he derived pleasure from his activities (Keritot 19b).Similarly, since the person derived physical satisfaction from eating the matzah, even though he was forced to do so, the action is attributed to him. In contrast, since his body did not benefit from hearing the shofar, he does not fulfill his obligation until he hears the shofar blown in the proper manner.As regards halachah l'ma'aseh, in Orach Chayim 589:8, the Shulchan Aruch quotes the Rambam's decision concerning blowing the shofar, stating that a מתעסק does not fulfill the mitzvah. Similar decisions are rendered concerning Kri'at Shema (Orach Chayim 60) and lulav and etrog (Orach Chayim 651).Concerning matzah, the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 475:4 quotes the Maggid Mishneh's opinion, and the Shulchan Aruch HaRav adds the explanation mentioned in the name of the Kessef Mishneh. (Even so, the Pri Chadash and other commentaries do not accept this decision.)If the person hearing had the intention of fulfilling his obligation, but the person blowing did not have the intention of facilitating the latter's performance of the mitzvah,5Rosh Hashanah 28b quotes Rabbi Zeira as instructing Shamaya: "Have me in mind and blow for me." or the person blowing had the intention of facilitating his colleague's performance of the mitzvah, but the person hearing did not have the intention of fulfilling his obligation, [the person hearing] did not fulfill his obligation.6The Magen Avraham (189:4) states that if a person comes to the synagogue on Rosh Hashanah with the intention to fulfill his obligation to hear the shofar, that intention is sufficient. Even if he has no specific intention while the shofar is being blown, he fulfills his obligation. Rather, both the person hearing and the one allowing him to hear7i.e., the person blowing the shofar must have the [proper] intention.
If a person blew the shofar with the intention of enabling all those hearing his blowing to perform the mitzvah,1The blower need not have each individual in mind. However, as the previous halachah states, he must have the intention that his blowing enable people to fulfill their obligation to hear shofar. If he blows without that intention, their listening is of no consequence. and a listener heard while having the intention to fulfill his obligation2However, as stated in the previous halachah, if the listener lacks that intention, he does not fulfill his obligation. - even though the person blowing did not have a specific intention that this individual would hear his blowing, nor did he know about him3the listener has fulfilled his obligation, because the blower had in mind all those who heard him. - Rosh Hashanah 29a derives this principle by contrasting the law mentioned in the previous halachah with the law mentioned in this halachah's latter clause. - the listener has fulfilled his obligation, because the blower had in mind all those who heard him.Accordingly, if a person was traveling on a journey4The Magen Avraham (589:5) explains that a person who continues traveling must be sure that he has the intention of fulfilling his obligation. However, if he stops to hear the shofar, that itself is sufficient proof that he desires to fulfill the mitzvah. or was sitting in his home and heard the teki'ot from the person leading the congregation, he has fulfilled his obligation if he had that intention, since the leader of the congregation had the intention of enabling the many to fulfill their obligation.5In his commentary on the Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 3:5), the Rambam writes: "the [function of] leader of the congregation was instituted in that capacity only in order to enable the many to fulfill their obligation."
If the festival of Rosh Hashanah falls on the Sabbath,1According to the fixed calendar we use, Rosh Hashanah never falls on Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday (Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 7:1). Thus, the second day of Rosh Hashanah will never fall on the Sabbath. However, it is not at all infrequent for the first day of Rosh Hashanah to fall on the Sabbath. the shofar is not sounded in every place.2However, it is sounded in certain places, as explained in Halachot 8 and 9. There is an allusion to this in the Torah itself. Though Numbers 10:10 describes Rosh Hashanah as a day of "the sounding of the shofar," Leviticus 23:24 refers to it as a day of "the remembrance of the sounding [of the shofar" - i.e., this refers to Rosh Hashanah which falls on the Sabbath, when the shofar is not actually sounded (Rashi, Rosh Hashanah 32a). [This law was enacted] even though blowing [the shofar] was forbidden only as sh'vut.3See the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 4 for a definition of the term sh'vut. Rosh Hashanah 29b equates the blowing of the shofar with removing bread from the oven. It appears from Shabbat 117b that the removal of bread from the oven was forbidden only because it is "a weekday act," not in the spirit of the Sabbath. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 588:4.)It would be appropriate for [the shofar] to be sounded, for a positive commandment of the Torah should supersede sh'vut instituted by the Sages.4A question can be raised, based on the Rambam's statements in Chapter 1, Halachah 4:Regarding a shofar to be used on Rosh Hashanah: It is forbidden to violate the festival's laws to obtain it. This applies even when the forbidden practice is in the category of sh'vut.The Lechem Mishneh offers a number of resolutions to this difficulty. Among them:a) Had the proper attention been paid to the matter before Rosh Hashanah, the sh'vut mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 4 with regard to obtaining the shofar would not exist. In contrast, the sh'vut involved in blowing the shofar cannot be avoided.b) The sh'vut mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 4 must be violated before the mitzvah is performed. Hence, there is no way the prohibition can be relaxed in the mere expectation that a mitzvah will be performed. In contrast, in this instance, the performance of the mitzvah and the sh'vut occur concurrently.However, the order of the halachot here suggests a different explanation. As the Rambam states in the following halachah, certain leniencies are taken regarding the sh'vut of sounding the shofar on Rosh Hashanah (since, as mentioned above, it is forbidden only because it is a "weekday act"). In contrast, the activities mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 4 are of a more severe nature, and hence no leniency may be taken in their regard. If so, why is the shofar not sounded?Because of a decree [of the Sages] lest a person take it in his hands and carry it to a colleague so that the latter can blow for him,5The Rambam alters the expression used by Rosh Hashanah 29b, which states: "perhaps he will take it to a skilled person so that the latter will teach him." Perhaps, the emendation was made because it is more likely that a person would desire that his colleague blow for him than begin to teach him on Rosh Hashanah itself. and [in the process,] carry it four cubits in the public domain or transfer it from one domain to another,6Hilchot Shabbat 12:8 equates the two and explains the nature of this melachah. It must be noted that the phrase "transfer it from one domain..." is the Rambam's addition and does not appear in Rosh Hashanah, ibid. (Indeed, Tosafot, Megillah 4b explains that there is no suspicion that the latter prohibition will be violated.) and thus violate a prohibition punishable by being stoned to death.7as is the commission of all Shabbat melachot (Hilchot Shabbat 1:1-2.) [This is necessary because] all are obligated in the mitzvah of blowing the shofar, but not all are skilled in it.8A similar expression is also found in Hilchot Megillah 1:13, explaining why the Megillah is never read on the Sabbath. It must be noted that while the Temple was standing, a similar decree was not enacted on the first day of Sukkot which fell on the Sabbath, even though it is possible that a person would carry his lulav in a forbidden manner. Note our commentary on Chapter 7, Halachot 13 and 14, which explains the difference between the two festivals.The fact that a Rabbinic decree can cause a mitzvah to be nullified - particularly as significant a mitzvah as the blowing of the shofar - has been the subject of much discussion by the Rabbis. In his commentary on the tractate of Sukkah, Rabbenu Nissim states that this decree was instituted only because in most Jewish communities, the people were not aware of the date the Rabbis had established for Rosh Hashanah. Hence, since the people could not be sure that they were in fact performing a mitzvah, the Rabbinic decree had the power to negate its performance. Even in the places where they were conscious of the proper date, they would not blow the shofar in such a year, so that great divisions in Torah practice would not be created among the Jewish people.In Likkutei Torah, Rav Shneur Zalman of Liadi explains the matter from a mystical perspective. He writes that the Sabbath itself generates spiritual influences which resemble those produced by the blowing of the shofar. Thus, there is no necessity to blow the shofar, and the Sages were therefore willing to allow such a decree to negate its observance.
Children who have not reached an age at which they can be educated:1Rabbenu Manoach explains that this refers to children of six or seven. We need not prevent them from blowing [the shofar] on a Sabbath2even though blowing the shofar on the Sabbath is prohibited for an adult which is not the festival of Rosh Hashanah, so that they will learn [to blow].3This halachah is not directly related to the laws of Rosh Hashanah, but rather to the laws of the Sabbath. If a child has not reached the age where he can be educated concerning the mitzvot, his parents are not required to prevent him from violating any of the mitzvot (Yevamot 114a).The law stated here represents a reversal of the Rambam's understanding of Rosh Hashanah 33a from that in his commentary on the Mishnah. Indeed, his change in interpretation caused the Ra'avad to object to this halachah. It is interesting to note that the Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh Hashanah 4:9) and the primary interpretation mentioned in the Halachot of Rav Yitzchak Alfasi (the Rif) - sources which the Rambam relies upon heavily - follow the Rambam's initial approach.An adult is permitted to be involved in the instruction [of children4He may tell them to blow the shofar and teach them how to blow (Maggid Mishneh). in the blowing of shofar] on the festival.5even though the blowing of the shofar is prohibited on the Sabbath. [This applies] concerning both children who have reached an age at which they can be educated and those who have not reached that age, for blowing [the shofar] is prohibited only as sh'vut.6Since the prohibition against blowing the shofar is not severe, a number of leniencies are taken in this regard. The shofar is sounded for women (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 589:6), and similarly, additional blasts are sounded to "upset Satan" (Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim, 596:1). However, it is forbidden for an adult to sound the shofar on Rosh Hashanah unnecessarily. Nevertheless, even a child who has reached the age when he is educated concerning the mitzvot need not follow this stringency (Ramah, ibid.).
When [the Sages] decreed not to sound [the shofar] on the Sabbath, they applied that decree only to places which lacked a court.1The Sages forbade sounding the shofar on the Sabbath lest someone carry it in a forbidden manner, as explained in the previous halachah. However, that decree was not applied to places where the Sanhedrin, Israel's supreme court, held its sessions. The influence of the court would be felt throughout the entire city and its surroundings. Hence, the people would be more scrupulous in their observance of the mitzvot. (See the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah Rosh Hashanah 4:1 and the following halachah.) However, while the Temple was standing and the Supreme Court was seated in Jerusalem,2After the Temple was constructed, the Sanhedrin held its sessions in the Chamber of Hewn Stone in the Temple. Forty years before the destruction of the Second Temple, the Sanhedrin was forced to move from that place to other locations in Jerusalem. (See Hilchot Sanhedrin 14:12-13.) everyone3i.e., not only was the shofar sounded at the seat of the Sanhedrin and on the Temple mount, but throughout the city; even private individuals were allowed to blow the shofar (Rosh Hashanah 30a). would sound the shofar in Jerusalem throughout the entire period the court held its sessions there.4The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statements. He disagrees with the Rambam on two points:a) while the Temple was standing, the Rambam maintains that the shofar was sounded throughout Jerusalem, while the Ra'avad maintains that it was sounded in the Temple alone.b) after the Temple's destruction, the Rambam maintains that the shofar was not sounded in Jerusalem, while the Ra'avad argues that it was.The difference between the two depends on the Rambam's interpretation of the Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 4:1):When the festival of Rosh Hashanah fell on the Sabbath, they would sound the shofar in the Mikdash, but not in the country at large.In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam writes: "We have already explained to you several times (see Ma'aser Sheni 2:4, Shekalim 1:3, Sukkah 3:10) that the term mikdash refers to the entire city of Jerusalem." Thus, he maintains that if Rosh Hashanah fell on the Sabbath while the Temple was standing, the shofar would be sounded throughout the city. After the destruction of the Temple, this practice was discontinued.[This did not apply] to the people of Jerusalem alone.5The influence of the Sanhedrin could be felt even on the outskirts of the city. Rather, every city that was within the outer limits6This refers to the תחום שבת - 2000 cubits from the outermost house from each point on the city's circumference. (See Hilchot Shabbat, Chapters 27 and 28.) of Jerusalem7There were a number of smaller villages surrounding Jerusalem which met all the requirements specified below. and [whose inhabitants] could:see Jerusalem8i.e., excluding those within a wadi - below the mountains, who could not see Jerusalem. - i.e., excluding those within a wadi;hear the shofar blown in Jerusalem9i.e., excluding those on the mountaintops - Since they were situated on the mountaintops, they could see the city even from afar. However, the sound would not carry that far. - i.e., excluding those on the mountaintops; andtravel to Jerusalem10i.e., excluding those separated by a wadi - which they would be unable to cross - i.e., excluding those separated by a wadi from the citythe11The exclusions mentioned by the Rambam are quoted from Rosh Hashanah, ibid., based on the text of the Mishnah. The Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh Hashanah 4:1) interprets the Mishnah slightly differently. people of these cities would blow the shofar on the Sabbath as in Jerusalem. However, in the other cities of Israel,12even where the courts held session they would not sound [the shofar on the Sabbath].
At present, while the Temple is destroyed, wherever a court whose judges received semichah1Semichah is the term used to refer to the permission granted to a judge to act in that capacity. Only a judge who himself possesses semichah can convey this distinction to a colleague. Moses gave Joshua and the seventy elders semichah, and they began a chain that stretched over many generations, ending several hundred years after the destruction of the Temple. (See Hilchot Sanhedrin 4:1-2.) in Eretz Yisrael2semichah could be conveyed only in Eretz Yisrael (ibid.:6). permanently holds sessions,3i.e., if, on Rosh Hashanah, the court held special sessions in a city where it was not normally located, the shofar would not be sounded. (See the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Rosh Hashanah 4:1.) the shofar is sounded on the Sabbath.4The Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 29b) states:When the Temple was destroyed, Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai ordained that the shofar be sounded in every place where a court holds sessions.The Talmud elaborates:[After the destruction of the Temple,] Rosh Hashanah once fell on the Sabbath, and all the cities gathered together [in Yavneh]. Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai asked the family of Beteira: "Shall we blow?""Let us consider the matter," they replied to him."Let us blow, and then consider the matter after having blown," he answered them."Let us consider the matter," they replied again.He told them, "The sounding of a horn has already been heard in Yavneh. Once a deed has been performed, no further discussion is entertained." Furthermore, the shofar is sounded on the Sabbath only in a court that has sanctified the new moon.5Originally, the months were sanctified by the courts after hearing the testimony of witnesses who saw the new moon. (See Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh, Chapters 1 and 2.) However, the shofar will not be sounded in other courts, even though their judges have received semichah.6The Rambam's statements represent a middle road in a difference of opinion between the Rabbinical giants upon whom our understanding of the Talmud is based. Rashi (Rosh Hashanah 29a) states that the shofar was sounded on the Sabbath only in the presence of the Supreme Sanhedrin. Thus, this law applied only in Yavneh and in the few other cities where the Sanhedrin subsequently held its session.Rav Yitzchak Alfasi (the Rif) quotes this law in his Halachot even though he quotes only those laws which are applicable in his age. From this it appears that he maintains that the shofar may be sounded in the presence of any court of stature on the Sabbath, even if its judges do not possess semichah. Indeed, the Ramban and Rabbenu Nissim write that Rav Yitzchak Alfasi would have the shofar sounded in his own court when Rosh Hashanah fell on the Sabbath. Similarly, the text Haezer records that the author saw a Sage from Damascus who stated that he saw the shofar blown on Rosh Hashanah which fell on a Sabbath.(The Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid., does not mention the need for the judges to possess semichah. Thus, it is possible that he also originally subscribed to this view.)In the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam's position lies in between these views. On one hand, unlike Rav Yitzchak Alfasi, he requires that the judges possess semichah and be of sufficient stature to have sanctified the new moon (thus, excluding any contemporary courts). Nevertheless, unlike Rashi, he allows the shofar to be sounded in the presence of any court that has those qualifications, and not the Supreme Sanhedrin alone. Also, the shofar is sounded only in the presence of a high court.7Our translation of בית דין גדול is based on the Kessef Mishneh, who explains that in this context the term refers to an established court of judges with semichah, and not the Supreme Sanhedrin, as is sometimes the case. Indeed, authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah from Yemen omit the word גדול from the above expression.It may be sounded during the entire time they are in session.8but only while they are in session. If they have risen, the shofar can no longer be sounded. However... Even after they9the judges have begun preparing to rise10as long as they have not risen - the shofar may be sounded before them - Though the Sages (Rosh Hashanah 30a) raised a question on this matter and left it unanswered, the Rambam allows the shofar to be sounded under such circumstances. Since the question concerns a Rabbinic decree, the more lenient approach is taken (Maggid Mishneh). - as long as they have not risen - the shofar may be sounded before them. However, outside the court, the shofar may not be sounded.11In this aspect, there was a difference between the sounding of the shofar on the Sabbath between Jerusalem and Yavneh. In Jerusalem, the influence of the Temple and the court was felt so strongly that even outside the presence of the court, the shofar could be sounded. In contrast, in Yavneh and other cities where courts were located, the shofar was sounded only in the presence of a court (Rosh Hashanah, ibid.).Why is the shofar allowed to be sounded in the court? Because the court is scrupulous [in the observance of the mitzvot] and, in its presence, those who blow the shofar will not carry the shofar in the public domain, for the court will warn the people and inform them.12The S'dei Chemed derives a general principle from this law. Hilchot Shabbat 21:27 states that all Sabbath and festival prohibitions that were categorized as sh'vut were suspended in the Temple, because the priests were scrupulous in their observance of the mitzvot and there was no danger that any infringement of Torah law would occur. Similarly, the above text continues, all decrees of this nature may be suspended in the presence of a high court, because the court will ensure that the Torah's laws will be kept.This logic runs contrary to a statement of Rabbenu Nissim, who writes that although Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai instituted the blowing of the shofar on the Sabbath in the presence of a court, he was not that lenient regarding the taking of the lulav and etrog. Thus, we see that the leniency mentioned here applies to the shofar alone and not to other cases.
In the present age, when we celebrate Rosh Hashanah in the exile for two days,1There is a slight imprecision with the Rambam's statements. Rosh Hashanah was celebrated for two days throughout almost the totality of Eretz Yisrael even while the Temple was standing. It was impossible to notify the people in most of the land (for the messengers were not allowed to travel more than two thousand cubits beyond Jerusalem) whether or not the court had substantiated the testimony of the witnesses on the day when Rosh Hashanah was expected to fall. (See Beitzah 4b-5a; Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 5:7-8.) the shofar is sounded on the second day just as it is sounded on the first.2This refers to the actual sounding of the shofar. According to Sephardic custom, there is a difference concerning the recitation of the blessing shehecheyanu (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 499:3).If the first day3As mentioned above, according to the fixed calendar which we employ at present, it is impossible for the second day of Rosh Hashanah to fall on the Sabbath. falls on the Sabbath, those who were not in the presence of a court fit to blow the shofar on the Sabbath4The Kessef Mishneh notes that there is some difficulty correlating this statement with that of the previous halachah, which implies that, at present, no courts are of sufficient stature to blow the shofar on the Sabbath. Among the possible resolutions to this difficulty are:a) as the Rambam writes in Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 5:3, until the age of Abbaye and Ravvah, there were courts of judges who sanctified the new month based on the testimony of witnesses. Thus, the Rambam could be referring to such a court.b) In Hilchot Sanhedrin 4:11, the Rambam discusses the possibility of the renewal of the practice of semichah. He could be referring to such an eventuality in the present instance. may blow the shofar on the second day alone.5This is our practice at present.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
How many shofar blasts is a person required to hear on Rosh Hashanah?1according to Torah law? Nine.2However, as explained throughout the chapter, the Sages have required us to hear many more.[This figure is derived3See Rosh Hashanah 33b. as follows]: The Torah mentions the word תרועה [sounding the shofar] three times4Teru'ah is also mentioned in relation to sounding the trumpets (Numbers, Chapter 10), but that is not relevant in this immediate context. in association with Rosh Hashanah5twice: Leviticus 23:24 and Numbers 29:1. and the Yovel.6once: Leviticus 25:9. Every תרועה must be preceded and followed by a [single] long blast.7Leviticus 25:9 states: והעברת שופר, and Numbers 29:1 states: תעבירו שופר. In both cases, the verb means "cause to pass." From that expression, Rosh Hashanah, ibid., derives that a long note should be sounded before the תרועה.Based on the above, the text Galia Masechta (Orach Chayim 3) explains that the essential element of the mitzvah is the teru'ah, since that is the sound specifically required by the Torah. The teki'ot are required only as a supplementary factor. According to the oral tradition, we learned that8whether on Rosh Hashanah or on Yom Kippur of the Yovel - Rosh Hashanah, ibid. notes that the verses which describe the sounding of the shofar on both occasions share a common word. Hence, an analogy (שוה גזירה) is established between them. Therefore... - whether on Rosh Hashanah or on Yom Kippur of the Yovel - all the soundings of the shofar of the seventh month are a single entity.9Thus, on each occasion, the same three series of blasts must be sounded.Thus, nine shofar blasts must be sounded on both of them: teki'ah,10The single, long blast preceding the teru'ah teru'ah,11a blast which is interrupted into shorter sounds, as described in Halachot 2-4. teki'ah;12The single, long blast following the teru'ah teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah; teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah.13two other identical series of blasts.
Over the passage of the years and throughout the many exiles, doubt has been raised concerning the teru'ah which the Torah mentions, to the extent that we do not know what it1Rosh Hashanah 34a explains that our custom of blowing the shofar was instituted by Rabbi Abahu in Caesaria approximately one hundred years after the destruction of the second Temple. In this halachah, the Rambam explains the reason for Rabbi Abahu's action.The Rambam's statements are accepted by Rabbenu Asher, Rabbenu Nissim, and most other authorities. Nevertheless, it is significant that Rav Hai Gaon, one of the major authorities who preceded the Rambam, offers a different explanation for Rabbi Abahu's actions.Rav Hai Gaon maintains that it is impossible that a doubt existed among the Jewish people concerning such an important manner as sounding the shofar. Since the shofar was sounded each year, surely the tradition could have been maintained. Hence, he explains that all the different manners of sounding the shofar were acceptable and that Rabbi Abahu's contribution was the establishment of a uniform custom that included all the different practices common among the Jewish people. By mentioning the "many years" and "exiles," the Rambam addresses himself to the question raised by Rav Hai Gaon. is:Does it resemble the wailing with which the women cry2thus, it would be short, staccato sounds like sobs when they moan,3The word teru'ah is translated into Aramaic as yevavah (moan), as in Judges 5:28: "Sisra's mother gazed out the window and moaned through the lattice." or4does a teru'ah resemble... the sighs5i.e., longer sounds which a person who is distressed about a major matter will release repeatedly?6Since before a person cries, he sighs (Rosh Hashanah 33b). Perhaps a combination of the two7sighing and the crying which will follow it - is called teru'ah, because a distressed person will sigh and then cry. Therefore, we fulfill all [these possibilities]. - as explained in detail in the following halachah.The commentaries have emphasized the homiletic aspects of these halachot. On Rosh Hashanah, a Jew must concentrate on the coronation of God as King of the world. He may feel internal distress when he meditates on how his daily behavior does not reflect the proper relation between a subject and his king. Ultimately, this may motivate him to sigh and even to cry. - sighing and the crying which will follow it - is called teru'ah, because a distressed person will sigh and then cry? Therefore, we fulfill all [these possibilities].
The crying1mentioned in the previous halachah refers to what we call teru'ah.2short, staccato sounds like sobs. Since a teru'ah is considered to be a single blast, the entire series of sounds must be completed without the person who blows pausing to catch his breath. The repeated sighs3mentioned in the previous halachah refer to what we call three4The Maggid Mishneh writes that one may add to the number of shevarim as long as one does not take a breath between them. However, the Magen Avraham (590:2) writes that it is Ashkenazic custom not to sound more than three shevarim. shevarim.5Like sighs, these sounds are neither short like teru'ot, nor prolonged like teki'ot, but rather of intermediate length, as described in the following halachah.Thus, the order of blowing the shofar6to fulfill the mitzvah as commanded by the Torah. is as follows: First, one recites the blessing7as explained in Halachah 10. and sounds a teki'ah; afterwards, three shevarim; and afterwards, a teru'ah; and afterwards, a teki'ah.8in accordance with the opinion that maintains that a teru'ah resembles both sighing and crying. He repeats this pattern [until he completes] three series.9in order to have heard the three series of blasts required by Halachah 1.Although the pattern of shofar blowing described by the Rambam has become universally accepted among the Jewish people, it is unclear when this practice was first instituted. One of the fundamental texts of the period directly following the conclusion of the Talmud, the Sh'eltot of Rav Achai Gaon (note 171), mentions a different practice.Three series of blasts from each pattern are not blown directly after each other. Rather, after sounding three series of teki'ah, shevarim, teru'ah, teki'ah, three series of teki'ah, shevarim, teki'ah, and then three series of teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah is sounded.[Then,] he sounds a teki'ah; afterwards, three shevarim; and afterwards, a teki'ah.10in accordance with the opinion that maintains that a teru'ah resembles sighing. It must be noted that from the passage on Rosh HaShanah 34a it seems that Rabbi Abahu instituted the series of three teru'ot before the series of three shevarim. He repeats this pattern [until he completes] three series.11to fulfill the obligation explained in Halachah 1.[Then,] he sounds a teki'ah; afterwards, a teru'ah; and afterwards, a teki'ah.12in accordance with the opinion that maintains that a teru'ah resembles crying. He repeats this pattern [until he completes] three series.13as explained above.Thus, there are a total of thirty shofar blasts,1418 teki'ot, six shevarim, and six teru'ot.From the Rambam's expression, it appears that he considers the shevarim and teru'ah sounded in the first series as two separate blasts. From this, the Maggid Mishneh derives a halachic insight, maintaining that according to the Rambam, one may take a breath between the two. (The Mayim Chayim supports this conclusion, noting that, regarding this series, the Rambam states that one should blow "three shevarim, and afterwards, a teru'ah.") Nevertheless, the Ramban and other authorities do not permit this leniency.Regarding halachah l'ma'aseh, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 590:4) suggests adhering to the more stringent view regarding the teki'ot required by Torah law. However, the Ramah maintains that this is unnecessary. Both the Shulchan Aruch HaRav 590:9, 10 and the Mishnah Berurah 590:20 suggest adhering to whichever practice is customarily followed in one's local community. However, if there is no accepted custom, the Shulchan Aruch HaRav suggests accepting the more stringent practice. in order to remove any doubt.15as mentioned in the previous halachah.Though all three sounds would be included in the series of teki'ah, shevarim, teru'ah, teki'ah, it would be insufficient for such a series alone to be sounded. According to the opinions that maintain that a teru'ah is either sobbing or crying alone, there would be another sound interrupting between either the teki'ah which precedes or that which follows the teru'ah (Rosh Hashanah 34a).
The required length of a teru'ah is that of two teki'ot.1These statements are the source of much controversy among the Rabbis. The Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 33b) states: "The required length of the teki'ah is three teru'ot; a teru'ah is three sobs."The Talmud questions:Behold, the baraita has taught: "the required length of a teki'ah is that of a teru'ah!"Abbaye replied: "The author of the Mishnah considered the length of all the teki'ot in comparison to the length of all the teru'ot. The author of the baraita considered the length of each blast. There is no difference of opinion between them."In his commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam interprets the above to mean: "The required length of all six teki'ot is equivalent to the required length of all three teru'ot," thus establishing each teru'ah as twice the length of a teki'ah. Hence, according to the Rambam, the length of the teki'ot are dependent on the length of the teru'ot.Rabbenu Nissim objects to the Rambam's interpretation, explaining that the word והעברת, the verb mentioned in the commandment to blow the shofar, implies a long blast, and hence the measure mentioned by the Rambam would not be appropriate.Similarly, the Ra'avad does not accept the Rambam's interpretation, and explains that the Mishnah establishes an independent measure for the length of a teki'ah - three teru'ot - with each teru'ah being equal to three short sobs. Thus, the measure of a teki'ah is equivalent to nine short sounds. The Ramban and the Rashba also subscribe to this view.Rashi and most Ashkenazic authorities accept the simple meaning of the Mishnah and explain that a teki'ah is equal to the length of a teru'ah. However, as explained in the previous halachot, there are three different interpretations of the definition of a teru'ah. Thus, the required length for the teki'ah varies accordingly.Regarding halachah l'ma'aseh, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 590:3) mentions the views of Rashi and the Ra'avad, but not that of the Rambam. The required length of the three shevarim is that of a teru'ah.2i.e., the length of the three shevarim should resemble a series of teru'ot.When a person sounds a teki'ah and a teru'ah, and afterwards sounds a long teki'ah, extending it twice the length of the original one,3with the intention that it be considered to be the final blast of the first series and the initial blast of the following series we do not say that it may be considered to be two teki'ot4although it is of sufficient length - thus allowing one [to complete the series merely by] sounding a teru'ah and another teki'ah.5This represents a rephrasing of the Mishnah, Rosh Hashanah 4:9 and Rosh Hashanah 28a. Rather, even if one extended a teki'ah the entire day, it is considered to be only a single teki'ah6This decision runs contrary to the statements of the Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh Hashanah 3:3), which does not accept a teki'ah blown with such an intention at all. and one must sound another teki'ah, teru'ah, and teki'ah [until he completes] three series.7This law is quoted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 590:6). However, the Ashkenazic authorities maintain that deference should be paid to the opinion mentioned in the Jerusalem Talmud.
If a person hears one shofar blast at one hour and a second one an hour later1even if he waits the entire day - Rosh Hashanah 34a-b quotes Rabbi Yochanan: "If a person heard the nine shofar blasts even over a span of nine hours, he fulfills his obligation." - even if he waits the entire day - the two may be considered to be a single unit2It is undesirable to delay the shofar blasts or to interrupt between them by talking or performing any other activity. Nevertheless, if an interruption was made between blasts, as long as one concentrates one's attention on each shofar blast, they are considered to be a single halachic unit. and he may fulfill his obligation.3The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 588:2) quotes this law. However, the Magen Avraham (588:2) compares this situation to the laws of Kri'at Shema (see Ramah, Orach Chayim 65:1) and explains that if one is prevented from hearing the shofar by forces beyond one's control, it is considered to be an interruption and one must begin the last series of blasts anew.The above applies provided each series is heard in the proper order;4a teki'ah, the series ofshevarim, teru'ot or the combination of the two, and then a teki'ah, as stated in Halachah 1. i.e., one may not hear a teru'ah and afterwards two teki'ot, or two teki'ot, and afterwards a teru'ah, and the like.5The Maggid Mishneh explains that with this phrase, the Rambam implies that even though a delay does not constitute an interruption, any shofar blast which is not in the proper order invalidates the entire series. Most other authorities (see Shulchan Aruch HaRav 590:12) explain that this applies only if one sounds the shofar with an improper blast, intending to fulfill one's obligation. Otherwise, no significance at all is attached to the shofar blast and it is not considered an interruption.
If a person heard nine shofar blasts from nine men simultaneously,1At the same time, six blew teki'ot and three, teru'ot, so that the person could have heard the required number of shofar blasts he has not fulfilled his obligation for a single blast.2Rabbenu Manoach gives two reasons for this decision:a) because of the cacophony of sounds, the listener is unable to properly distinguish any one;b) As stated in the previous halachah, one must hear the shofar blasts in the proper order, a teki'ah preceding and following a teru'ah; that requirement is not fulfilled in this instance.Rashi, in his commentary on Rosh Hashanah 34b, disagrees with the Rambam's decision, explaining that Rosh Hashanah 27a states that even though two people blow the shofar simultaneously, since the mitzvah is dear to the hearer, he will concentrate sufficiently to differentiate between the sounds. Furthermore, the Tosefta 2:12 states specifically that one does fulfill one's obligation in this manner.Tosafot disagrees with Rashi, mentioning the second reason stated by Rabbenu Manoach. It appears that the Rambam goes further and discounts Rashi's opinion entirely. According to Tosafot, the listener will have heard at least the first teki'ah, while the Rambam explicitly states "he has not fulfilled his obligation for a single blast." (See Lechem Mishneh.)The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 588:3 quotes the Rambam's decision as halachah. The Ramah quotes the law from Rosh Hashanah 27a, allowing a person to fulfill his obligation even though he heard two people blowing the shofar at the same time, provided he heard the blasts in the proper order. [If he heard] a teki'ah from one, a teru'ah from another, and another teki'ah from a third, in sequence, he has fulfilled his obligation.3The fact that different people sounded the shofar does not prevent the fulfillment of the mitzvah.The above applies even if one heard [the shofar blasts] with interruptions, even if [the blowing was extended] over the entire day.4There is a certain redundancy with this statement, because the same principle was mentioned in the previous halachah. Nonetheless, the Rambam included it to emphasize that the passage of time is not considered an interruption even when the shofar is being blown by different people (Rabbenu Manoach). A person does not fulfill his obligation until he hears all nine shofar blasts, for they are all [only] one mitzvah.5as explained in Halachah 1. Thus, they are dependent one on the other.6Based on this principle, a person who does not know how to blow either the shevarim or the teru'ot should not sound the teki'ot, for he will accomplish nothing by doing so (Tosafot, Rosh Hashanah 33b). Nevertheless, if a person knows how to sound both teki'ot and shevarim, he should sound three series of such blasts even if he does not know how to sound a teru'ah. Since it is possible that the mitzvah may be fulfilled by these series (as explained in Halachot 2 and 3), at the very least they should be sounded (Rabbenu Nissim, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 593:2).
The congregation1but not an individual (Rosh Hashanah 34b) is obligated to hear the shofar blasts2i.e., the nine blasts mentioned in Halachah 1 together with the order of blessings.3Rosh Hashanah 16b explains that the Sages instituted the blowing of the shofar in the midst of the prayer service in order to confuse Satan, lest he lodge accusations against the Jews in the midst of their prayers. The Sages explain (ibid., 32b) that it would have been appropriate to institute the shofar blowing in the morning service. However, the Romans desired to stamp out the performance of the mitzvot and sent guards to make sure that the mitzvah was not fulfilled. After midday, the guards left, and then, in the musaf service, the shofar would be sounded.Originally, the Sages' decree involved determining the place of the service when the mitzvah required by the Torah would be fulfilled and this halachah must be interpreted in that context. However, as explained in Halachot 11 and 12, it became universally accepted Jewish custom to blow the shofar before the musaf prayers to fulfill the Torah's commandment, and thus "confuse the Satan" even before the beginning of our prayers, and then to sound the shofar again in the midst of those prayers to fulfill the Rabbinic decree. See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 592:7.How is this expressed? The chazan recites Avot,4literally, "patriarchs"; the first blessing of the Amidah, which praises God as "the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." Gevurot,5literally, "mighty acts"; the second blessing of the Amidah, which begins: "You are mighty," and recounts different expressions of God's power. the sanctification of God's name,6The third blessing of the Amidah, which includes the Kedushah prayer. Malchuyot7Three additional blessings are recited in the musaf service of Rosh Hashanah: Malchuyot (acceptance of God's sovereignty), Zichronot (acknowledgement of God's remembrance of the Jewish people), and Shofarot (describing the significance of the sounding of the shofar).Rosh Hashanah 16a states:The Holy One, blessed be He, declares: "On Rosh Hashanah, recite before me Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot.Malchuyot - so that you will crown Me as King over you.Zichronot - so that I will remember you for good.By what means? Through the shofar."These blessings are described in the following halachot.The prayers mentioning the sacred nature of the holiday and the sacrifices which were offered in the Temple are also included in the Malchuyot blessing. [ - at this point,] the shofar is sounded three times;8i.e., one series of teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah required by the Torah. Though this point is disputed in the Mishnah, Rosh Hashanah 32a relates that this opinion (quoted in the name of Rabbi Akiva) was the accepted practice in Yavneh. Zichronot9the shofar is sounded three times - the second series of teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah required by the Torah. - the shofar is sounded three times; Shofarot10the shofar is sounded three times - the final series of teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah required by the Torah. - the shofar is sounded three times - [and concludes the Amidah with] the Avodah,11literally, "the service," i.e., the blessing R'tzey, which asks God to accept our prayers and restore the Temple service. an acknowledgement [of God's wonders],12the blessing Modim. and the priestly blessing.
These three intermediate blessings recited on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur of the Yovel1The Mishnah (Rosh Hashanah 26b) states: "Rosh Hashanah and the Yovel are identical regarding the sounding of the shofar and the blessings." - Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot2The blessings must also be recited in this order (Magen Avraham 593:4). - are each dependent on each other.3i.e., a person who cannot recite all three blessings should not recite any. Generally, a person who does not know all the blessings of the Amidah should recite those that he knows. However, on the musaf service of Rosh Hashanah, a person should begin the Amidah only if he knows the entire service (Magen Avraham 593:2). (See also the Bi'ur Halachah.)In each of these blessings, one is required to recite ten verses4Rosh Hashanah 32a explains that the number ten alludes to the ten expressions of praise used by King David in Psalm 150; or, alternatively, to the ten statements of creation; or, alternatively, to the ten commandments. The Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh Hashanah 4:7) explains that the ten verses of Malchuyot refer to David's ten expressions of praise; the ten Zichronot, to the ten calls to repentance proclaimed by Isaiah; and the ten Shofarot to the ten sacrificial animals offered in the Temple on Rosh Hashanah.One may recite additional verses if one desires (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 591:4). Indeed, the text of the blessings generally recited for Malchuyot and Shofarot includes eleven quotes. reflecting the content of the blessing5as explained in the commentary on the previous halachah - three verses from the Torah,6Since the Torah is on a higher level of holiness, its verses are mentioned first. three from the Book of Psalms, and three from [the words of] the prophets.7The commentaries question why the Book of Psalms is given prominence over the words of the prophets, when generally the prophets' statements are considered on a higher level of holiness. Among the resolutions offered to this difficulty is that chronologically, the Psalms were written before the prophecies quoted (Tosafot, Rosh Hashanah 32a).Examples of the verses recited are mentioned in the following halachah and commentary. One concludes with a verse from the Torah.8because of the dearness of the Torah. Rosh Hashanah 32b explains that this was the custom of the experienced Sages of Jerusalem. Should a person conclude with a verse from the prophets, he fulfills his obligation.9However, one should preferably conclude with a verse from the Torah. This is our present practice.From the statements of the Rambam and the relevant passages from the Mishnah and Talmud, it would appear that originally there was no standard text containing universally accepted verses for these blessings. Rather, certain verses were commonly accepted and would be recited by almost all those who prayed. Others were left to the preference of each individual.(One must remember that machzorim were uncommon in this period, and most of the prayers were recited by heart. Thus, the verses chosen by an individual might often have been those which he had been able to commit to memory.)Should a person recite only one verse from the Torah, one from the sacred writings, and one from the prophets,10Thus mentioning three verses in each blessing, one from each division of the T'nach he fulfills his obligation.11after the fact. However, at the outset it is desirable to recite all ten verses. Even if he states: "In Your Torah, God, our Lord, it is written..." and recites one verse from the Torah and concludes, nothing further is necessary.12The commentaries have questioned the Rambam's statements, which appear self-contradictory. In the previous clause, he stated that one must recite three verses - one from the Torah, one from the prophets, and one from the writings - to fulfill one's obligation, while this clause implies that the recitation of one is sufficient.The source for the difficulty is the following quotes: The Mishnah, Rosh Hashanah 32a, states:One should not recite fewer than ten verses for Malchuyot, ten for Zichronot, and ten for Shofarot. Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri says: "If one recites three - three of each - one fulfills his obligation."Rosh Hashanah 35a quotes Rav Chanan'el as saying in the name of Rav:Even if he states: "In Your Torah, it is written..." [and recites one verse], nothing further is necessary.From the Talmud, it appears that both these statements are accepted as halachah. The Maggid Mishneh explains that the Rambam interprets Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri's requirement of three verses as the total for all three blessings. Thus, for each blessing, one must state "In Your Torah, it is written..." and recite a single appropriate verse. [This surely differs from the Rambam's statements in his commentary on the Mishnah.]The Ramban, Rabbenu Nissim, and others explain that Rav Chanan'el agrees with Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri and thus, in addition to "In Your Torah, it is written...," he also requires one to say: "In Your holy writings, it is recorded...," and: "by your prophets, it was proclaimed...," mentioning an appropriate verse in each instance. (This opinion is quoted by Shulchan Aruch HaRav 586:8 and the Mishnah Berurah 591:11.)Alternatively, one may explain the Rambam's position as follows: Ideally, one should recite ten verses for each blessing; after the fact, three are sufficient, as stated by Rabbi Yochanan ben Nuri. When does this apply? Once one has recited at least one verse from the Torah. However, if one has not recited any verses, it is sufficient to say "In Your Torah, it is written..." and recite a single verse from the Torah, as Rav Chanan'el said in the name of Rav.The flexibility regarding the number of quotes in each blessing was only granted in the previous generations. Since at present we have adopted a standard set of blessings, a person should not delete verses at will (Magen Avraham 591:6; Shulchan Aruch HaRav 591:8).
One should not recite [verses for] Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot which describe [Divine] retribution;1Since Rosh Hashanah is a day of judgement, we are careful not to mention any factors that might lead to negative repercussions. For this reason, no confessional prayers are recited on Rosh Hashanah, and extreme care is taken regarding all aspects of our prayers and speech. (See Maharsha, Rosh Hashanah 32b.) for example, for Zichronot, [Psalms 78:39]: "And He remembered that they were mere flesh...";2It is uncertain why the Rambam mentions a verse for Zichronot before one of Malchuyot. for Malchuyot, [Ezekiel 20:33]: "With outpoured anger, I will reign over you...";3Rosh Hashanah 32a mentions that this prophecy concludes with the redemption of our people; since it is associated with anger and wrath, it is not fit to be mentioned on Rosh Hashanah. for Shofarot, [Hoshea 5:8]: "Blow the shofar in Givah..."Similarly, Zichronot which are merely associated with an individual [should not be mentioned] even if they are of a positive nature - for example, [Psalms 106:4]: "Remember me, O God, amidst the favor of Your people," [Nehemiah 5:19]: "Remember me, my God, for good."4Even though on Rosh Hashanah each man is judged individually, and his own personal future is determined (see Rosh Hashanah 16b; Hilchot Teshuvah 3:3), it is desirable to look beyond these individual matters and concentrate our prayers on the welfare of the Jewish people as a whole.Verses using the verb פקד - for example, [Exodus 3:16]: "I have surely taken note..."5Rosh Hashanah 32a also mentions another verse - Genesis 21:1: "and God granted providence to Sarah" - as an example of this principle. The Talmud objects to this verse because it is of an individual nature. Though it continues to resolve that difficulty, explaining that God's granting providence to Sarah effected the future of the entire Jewish people, the Rambam nevertheless avoided the problem by choosing the verse which is clearly of general import. - may not be included as Zichronot.6The meaning of פקד is often "remember." Indeed, the Targum of the cited verse in Genesis is דכיר, the Aramaic for "remembered." Furthermore, the Talmud mentions that Rabbi Yosse allowed verses using the verb פקד, and although Rabbi Yehudah objected, in differences of opinion between the two, Rabbi Yosse's position is generally favored. Nevertheless, since there are many verses that use the verb זכר, there is no difficulty in establishing a practice that will be accepted by all opinions (Beit Yosef 591). One may mention verses that refer to retribution to be visited upon the gentile nations - for example, [Psalms 99:1]: "God is King, the nations will tremble..."; [Psalms 137:7]: "Remember, O God, against the Edomites, the day of Jerusalem"; or [Zechariah 9:14]: "God, the Lord, will sound the shofar and proceed in a southerly storm-wind."7Despite this decision, only the latter verse is included in the text of the blessings we recite on Rosh Hashanah.All the following verses: [Deuteronomy 6:4]: "Hear Israel, God is our Lord, God is one"; [Deuteronomy 4:35]: "To you, it has been revealed that you may know..."; and [Deuteronomy 4:39]: "And you shall know today and draw it close to your heart..." express the concept of God's sovereignty.8These verses all express the oneness of God and creation; thus they emphasize how "He is unique and one, with none that compare to Him. His Kingship permeating all dominion." (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 591:11). Even though [these verses] do not explicitly mention His kingship, they are equivalent to [Exodus 16:18]: "God will rule forever and ever"; and [Deuteronomy 33:5]: "When He became King in Jeshurun."9Shemot Rabbah 48:4 states that this verse refers to Moses. Though the Rambam accepts the principle that Moses served the people as a king (see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:11), he does not necessarily view this verse as the source for that concept.The verses which have been accepted in the standard text for these blessings are as follows:MALCHUYOTTorahAnd you shall know today and draw it close to your heart that God is the Lord in the heavens above and the earth below. There is nothing else (Deuteronomy 4:39).God will rule forever and ever (Exodus 15:18).He does not look at iniquity in Jacob or see wrongdoing in Israel; God, his Lord, is with him and the desire of the King is in him (Numbers 23:21).And there was a King in Jeshurun and the heads of the people assembled, together with all the tribes of Israel (Deuteronomy 33:5).PsalmsFor sovereignty is God's and He rules over the nations (22:29).God is King. He has clothed Himself with grandeur; the Lord has girded Himself with strength. He has established the world firmly so that it will not falter (93:1).Lift up your heads, O gates; be upraised, eternal doors, so the glorious King may enter. Who is the glorious King? God, strong and mighty, God, mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O gates; be upraised, eternal doors, so the glorious King may enter. Who is the glorious King? The God of hosts. He is the glorious King for eternity (24:7-10).ProphetsThus said God, King and Redeemer of Israel, the God of hosts, "I am the first and I am the last. Aside from Me, there is no God" (Isaiah 44:6).Deliverers will ascend Mount Zion to judge the mountain of Esau and the kingship will be God's (Ovadiah 1:21).God will be King over the entire earth. On that day, God will be One, and His name, One (Zechariah 14:9).Concluding VerseHear Israel, God is our Lord, God is One (Deuteronomy 6:4).ZICHRONOTTorahAnd God remembered Noah and all the beasts and all the livestock that were with him in the ark. And God caused a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters were calmed (Genesis 8:1).God heard their outcry. And God remembered His covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob (Exodus 2:24).I will remember My covenant with Jacob, also my covenant with Isaac, and also My covenant with Abraham, and I will remember the land (Leviticus 26:42).PsalmsHe has made a remembrance of His wonders, gracious and merciful is God (111:4).He provides sustenance to those who fear Him. He will remember His covenant forever (111:5).For them, He remembered His covenant and He relented in accordance with His abundant kindness (106:45).ProphetsGo and call out in the ears of Jerusalem, saying: "Thus said God, 'For you, I remember the devotion of your youth, the love of your bridal days, as you went after Me in the desert, in an uncultivated land' (Jeremiah 2:2).I will remember My covenant with you [made] in the days of your youth, and I will fulfill it for you as an everlasting covenant (Ezekiel 16:60)."Is Ephraim not My beloved son? Is he not a precious child? For whenever I speak of him, I recall him even more. The inner parts of my being stir for him. I will surely have compassion on him," says God (Jeremiah 31:19).Concluding VerseFor them, I will remember the covenant with their ancestors, whom I took out from the land of Egypt before the eyes of the nations to be their Lord. I am God (Leviticus 26:45).SHOFAROTTorahAnd it was on the third day, at dawn. There was thunder and lightning and a heavy cloud on the mountain. The sound of the shofar was very strong and all the people in the camp trembled (Exodus 19:16).And the sound of the shofar proceeded, becoming stronger. Moses spoke and God answered Him out loud (Exodus 19:19).And all the people saw the voices and the flames, the sound of the shofar and the mountain smoking. The people saw and recoiled and stood off from afar (Exodus 20:15).PsalmsThe Lord ascends through teru'ah, God through the sound of the shofar (47:6).Sound off with trumpets and the call of the shofar before the King, God (98:6).Blow the shofar on the new moon, on the appointed time of our sacred day. For it is a statute for Israel; an ordinance of the Lord od Israel (81:4-5)Praise God. Praise the Almighty in His holiness. Praise Him in the firmament of His strength. Praise Him for His mighty acts. Praise Him according to His abundant greatness. Praise Him with the call of the shofar. Praise Him with harp and lyre. Praise Him with timbrel and dance. Praise Him with stringed instruments and flute. Praise Him with loud cymbals. Praise Him with resounding cymbals. Let every being with a soul praise God. Halleluyah (150).ProphetsAll those who inhabit the world, who dwell on earth: When the banner is raised on the mountain, you will see. When the shofar is sounded, you will hear (Isaiah 18:3).And it shall be on that day, that a great shofar will be sounded, and those who were lost in the land of Asshur and those who were banished in the land of Egypt shall come and bow down to God on the holy mountain in Jerusalem (Isaiah 27:13).And God will appear over them and His arrow shall go forth like lightning. God, the Lord, will sound the shofar and proceed in a southerly storm-wind (Zechariah 9:14-15).Concluding VerseAnd on the days of your rejoicing; on your holidays, and on your Rosh Chodesh days, you shall sound the trumpets over your burnt-offerings and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings, and they shall be a remembrance for you before your Lord. I am God, your Lord (Numbers 10:10).
The following is the commonly accepted custom for blowing the shofar on Rosh Hashanah1As mentioned in Halachah 7 and the commentary, the Sages had originally ordained that a person hear the shofar blasts required by the Torah in the midst of the musaf service. However, as evident from Rosh Hashanah 16a-b, even in Talmudic times the custom mentioned by the Rambam was already the general practice. in the communal services:After2The laws pertaining to an individual are mentioned at the conclusion of Halachah 12. the Torah is read3Hilchot Tefillah 13:10 states:The common custom is to read on the first day: "And God showed providence to Sarah..., and on the second day: "And God presented a trial to Abraham..."As stated in that halachah, the haftarah is recited after the Torah reading is concluded. and returned to its place,4Though at present, Ashkenazic custom is to blow the shofar in the presence of the Torah scrolls, the Rambam's son, Rav Avraham, supports his father's decision in the Ma'aseh Rokeach, explaining that it is not proper to make any interruptions between the shofar blowings which precede musaf and those within the prayer service. the congregation is seated.5This practice is mentioned in Rosh Hashanah 16a and the Sh'eltot of Rav Achai Gaon. However, today it is Ashkenazic custom to stand when hearing these shofar blasts. Nevertheless, based on this original practice, these are still referred to as teki'ot meiyoshav - "the teki'ot sounded while seated." One person stands6Rabbenu Manoach questions the need for the person blowing the shofar to stand. He offers two possible explanations:a) as a mark of deference to the community;b) in respect for the blessing recited, as implied by Nehemiah 8:4.The Hagahot Maimoniot quotes the Jerusalem Talmud (the location of the source in the Jerusalem Talmud is a matter of question) as drawing an analogy (גזרה שוה) between the blowing of the shofar and the counting of the Omer. Hence, just as the Omer must be counted while standing, the shofar should be sounded in a similar position. and recites the blessing:Blessed7as required before the fulfillment of any positive commandment (Hilchot Berachot 11:1,2,8). are You, God, Lord of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to hear the sounding of the shofar.8As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 1, the fundamental aspect of the mitzvah is hearing, not blowing, the shofar. Nevertheless, the Sh'eltot suggests concluding the blessing "to blow the shofar" and the Sefer Mitzvot HaGadol advises the text "concerning the blowing of the shofar."The entire congregation responds "Amen." He then recites the blessing shehecheyanu,9as is necessary before the fulfillment of any mitzvah performed infrequently (Hilchot Berachot 11:9). and the entire congregation responds "Amen" to him. Thirty shofar blasts are sounded in the proper order.10as explained in Halachah 3.Kaddish is recited.11"The chazan always recites Kaddish before and after every prayer service (Rambam, Seder Tefillot kol Shanah)." The congregation stands12and remain standing during the repetition of the the Amidah as well. Therefore, the shofar blasts sounded during these prayers are referred to as teki'ot m'umad (the shofar blasts sounded while standing). and recites the musaf service.13in a hushed tone.The Tur relates that there were varying customs regarding the recitation of the musaf service in a hushed tone. In certain communities, it had been customary for the congregation to recite the musaf prayers as on other festivals without reciting Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot. Only the chazan would recite the latter. However, even in the Tur's time, the prevailing custom was that even the congregation recited these three blessings.The Sh'lah records the custom of sounding the shofar for Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot while the congregation recites the Amidah. However, this custom is not accepted in all communities. After the chazan completes the fourth blessing14i.e., Malchuyot - a teki'ah, three shevarim, a [series of] teru'ot, and a teki'ah are sounded once. - The rationale for this practice and the different customs associated with these shofar blasts are discussed in Halachah 12 and its commentary.In the text of prayers with which the Rambam concludes Sefer Ha'ahavah, he also mentions the recitation of the prayer Hayom Harat Olam. - i.e., Malchuyot - a teki'ah, three shevarim, a [series of] teru'ot, and a teki'ah are sounded once.He then recites the fifth blessing15i.e., Zichronot. After he completes the blessing, a teki'ah, three shevarim, and a teki'ah are sounded. He then recites the sixth blessing - i.e., Shofarot. After he completes the blessing, a teki'ah, a [series of] teru'ot, and a teki'ah are sounded once, and he concludes the prayers. - i.e., Zichronot. After he completes the blessing, a teki'ah, three shevarim, and a teki'ah are sounded. He then recites the sixth blessing - i.e., Shofarot. After he completes the blessing, a teki'ah, a [series of] teru'ot, and a teki'ah are sounded once, and he concludes the prayers.
The person who sounds the shofar while they are sitting1the thirty shofar blasts mentioned in Halachah 3. also sounds the shofar according to the order of blessings2i.e., Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot while they stand.3Rav Hai Gaon also mentions this practice. The Kolbo explains that it is appropriate, since "when a person begins a mitzvah, we tell him to complete it" (Jerusalem Talmud, Rosh Hashanah 1:8). Nevertheless, the Magen Avraham 592:7 writes that in many communities, it has become customary to divide the honor of shofar blowing between two individuals. He4i.e., the person blowing the shofar. Rabbi Yitzchak Alfasi and Rabbenu Asher write that not only he, but the entire congregation should refrain from speaking. The Maggid Mishneh does not accept this view, yet it is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 592:3. should not speak5Permission is granted to speak about matters required for the prayers or for blowing the shofar (Ramah). between the shofar blasts while the congregation is seated and those sounded while they stand.6for since they are both part of one mitzvah, it is improper to interrupt between them. If he did talk between them, even though it is a transgression, he does not repeat the blessing.7Since, essentially, the mitzvah is fulfilled by hearing the teki'ot before musaf, and the others are sounded only "to confuse Satan" (Rabbenu Manoach).
It is logical that each series of shofar blasts should be sounded three times for every blessing,1Because of the doubt mentioned in Halachah 3, it would be proper for us to blow three series of blasts - i.e., teki'ah, shevarim, teru'ah, teki'ah; teki'ah, shevarim, teki'ah; and teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah - at the conclusion of each blessing. as [the shofar] was sounded while [the congregation] was seated.2the shofar blasts sounded before musaf. However, since they3the congregation satisfied every possible doubt4regarding the proper manner of blowing the shofar, as explained in Halachah 3. [by hearing] the shofar while seated, there is no need for the congregation to repeat them5these shofar blasts in their entirety during the order of blessings. Rather, it is sufficient for them to hear one series for each blessing,6as explained in Halachah 10 and they will thus have heard the shofar during the order of blessings.7and fulfilled the requirement of the Sages mentioned in Halachah 7.In practice, a number of different customs are followed regarding this matter. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 592:1) suggests following the pattern described by the Rambam, but sounding each series three times, rather than once. The Ramah writes that Ashkenazic custom is to sound one series - teki'ah, shevarim, teru'ah, teki'ah - after each blessing. However, the Sh'lah suggests blowing three series of blasts - i.e., teki'ah, shevarim, teru'ah, teki'ah; teki'ah, shevarim, teki'ah; and teki'ah, teru'ah, teki'ah - at the conclusion of each blessing.All of the above applies only to a congregation.8as specifically stated in Halachot 7 and 10. However, there is no [set] custom regarding an individual. He fulfills his obligation whether or not he hears [the shofar blasts] during the order of blessings,9Some authorities object to the permission granted by the Rambam for an individual to interrupt his recitation of the the Amidah in order to hear the sounding of the shofar. However, the Rambam's opinion is based on his interpretation of Rosh Hashanah 34b. (See Ma'aseh Rokeach.) whether seated or standing.
The blessings1Malchuyot, Zichronot, and Shofarot. are not dependent on the teki'ot,2Therefore, if it is impossible for a person to hear the shofar blown, he should still attempt to recite or hear the blessings. nor are the teki'ot dependent on the blessings.3Thus, if it is impossible for a person to hear the blessings, he should still attempt to hear the shofar being blown.When there are two cities4in one it is known that there will definitely be someone to recite the nine blessings - recited in the musaf service on Rosh Hashanah - in one it is known that there will definitely be someone to recite the nine blessings, but there is no one to blow the shofar5in the other, a doubt exists whether or not there will be someone to blow the shofar, one should go the latter, since the sounding of the shofar is a requirement of the Torah - as mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 1 - in the other, a doubt exists whether or not there will be someone to blow the shofar, one should go the latter, since the sounding of the shofar is a requirement of the Torah, while the blessings6as is the prayer service in its entirety are of Rabbinic origin.7i.e., surely if one could be sure of fulfilling the Torah commandment, one should do so at the expense of the fulfillment of the Rabbinic commandment. However, even if, as in the case described, there is a doubt whether one can fulfill the Torah commandment, one should take that risk, rather than forego the opportunity entirely, even if doing so will cause one to negate the fulfillment of the Rabbinic commandment.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
These are the required measurements of a sukkah: Its height1I.e., the height of its inner space, without including the height of the s'chach (Eruvin 3b) should not be less than ten handbreadths2anything less is not considered to be a dwelling fit for human habitation (See Sukkah 4a.) Sukkah 4b-5a derives the concept as follows: The ark and the kaporet covering it were ten handbreadths high. This constituted a line of demarcation between the place where the Shechinah was manifest and the area below it. Thus, we see that a height of ten handbreadths is sufficient for an independent area.Rabbenu Manoach establishes a closer relationship between the above concept and a sukkah, noting that Exodus 25:20 describes how the wings of the cherubs "shall shield the kaporet," using the verb סככים, which has the same root as the word s'chach. The beginning of the height of the cherub's "shield," ten cubits, is the minimum of the height for our s'chach. nor more than twenty cubits.3Any structure more than twenty cubits high can only be built as a permanent dwelling. Hence, it is unfit to serve as a sukkah, which must be of a temporary nature. (See Sukkah 2a and the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah.)[ It must be noted that any structure less than 20 cubits high can serve as a sukkah even if its walls are of a permanent nature.]A cubit is 48 centimeters according to Shiurei Torah and 57.6 centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. Its area should not be less than seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths.4the minimum size necessary to contain a person's head, the majority of his body [6 handbreadths by six handbreadths], and a small table [a handbreadth by a handbreadth] (Jerusalem Talmud, Sukkah 2:8). A handbreadth is 8 centimeters according to Shiurei Torah, and 9.6 centimeters according to the Chazon Ish.The Rambam explains the requirement of seven handbreadths by seven hand breadths as follows: The first three hand breadths are not of consequence because of the principle of l'vud and four additional handbreadths are required since the smallest area of halachic consequence is four cubits by four cubits (Commentary, to the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:1).If the sukkah is not seven handbreadths in either length or width, it is invalid, even if its area equals 49 square handbreadths. If it is round in shape, it must be sufficiently large to encompass a square seven by seven (See Halachah 7). This size is required because if either of the dimensions were less, it would not be considered a dwelling fit for human habitation (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 634:1-2; Magen Avraham; Taz). [There is no maximum limit to] its area,5The commentaries point to Sukkah 27b: "All Israel is fit to sit in one sukkah," as the source for this statement. A sukkah large enough to contain "all Israel" must possess a sizable area. and one may increase it [to include] a number of millim.6A mil is approximately a kilometer in contemporary measure.A sukkah which7does not meet the above requirements and is less than ten handbreadths high, smaller than seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths [in area], or taller than twenty cubits8The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 633:2-5) mentions a number of techniques by which a sukkah of this size can be made kosher, by decreasing the height of its inner space. - even [if the increase or decrease] is of the slightest amount9is invalid. - is invalid.
A sukkah which does not possess three walls is invalid.1Though Sukkah 6b mentions Rabbi Shimeon's opinion, which requires four walls, all authorities accept the more lenient view. The Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 1:1) explains that their difference of opinion is based on the exegesis of Isaiah 4:6:There will be a sukkah that will serve as a shadow from the heat during the day, a place of refuge, and a cover from storm and from rain.The Sages maintain that the verse refers to three different activities, and hence require three walls. Rabbi Shimeon counts "a cover from storm and from rain" as two different activities, and hence requires four walls. However, if it has two complete walls2i.e., walls of at least seven handbreadths long, so that the minimum requirements for the sukkah's area mentioned in the previous halachah can be met perpendicular to each other in the shape of [the Greek letter]3Rabbenu Manoach notes that a gamma has the same shape as the Hebrew letter dalet (see accompanying drawing) and asks why the Sages did not use that letter to refer to the intended shape. He explains that the very letters of the Hebrew alphabet are endowed with holiness. Hence, the Sages did not want to use them as an example to refer to a mundane matter. gamma, it is sufficient to construct a third wall that is [only] slightly more than a handbreadth wide and place it within three handbreadths4Sukkah 16b teaches that whenever there is a gap of three handbreadths or less between two entities, the principle of l'vud applies. The gap is considered to be closed and the two parts connected. Thus, the third wall is considered to be more than four handbreadths long, hence spanning more than half of the length required for the third wall. Therefore, it is acceptable (Rabbenu Nissim). of one of the two walls.5See the accompanying diagram.The Rabbis have posed an abstract question: Is the minimum requirement for a sukkah three walls (including one which is incomplete), or must a sukkah have four walls, however, the Torah was lenient enough to consider a sukkah of this nature as comparable to one of four walls.The Marcheshet brings support for the latter view, quoting Sukkah 7b, which states that since the third wall only a handbreadth in size is considered to be a wall with regard to the laws of sukkah, it is also considered to be a wall with regard to the laws regarding a private domain on the Sabbath. In the latter instance, four walls are necessary. Also, one must construct the likeness of an entrance,6to complete this third wall. This is necessary... since it7the sukkah does not possess three complete walls.8However, if the three walls are complete - i.e., at least seven handbreadths in length - as in the accompanying diagram, no "likeness of an entrance" is required.The Bayit Chadash (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 430) explains that the requirement of a "likeness of an entrance" is a Rabbinic ordinance, and, according to Torah law, a sukkah is acceptable as long as the third wall is a handbreadth as required.We have already explained in Hilchot Shabbat916:19 that wherever the term "a likeness of an entrance" is used, it may be a rod on one side, another rod on the opposite side, and a third above,10The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 630:2) states that if the two rods reach the s'chach, a third rod is unnecessary. (See Mishnah Berurah 630:12.) even though it does not touch them.11as depicted on page 67.
If the two walls1each being seven handbreadths or more long were parallel to each other and there was an open space between them, one should construct a wall slightly more than four handbreadths wide2as depicted in the accompanying diagram.Since the two walls are not connected, the third wall which "connects" them must be longer (Sukkah 7a). and place it within three handbreadths3so that it will be considered l'vud. of one of the two walls; then, [the sukkah] is kosher.4The third wall is considered to be seven cubits long itself - the four cubits of actual length and the three cubits between it and the wall that are added to it, because of the principle of l'vud (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:1). However, it is necessary to construct "the likeness of an entrance."5between the wall of four handbreadths and the wall further removed from it.This opinion is not universally accepted; and some authorities do not require a "likeness of an entrance" for such a sukkah. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 630:3) quotes the Rambam's opinion as halachah.The Ramah mentions that the "likeness of an entrance" is required only when the third wall needs the principle of l'vud for it to be considered seven handbreadths long. However, if the wall is actually seven handbreadths or more long, nothing more is necessary.If the rods of the s'chach of the sukkah extend beyond the sukkah and one wall extends with them,6As portrayed in the accompanying diagram, the sukkah has two walls, each at least seven handbreadths long, joined to each other at a right angle. The third wall is also joined to the other at a right angle; however, its length exceeds that of the wall opposite it, and thus, the fourth side of the sukkah, which remains open, slants at an angle. they are considered to be [part of] the sukkah.7sitting under the extension is considered to be the same as sitting under the portion enclosed by three walls. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 631:7.)
Walls1at least seven handbreadths high which are connected to the roof of the sukkah, but do not reach the earth:2See accompanying diagram. If they are more than three handbreadths above the earth, they are invalid;3Sukkah 16a records a difference of opinion between the Sages whether a "hanging partition" - i.e., a partition that is not connected to the earth - is kosher. The halachah does not accept such a partition, because animals can crawl under it. (See Shabbat 97a.) Nevertheless... if the distance is less than that,4three handbreadths they are kosher.5Because of the principle of l'vud, it is considered as if they actually reach the ground.[The following rules apply] should the walls be connected to the earth, without reaching the s'chach:6See the accompanying diagram. If they are ten handbreadths high, they are kosher even7they are considered to be a viable partition. Therefore... though are removed several cubits from the roof,8We say גוד אסיק מחיצתא - "Pull up and raise the partition;" i.e., it is considered as if the partition has been extended upward and reaches the s'chach. See Sukkah 4b for an additional discussion of this concept.Though this concept is accepted, we do not say מחיצתא גוד אחית - "Pull down and extend the partition." Hence, in the first clause of this halachah, the partition is not acceptable until it reaches three cubits of the ground.[It is possible to distinguish between the two cases as follows. A partition on the ground that must be extended upward serves as a functional divider. In contrast, a partition hanging downward cannot adequately fulfill its purpose unless it reaches within three handbreadths of the ground. (See also the Or Sameach's resolution of a difficulty arising from Eruvin 79a.)] provided they9the walls are positioned below the end of the roof.10i.e., the s'chach, so that the s'chach covers them.Furthermore, the walls may even be slightly removed from the s'chach. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 630:9.) If the roof11the s'chach was separated from the wall by more than three handbreadths, it is invalid;12for then the distance is too great for the s'chach to be considered the roof of these walls. In such an instance, not only is sitting under the open portion of no halachic import, the entire sukkah is invalid. Nevertheless, a sukkah in which the distance is... less than this amount is kosher.13because of the principle of l'vud. This concept also applies when the walls are as high as the s'chach. Even though the walls extend beyond the s'chach the sukkah is kosher. Nevertheless, one should not sit under the open portion.If one suspended a partition which is slightly more than four handbreadths high at a distance of less than three handbreadths from the earth14and thus, it is viewed as connected to the earth because of the principle of l'vud. and a distance of less than three handbreadths from the roof,15and thus, it is viewed as connected to the s'chach because of the principle of l'vud. it is kosher.16Sukkah 16b explains that even though we must rely on the principle of l'vud twice, the sukkah is still kosher.
When a person constructs his sukkah among the trees,1This halachah does not deal with the problem of the branches and leaves of the trees interfering with the s'chach. That issue is dealt with in Chapter 5, Halachah 12. Rabbenu Manoach and others have also raised questions whether the s'chach should be supported by the trees. (See the commentary on the following halachah.) using the trees as walls, it is kosher if:a)2the following two conditions are met they are strong enough3by nature - or he tied them and reinforced them so that they would be strong enough4that they would not be shaken by the wind at all times; - even if the wind is not strong enough to uproot them, it should not cause them to sway back and forth - that they would not be shaken by the wind at all times; andb) he filled [the space] between the branches5this translation of the word אמיר is taken from Isaiah 17:6. with hay and straw,6weaving them together so that the wall would be a solid continuum (Sukkah 24b) tying them7the hay and straw fillers so that they will not be shaken by the wind.8so that they will not be shaken by the wind.[This is necessary,] for any partition that cannot stand before a normal9However, a sukkah's inability to stand before a hurricane wind does not invalidate it. land wind10in contrast to sea winds, which are more powerful (Sukkah 23a) is not considered to be a partition.11This law also has implications with regard to the Sabbath laws. (See Hilchot Shabbat 16:15, 24.)
If a person constructs his sukkah on top of a wagon1although the wagon moves and is not fixed in one place (Rashi, Sukkah 22b) or on the deck of a ship,2Sukkah 23a relates:A person who constructs his sukkah on the deck of a ship: Rabban Gamliel deems it invalid; Rabbi Akiva deems it kosher.Once Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Akiva were traveling on a ship. Rabbi Akiva arose and constructed a sukkah on the ship's deck. The next morning, the wind came and blew it over. Rabban Gamliel asked Rabbi Akiva: "Akiva, where is your Sukkah?"As apparent from the narrative, such a sukkah need not be strong enough to withstand sea winds. However, even according to Rabbi Akiva, it must be strong enough to withstand normal land winds, as explained in the previous halachah. it is kosher, and one may ascend to it on the festival.3i.e., on the first day of Sukkot in Eretz Yisrael and on the first and second days in the diaspora. If one constructs it on the treetops or on a camel's back, it is kosher,4Sukkah 23a explains that Rabbi Yehudah objected to the use of such a sukkah, explaining that since it was not fit to be used on all seven days of the holiday (because of the prohibition against using it on the first day), it should not be used at all.Our halachah follows Rabbi Meir's opinion. He accepts Rabbi Yehudah's motivating principle, but explains that in the case at hand, there is no inherent difficulty with using such a sukkah throughout the holiday. The only reason it is not used on the first day is an external factor - a Rabbinic decree - which should not affect the halachic status of the sukkah itself. but one may not ascend to it on the festival,5Surely, this prohibition also applies on the Sabbath.From the Rambam's words, it appears that the restriction applies when the floor of the sukkah is actually in the tree. In contrast, Rashi (Shabbat 154b), Tosafot, Sukkah 22b and the Maggid Mishneh explain that even if the sukkah is on the ground and only the s'chach is supported by the tree, it is forbidden to use such a sukkah on the festival, lest one place utensils on the s'chach, and thus make use of the tree.The Magen Avraham (628:6) quotes this opinion, but states that at present it is no longer customary to place articles on the s'chach. Therefore, it is permitted to use such a sukkah. His opinion is quoted by Shulchan Aruch HaRav 628:7, and the Mishnah Berurah 628:17, with one qualification. At the outset, it is desirable not to use an article as support for s'chach unless it is, itself, fit to be used as s'chach. Hence, since the trees themselves are not fit to be used as s'chach, they should not be used as its supports. because climbing on a tree or animal is forbidden on a festival.6Beitzah 5:2 relates:All the [prohibitions] which we are obligated [to observe as] sh'vut...on the Sabbath, we are obligated [to observe] on a festival. These are [the activities prohibited] as sh'vut: We do not climb a tree; we do not ride an animal...In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam writes:"We do not climb a tree" - a decree lest we uproot [it];"we do not ride an animal" - a decree lest we break off a branch to lead it.If some of the walls were the result of human activity and some were trees, we consider [its structure]. We may ascend to any [sukkah] where, if the trees were taken away, it would be able to stand with the walls that were built by man alone.7The Rambam quotes this general principle from the Mishnah, Sukkah 23a. The Mishnah adds examples to express the concept more clearly:Two [walls] that were the result of human activity and one [wall] from the tree, or two [walls] from the tree and one [wall] that is a result of human activity.
A sukkah that does not possess a roof is invalid.1because a dwelling even of a temporary nature must have a roof. To what does this refer? A sukkah whose walls are joined to each other like a hut;2Rashi (Sukkah 19b) explains that this is a reference to a hunter's hut. See Diagram A; alternatively, when the side of the sukkah is placed against the wall.3See Diagram B. However, if it4the sukkah has a roof, even only a handbreadth in width,5between the two walls, as depicted in Diagram C. As long as it has a roof at least a handbreadth wide, the remainder of the roof may be slanted. or if one lifted the side of the sukkah close to the wall a handbreadth above the ground,6so that handbreadth is considered to be a wall, as depicted in the diagram below. it is kosher.7for the fact that the roof is slanted does not disqualify the sukkah.The Kessef Mishneh, Rabbenu Manoach, and others explain that though leniency is taken and such a sukkah is allowed, it must still possess all the dimensions required of a kosher sukkah mentioned in Halachah 1 of this chapter. Accordingly, at least six handbreadths of the slanted roof must itself be kosher for use as s'chach, and it must be more than 16 handbreadths long, so that it will be of the required height. When the Sukkah meets these qualifications, one is permitted to eat and sleep within it. (See also Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 631:10.)A round sukkah8if its circumference is large enough to contain a square seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths, it is kosher even though it has no corners. - Sukkah 7b records an opinion which disqualifies such a sukkah because it is not fit for use as a permanent dwelling. Nevertheless, the halachah does not follow this view.On this basis, we can understand the placement of this law. On the surface, it would be more appropriate to state this law as part of Halachah 1, which describes the dimensions of a sukkah. However, the Rambam structured the order of his halachot according to their motivating principles. Thus, the first clause of the halacah describes the construction of a sukkah whose shape causes it to be deemed unacceptable even as a temporary dwelling. In contrast, this clause describes a sukkah whose shape is abnormal, but acceptable for temporary purposes. - if its circumference is large enough to contain a square seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths, it is kosher even though it has no corners.
Should one place s'chach over an exedrah1A structure frequently employed in Roman architecture, and which was quite common in Jewish homes as well. There were a number of possible forms of this structure. Our halachah (in contrast to Hilchot Shabbat 17:35) deals with the following structure: A roof is placed between two walls, and within this roof a hollow place is left to allow sunlight to enter. Pillars are placed at each of the corners of the hole. The question is whether such a structure can serve as a sukkah if one placed s'chach over the hole. See diagram A. which has projections [extending from its pillars],2At times these pillars were ornamented with artistic projections. See the diagrams below. it is kosher,3Because of the projections, the opening of the ceiling is considered to be a third wall extending over the entire width of the exedrah and reaching the ground (Sukkah 18b) Thus, greater leniency is granted in this instance than in Halachah 3 of this chapter, where a partition four handbreadths in width is required.Needless to say, as evident from Halachah 5:14, the walls of the exedrah cannot be more than four cubits removed from the s'chach. regardless of whether the projections can be seen from the inside4of the Sukkah - although they cannot be seen from the outside5See diagram B. - or whether they can be seen from the outside6of theSukkah - although they cannot be seen from the inside.7See diagram C.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 630:8) quotes the Rambam's statements as halachah. However, the Ramah advises against constructing a sukkah in this manner.
If it1the sukkah constructed in the exedrah does not have projections [extending from its pillars]2as explained in the previous halachah it is not valid, because it resembles a sukkah constructed in an alley,3which is described in Halachah 3. because it has [walls on] only the two sides of the exedrah. The middle of the exedrah does not have a wall and there are no projections opposite it.4Hence, the principle that the opening of the roof is considered to be a third wall, reaching to the ground, is not applied in this instance. Rabbenu Manoach notes that different principles apply in this context from those in the laws of eruvin, but explains that there is a basic difference between the two contexts. Here, the two walls were not constructed for the sake of the sukkah. In contrast, in the laws of eruvin, the walls were constructed for the sake of creating an enclosure.
Should a person place s'chach over an alleyway which possesses a lechi1Hilchot Shabbat 17:2 states:How is one permitted [to carry articles] in a closed alleyway?One constructs a lechi (vertical pole) [at the entrance] to the fourth side or one lays a beam (korah) across [the span of the fourth side].Rabbenu Manoach explains that although the alleyway is closed on three sides, were it not for the special provisions mentioned in this halachah, it would not be acceptable, because in this instance the s'chach is placed more than four cubits away from the end of the alleyway. Hence, generally, as explained in Chapter 5, Halachah 14, such a sukkah would not be acceptable. or a well which possesses pasim,2Hilchot Shabbat 17:27 states:When a total of eight pasim [partitions] are constructed around a well, two connected to each other at each of its corners, they are considered to be walls. Thus, even though on each side the open portion exceeds the closed, since the four corners are closed, it is permitted to fill up water from the well and to water an animal.What is the height of each of these pasim? Ten handbreadths; their length must be at least six handbreadths and between each pas, there should be...no more than thirteen and one third cubits.Thus, there are no complete walls to this structure, and without the special provision granted by this halachah, it would not be acceptable.Sukkah 7b explains that each of these situations possesses an advantage over the other: The alley possesses an advantage in that it has two complete walls. In contrast, the well possesses an advantage in that it has partitions of some sort on each of its four sides. Hence, it is necessary to state both these laws, and neither could be derived from the other. it is considered a kosher sukkah only on the Sabbath of the festival.3The Tzafenat Paneach explains this as applying only to the days which precede the Sabbath. However, once the sukkah is acceptable on the Sabbath, it is also deemed kosher for the remaining days of the festival. (This view is not accepted by other authorities.) Since this lechi and these pasim are considered to be partitions with regard to the Sabbath laws,4On the Sabbath, one is allowed to carry only within an enclosed domain. Since the situations mentioned in this halachah are not actual enclosures and achieve that status only because of a Rabbinic ordinance, the application of these principles is confined to the Sabbath itself. Thus, on the Sabbath... they are also considered to be partitions with regard to the laws of sukkah.5and the sukkah is considered to be enclosed by three walls as required. However, throughout the remainder of the holiday, when the Rabbinic ordinances are not in effect, they are not considered to be enclosed structures. Hence, they are not acceptable as a sukkah.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 630:7) quotes these laws as halachah. (Also see the Ramah's notes.)
Should a person implant four poles in the four corners of the roof and place s'chach upon them,1See the accompanying diagram. it is kosher. Since he placed the s'chach [above] the edge of the roof, we consider that the lower walls ascend to the edge of the s'chach.2because of the principle of גוד אסיק מחיצתא, it is considered as if the walls of the house have been extended upward, as explained in Halachah 5.This halachah is based on the statements of Sukkah 4b. There are differences in the versions of the relevant passage possessed by the Rambam and Rav Sherirah Gaon, on the one hand, and those possessed by other Sages, on the other hand. Because of those textual differences, the Ra'avad, Rabbenu Manoach, and others have questioned the Rambam's decision. (See Maggid Mishneh.)These differences caused the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 630:6) to reject the Rambam's decision. The Mishnah Berurah 630:31 states that even according to the Rambam, the poles must be placed exactly at the edge of the roof. If they are placed further in, even when they are within three handbreadths of the edge, the sukkah is not acceptable.
A sukkah which has many entrances and many windows in its walls is kosher even though the open portion1Any open portion less than three handbreadths in length is considered to be closed, based on the principle of l'vud (Hilchot Shabbat 16:17). The Magen Avraham 630:1 explains that regarding the laws of sukkah, this principle applies only when one constructs four walls. However, if the sukkah has only three walls, the principle of l'vud cannot be applied, to consider spaces less than three handbreadths in length to be closed. exceeds the closed portion, provided there is no opening larger than ten cubits.2Sukkah 7a states:[The laws governing] a wall of a sukkah resemble [those governing] the wall [of an enclosure] on the Sabbath...There is an additional [stringency to the laws] of the Sabbath that does not apply to a sukkah. On the Sabbath, [a wall] is permitted only when the enclosed portion is greater than the open portion. This does not apply to a sukkah.The Rambam describes the laws governing a wall on the Sabbath as follows (Hilchot Shabbat 16:16):Every wall whose open portion exceeds its enclosed portion is not considered to be a wall. However, if the open portion is equal to the closed portion, it is permitted, provided that none of the open portions exceeds ten cubits.Based on the above, the Maggid Mishneh and the Kessef Mishneh explain that just as concerning the laws of the Sabbath, the closed portion of a wall must exceed its open portion, so, too, concerning two of the walls of the sukkah. The leniency allowing a wall of the sukkah to be counted as a wall even though the open portion exceeds the closed portion applies only concerning the third wall. Just as other leniencies (see Halachot 2 and 3) are granted concerning the third wall, this leniency is also allowed.Others explain that the intent is that even when the open portion of all four walls exceeds the closed portion, the sukkah is kosher, while on the Sabbath such an enclosure is not acceptable. This interpretation of the Talmud's statements is advanced by Rabbenu Asher and is quoted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 630:5.If there is an opening larger than ten cubits, it is necessary that the closed portion exceed the open portion, even though [the opening] is constructed in the form of an entrance.3Hilchot Shabbat (ibid.) states:If the open portion is constructed in the form of an entrance, even if it is more than ten cubits long it does not negate the wall, provided the open portion does not exceed the closed portion.However, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 362:10, 630:5) follows the opinion of Tosafot and other authorities, who are willing to accept a wall as kosher even though it has a wide opening, provided it is constructed in the form of an entrance.The Sefer Hashlamah presents a third view, accepting an open portion more than ten cubits long in the form of an entrance as part of the wall of a sukkah, but not concerning the laws of the Sabbath.The Ramah concludes his discussion of this halachah by stating that since these laws are somewhat complicated, it has become customary to build whole walls without any open portions. If one has only a minimum amount of wood, it is preferable to build three complete walls, rather than to construct four walls leaving open spaces.
A sukkah whose inner space1the space between the ground and the s'chach. exceeds twenty cubits [is not acceptable].2as stated in Halachah 1. Indeed, the question may be raised: Why did the Rambam state these two halachot so far removed from each other? Should one reduce it3the sukkah's inner space [by placing] pillows and coverings [on the floor], it is not considered to be reduced.4for these are merely temporary additions that will later be removed. [This applies even if] one considered them a permanent5The Maggid Mishneh interprets "permanent" literally. However, the Mishnah Berurah 633:11 explains that according to one opinion, the definition of "permanence" is for the duration of the Sukkot holiday. (See also Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 358:2.) part of the sukkah.6Most people would not consider leaving these articles in the sukkah permanently. Accordingly, a particular individual's desire to do so is not taken into consideration, and the space is not considered to be reduced (Sukkah 4a). If one reduced the space using straw and considered it as a permanent part of the sukkah, [the space] is considered to be reduced.7However, if one laid straw on the floor of the sukkah without having such an intention, the space is not considered to be reduced (ibid.). In his commentary on Ohalot 15:6, the Rambam writes: "In general, one will have in mind to remove straw."The Mishnah Berurah 633:13 emphasizes that one should not reduce the space of the sukkah on the first day of the festival because of the holiday prohibitions. (See also Rabbenu Manoach.)Needless to say, the above applies if one used earth and considered it to be a permanent part of the sukkah. However, if one [merely brought in] earth with no specific intention, [its space] is not considered to be reduced.8The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 633:4) quotes these decisions as halachah and adds that one must verbally express the desire to make the earth or straw part of the sukkah. The Mishnah Berurah (ibid.) states that many later authorities considered an unspoken intention as sufficient.If it9the inner space of a sukkah was twenty cubits high,10and, therefore, unacceptable but branches [from the s'chach descend within the twenty cubits, [the following principle applies:] If its shade would be greater than its open portion11this is the minimum measure required by the Mishnah (Sukkah 1:1) for s'chach to be kosher. because of these branches alone,12i.e., were the upper portion of the s'chach to be removed, the branches which hang down would create sufficient shade it is considered as having thick s'chach13i.e., the s'chach is considered to begin at the low branches and to have been piled high. and is kosher.14The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 663:2) quotes this law as halachah.
When [a sukkah is more than twenty cubits high, but] one builds a bench next to the middle wall extending across its entire span1and there are fewer than twenty cubits between the bench and the s'chach - if the width of the bench is equal to the minimum width of a sukkah,2seven handbreadths, as in Halachah 1 above. See Diagram A. it is kosher.3Rashi (Sukkah 4a) maintains that not only the area above the bench, but the entire sukkah is kosher, as evident from the last clause of Halachah 3. Though Rabbenu Nissim and other authorities maintain that only the area above the bench may be used as a sukkah, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 633:5) accepts Rashi's view.Should one build the bench next to the middle wall along [one] side, if there are four cubits between the bench and the [opposite] wall, it is unacceptable.4because the area around the bench is surrounded by only two walls. If there are fewer than four cubits, it is kosher.5because of the principle explained in the latter clause. In this instance as well, there is a disagreement between the Rabbis whether the entire sukkah is kosher or only the area above the bench. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 633:6) follows the view that only the area above the bench is acceptable for use as a sukkah. See Diagram B.Should one build the bench in the middle [of the sukkah], if there are more than four cubits from the edge of the bench to any of the sides [of the sukkah],6that wall is too far removed from the bench to be considered to be a wall around it. Hence, it7the sukkah in its totality, even the area above the bench... is not acceptable.8for in this instance, the sukkah must have four walls. If there are fewer than four cubits,9between the bench and the walls of the sukkah... it is kosher. It is considered as if the walls touch the bench,10i.e., the area from the bench to the wall is considered to be an extension of the wall. Thus, this halachah is the converse of the principle of דופן עקומה (Dofen Akumah literally, a crooked wall) mentioned in Chapter 5, Halachah 14.There and in his commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 1:10), the Rambam explains that the principle of Dofen Akumah allows us to consider materials on the roof of the sukkah which are unacceptable as s'chach to be extensions of the wall, thus creating an L-shaped - i.e., "crooked" - wall.Here, the Rambam explains that the opposite is also true. As long as there are no more than four cubits between the bench and the wall, the ground of the sukkah can also be considered to be an extension of its wall. (See Kessef Mishneh.) and11Since... the distance from the bench to the s'chach is less than twenty cubits.12as required in Halachah 1, the area above the bench is considered as having four walls and kosher s'chach.If one constructs a pillar13ten handbreadths or more high, because otherwise, the pillar could never be considered to be a significant domain (Maggid Mishneh). [within a sukkah14removed four cubits or more from the walls. (Otherwise, it would be considered to be kosher because of the principles mentioned above.) whose s'chach is more than twenty cubits high, the following rule applies]: Even though it is of the minimum size required of a sukkah,15seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths it is unacceptable,16Sukkah 4b explains that Abbaye desires to consider such a sukkah to be kosher, based on the principle of גוד אסיק מחיצתא mentioned in Halachah 11 - i.e., the walls of the pillar would be considered as extending upward until the s'chach. Ravva answered him that, in this instance, that principle cannot be applied...for - in contrast to those of a houseits - the pillar'swalls are not discernible. - See the Chiddushim of Rav Chayim Soloveichik, Halachah 11.Thus, it is as if there is kosher s'chach above the pillar without any walls. because its walls are not discernible. Thus, it is as if there is kosher s'chach above the pillar without any walls.
[The following rule applies] when [the inner space of the sukkah] was less than ten [handbreadths high]1the minimum height required by Halachah 1. and one dug [into the ground of the sukkah] to create2a pit at least seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths (Rabbenu Manoach, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 633:10) with... an [inner space] of ten [handbreadths]:3between it and the s'chach. If there are three handbreadths from the edge of the pit until the wall [of the sukkah], it is not acceptable.4One might assume that as long as there are less than four cubits between the edge of the pit and the sukkah, the sukkah would be kosher, because of the principle mentioned in the previous halachah; i.e., the ground of the sukkah would be considered to be an extension of the wall. Nevertheless, Sukkah 4a differentiates between the two cases. In the situation described in the previous halachah, the wall was of the proper size; the only question was its proximity to the sukkah. In this instance, there is no halachically acceptable wall to begin with. If there is less than that [amount], it is kosher,5The Mishnah Berurah 633:29 quotes authorities who maintain that only the area within the pit is kosher, and one does not fulfill the mitzvah of eating or sleeping in the sukkah by performing these activities in the portion covered by the s'chach outside the pit. because any [distance] less than three [handbreadths] is considered to be [insignificant, and the two entities are considered to be] adjacent [to each other], as explained in Hilchot Shabbat.614:7, which explains the principle of l'vud mentioned above.
The walls of the sukkah are kosher [although made] from all [substances].1The Mishnah (Sukkah 12b) mentions many substances which are not acceptable as s'chach (as mentioned in the following chapter), and concludes "all are fit to be used as walls." All that is necessary is a barrier of any kind.2The Ramah (Orach Chayim 630:1) explains that one should take care not to use substances that have an unpleasant odor or substances that will shrivel during the holiday, and thus cause the walls to be less than the required measure. Even living beings [may serve that purpose.3The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 630:11) states that an animal used for this purpose must be tied so that it will not run away. Thus,] a person can create a wall [of the sukkah] by using a colleague so that he can eat, drink, and sleep in the sukkah, for which his colleague is serving as a wall4The Tzafnat Paneach raises the question whether the person serving as the wall can also fulfill the mitzvah of eating in such a sukkah. He quotes a number of passages from which one might infer that he may. [even] on the holiday.5The latter term refers to the first day of Sukkot - and in the Diaspora, the second day - and the day of Shemini Atzeret, when the laws prohibiting work and the Rabbinic ordinances extending those restrictions must be observed.The above applies when one employs the person as a wall without his conscious knowledge. However, it is forbidden to create [a wall by using a person]6The Ra'avad and the Maggid Mishneh explain that this refers only to the third wall of the sukkah. If a sukkah has three kosher walls, a person may employ a colleague to serve as the fourth wall on the holiday, even though the latter is conscious of what he is doing. The Ramah (Orach Chayim 630:12) states this as halachah. when the latter is conscious of the fact on the holiday.7Hilchot Shabbat 16:23 states:It is permitted to create a barrier of men, one standing next to the other, on the Sabbath, as long as the people who are standing are not conscious of the fact that they are serving as a barrier.Although it is forbidden to create an enclosure on the Sabbath, since the person serving as the barrier is unaware of what he is doing, no transgression is involved. It is his intention, and not that of the person using the sukkah, which is significant (Ra'avad). In contrast, when the person serving as the wall is conscious of his acts, it is considered as if he has created a structure of substance (Magen Avraham 630:19).The Magen Avraham (ibid.) also states that leniency is granted only when humans serve as the walls. It is absolutely forbidden to create a wall using an animal on the holiday. Nevertheless, it is permitted during the other days of the festival.8with the exception of the Sabbath; i.e., there is no essential difficulty with the use of such a sukkah, the only problem is the Rabbinic prohibition mentioned above.Similarly, a person may create a fourth wall9Since a sukkah is kosher when it possesses only three walls, the addition of the fourth wall is not halachically significant. We are allowed to add to a temporary structure on the Sabbath. from utensils on the holiday. However, he should not create a third wall using utensils10It is permitted to create a utensil from human beings, because one does not normally create an enclosure in such a manner. In contrast, an enclosure is frequently made from utensils (Rabbenu Manoach). on the holiday, because, [by doing so], he is making the sukkah fit for use, and it is forbidden to create [even] a temporary tent on the holiday.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
[There are requirements regarding] the s'chach of a sukkah, and not all substances are acceptable [to be used for this purpose].1Some of the requirements mentioned by the Rambam were established by Torah law, while others are Rabbinic ordinances, as explained below. For s'chach, we may use only a substance which grows from the ground,2i.e., is an agricultural product and is neither found naturally - e.g., metals - nor produced from animals nor manufactured synthetically; has been detached from the ground,3and is not still connected to its source of nurture; is not subject to contracting ritual impurity,4This excludes articles used as food and those that have been fashioned into utensils. These three requirements are alluded to by Deuteronomy 16:13: "Make the Sukkot holiday for yourselves for seven days, when you gather in from your grain and grapes..."Sukkah 12a explains that the verse implies that the s'chach, the essential element of the sukkah, must resemble "the leftovers from the grain and grape harvest."(The expression "alluded to" was used rather than "derived from" on the basis of the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:4. That expression implies that the concept cannot be derived from the verse per se. Rather, it was transmitted as a halachah l'Moshe miSinai, and the Biblical verse is merely an allusion.)The Rambam gives examples of entities which are not acceptable as s'chach on the basis of these principles in the following halachah. does not have an unpleasant odor,5As implied by the following halachah, this and the following clause are Rabbinic decrees. S'chach with an unpleasant odor will not create an inviting holiday environment. Indeed, substances with an unpleasant odor should not be used for the sukkah's walls either. and does not have elements which fall off and wither constantly.6for a person will not be pleased to have portions of the s'chach falling into his food. The Mishnah Berurah 629:39 states that the prohibition applies to elements that fall off naturally. However, if they fall off only when subjected to wind, there is no difficulty in using them.
When a person uses as s'chach a substance which does not grow from the ground, is still connected to the ground, or is subject to contracting ritual impurity, [the sukkah] is not acceptable.1for these requirements stem from the Torah itself. The particular aspects of these requirements are described in this and the following halachot.However, if he transgressed and used as s'chach a substance which has elements which fall off and wither,2Sukkah 13a gives the shrub known as hollow as an example of such a substance. or which possesses an unpleasant odor,3Sukkah 12b gives the plant known as wormwood as an example of such a substance. it is kosher.4after the fact, for these are only Rabbinic requirements. The Mishnah Berurah 629:38 emphasizes that even if other s'chach is available, there is no need to remove the s'chach with the unpleasant odor. However, the Pri Megadim stresses that if the odor is so unpleasant that no one would bear it in his home, it is forbidden to use such a sukkah. [Our Sages]5Sukkah 13a said only that one should not use these as s'chach lest one leave one's sukkah and depart. One must take care that the branches and leaves should not descend within ten handbreadths of the ground,6the minimum height for a sukkah prescribed in Chapter 3, Halachah 1. so that one will not be uncomfortable7Sukkah 4a describes this as "a disgusting dwelling, unfit for human habitation." when using the sukkah.8The Rambam's phraseology leaves room for the interpretation that this is a suggestion, but not an absolute requirement. (See Rabbenu Manoach.) Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 633:9) states that such a sukkah is unacceptable for use.If one used metals,9even if they have not been made into utensils, but are still in a raw state in which they are unfit to contract ritual impurity; bones, or hides10even if they have not been made into garments, but are still in a raw state in which they are unfit to contract ritual impurity; as s'chach, it is unacceptable because these do not grow from the ground. If one suspended vines and the like over it until they made a sukkah, it is unacceptable, because they were not uprooted [from the ground].11The laws governing the use of such plants as s'chach after they have been hung over the sukkah and then detached from the ground are discussed in Halachah 12.Should one use wooden utensils,12In particular, this refers to wooden utensils that have a receptacle or are wide and other articles are frequently placed upon them - e.g., a table. However, wooden utensils that do not fall into these categories are not subject to contracting ritual impurity, and, hence, may be used for s'chach. An example of such utensil is a ladder. The Rambam (Hilchot Keilim 4:1) declares that a ladder is not subject to contracting ritual impurity. Hence, according to his opinion, there is no difficulty with using it as s'chach.(It must be emphasized that other authorities question the Rambam's decision on a ladder and maintain that a ladder may be subject to contracting ritual impurity. Hence, it is preferable not to use it as s'chach. See the Shulchan Aruch and Ramah, Orach Chayim 629:7.) mats that were made to lie on,13However, mats that were made for use as s'chach or for shade may be used as s'chach. Halachah 6 discusses the laws which apply when a mat was made without any specific intention. and the like as s'chach, it is unacceptable, because they are subject to contracting ritual impurity. Similarly, using broken14e.g., utensils with holes of sufficient size to render them no longer subject to contracting ritual impurity. (See Hilchot Keilim, Chapter 6.)and worn out - e.g., garments that have worn out and are less than three fingerbreadths by three fingerbreadths in size and, hence, are no longer subject to contracting ritual impurity (Sukkah 16a; Hilchot Keilim 22:21).utensils as s'chach is unacceptable. - This is a Rabbinic decree on the basis of the following rationale...Since these substances were subject to ritual impurity - previously,[the latter law was instituted] lest one use broken pieces - from utensilswhich have not yet attained a state of [unquestionable] purity - i.e., are still subject to contracting ritual impurity.as s'chach. and worn out utensils as s'chach is unacceptable. Since these substances were subject to ritual impurity, [the latter law was instituted] lest one use broken pieces which have not yet attained a state of [unquestionable] purity.
If one used foods1This refers only to foods for humans. Food which is eaten primarily by animals is not subject to contracting ritual impurity (Hilchot Tum'at Ochlin 1:1) and hence may be used as s'chach (Taz 629:12). as s'chach, it is unacceptable, because they are subject to contracting ritual impurity.2There is a slight imprecision in the Rambam's statements. Produce is not subject to contracting ritual impurity until it comes into contact with liquid. (See Leviticus 11:38; Hilchot Tum'at Ochlin 1:1-2.) Nevertheless, foods are not fit to be used as s'chach even though they have never come into contact with water (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 629:1; Mishnah Berurah 629:28). [When one uses] branches from a fig tree which contain figs, runners from a grape vine which contain grapes, branches of a date palm which contain dates and the like,3i.e., the difficulty being that although the branches are proper s'chach, the fruit is unfit to be used for that purpose... [the following rules apply:] We see - if the waste4the branches and leaves is more than the food;5the fruit then we may use them as s'chach. If not, we may not use them as s'chach.6Rabbenu Manoach explains that these decisions are based on the principle that according to Torah law, mixtures are categorized according to the majority (בטל ברב).On the basis of Sukkah 13b-14a, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 629:10) explains that sometimes the stems of the fruit are considered part of the fruit, and on other occasions part of the branches. The Magen Avraham 629:12 explains that generally, a stem is not considered to be longer than three handbreadths. However, there are certain instances (e.g., grains) when a longer measure is considered. Hence, it is proper to be stringent in this regard. (See also Shulchan Aruch HaRav 629:15-16.)The apparent contradiction between this halachah and Halachah 13 is discussed in the commentary on that halachah.If one uses as s'chach vegetables7The Maggid Mishneh explains that this refers to vegetables that are used as animal food, and hence were not excluded by the previous clause of this halachah. Rabbenu Manoach and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 629:12) explain that this refers to vegetables that are eaten by humans. Sukkah 13b appears to support the latter interpretation, stating:The vegetables with which a person can fulfill his obligation on Pesach... [can] invalidate a sukkah, [because they are considered] to be vacant space. which, when they dry up, will wither, and none of their substance will remain,8i.e., the vegetables will dry up and wither during the Sukkot festival, leaving the sukkah with more vacant space than shade (Kessef Mishneh). even though they are now fresh, their place is considered to be vacant, as though they did not exist.9According to the Maggid Mishneh's interpretation, the explanation of the law is straightforward. It teaches us that rather than consider the vegetables to be non-kosher s'chach, we consider their space to be vacant. The latter interpretation requires a slightly more intricate explanation. The vegetables are not considered to be non-kosher s'chach, which would invalidate the sukkah if they take up four handbreadths, as explained in Halachah 14. Rather, their space is considered to be empty. Hence, a space of three handbreadths is sufficient to invalidate the sukkah, as explained in Halachah 20.
If one used as s'chach branches of flax which were not crushed and combed, they are kosher, because they are still considered to be wood.1The use of the word עץ, rendered as branches or wood, with regard to flax, has its source in Joshua 2:6, which describes how Rachav "hid them in branches of flax." After the flax has been crushed and combed,2The Rishon Letzion questions the law when the flax has been crushed but not combed, and concludes that as long as it has not been combed, it is acceptable. Nevertheless, Shulchan Aruch HaRav 629:5 does not accept this conclusion. it may not be used as s'chach,3Though it is not considered to be a garment and, hence, is not subject to contracting ritual impurity (Maggid Mishneh; see also Shabbat 27b), it may nevertheless not be used as s'chach... since its form has changed and it is as though it is no longer a product of the earth.4The Ra'avad disagrees with this principle and states that even before it is woven into a garment, flax is useful to stuff pillows and covers. Hence, it is subject to contracting ritual impurity and is thus unfit to be used as s'chach.The Maggid Mishneh points out a contradiction to the Ra'avad's logic. The "male arrows" mentioned in the following halachah are - like flax - prepared to be used for a purpose. Nevertheless, they are considered acceptable for use as s'chach.Rav Kapach mentions two possible extensions of the difference of opinion between the Rambam and the Ra'avad:a) paper or carton - According to the Rambam, it may not be used because it no longer resembles a plant produced from the earth. According to the Ra'avad, it might be acceptable, since it is not subject to contracting ritual impurity.b) cotton wool - It may be used for the purposes mentioned by the Ra'avad and thus, according to his opinion, would be subject to contracting ritual impurity. Nevertheless, its natural form is preserved. Hence, according to the Rambam's opinion, it would be acceptable. (It must be noted that the Magen Avraham 629:3 and Shulchan Aruch HaRav 629:5 maintain that after cotton has been combed, it is considered as though its form has been altered.)One may use ropes made from palm bast or hemp and the like as s'chach, since their original form is unchanged and ropes are not considered to be utensils.5nor are they subject to contracting ritual impurity. The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 629:5 quotes this law as halachah, but adds that ropes of flax and canvas may not be used for this purpose.
[The following rules apply] when one uses arrows as s'chach.1The question whether the arrows are acceptable as s'chach or not revolves around another issue - their susceptibility to contracting ritual impurity. Those which are "male"2i.e., the end of their body is sharpened and comes to a point, which is intended to be put inside a metal arrowhead. are kosher;3for the arrow itself is considered a simple wooden utensil which is not susceptible to contracting ritual impurity. (See Hilchot Keilim 1:10.)The Magen Avraham 629:2 states that this decision applies only before these arrows were placed in the arrowhead. If they have been placed in the arrowhead, even if subsequently removed they are no longer acceptable as s'chach. those which are "female"4i.e., the end of their body is hollowed out for the arrowhead to be inserted within are not acceptable.5for they are subject to contracting ritual impurity. Even though [ultimately,] they will be filled with iron,6Hilchot Keilim 2:3 states: "A receptacle which is made to be filled is not considered a receptacle." Thus, one might assume that these arrows would also not be considered as having a receptacle. The Pri Ha'aretz explains that since the iron arrowheads are often removed from these bodies, it is considered as though... they have a receptacle. Hence, they are susceptible to contracting ritual impurity, as are all utensils with receptacles.7It must be noted that Rashi and other commentators follow the simple interpretation of Sukkah 12b (the source for this law) and disagree with the Rambam's decision in Hilchot Keilim. They maintain that if a utensil has a receptacle, even if it will be permanently filled, it is subject to contracting ritual impurity.
A mat of reeds, of raw rubber, or of hemp1if it is small, we may assume that it was made to lie on. - The commentaries note an apparent contradiction in the Rambam's words. Hilchot Keilim 25:13 states that even a small mat of reeds or hemp is not subject to contracting ritual impurity, because it is uncomfortable to lie on. - if it is small, we may assume that it was made to lie on. Therefore, it may not be used for s'chach unless it was [explicitly] made for this purpose.2Since the mat was made with that specific intention, we do not follow the general principles, but rather judge it individually.If it is large,3The Rambam's statements are based on Sukkah 20a. It must be noted that his decisions are dependent on the version of the text of the Talmud he accepted. The Ra'avad and others interpret the word גדולה as related to the word גדיל (tassel). Thus, they explain that the Talmud is referring to a small mat. However, because it is made of thick tassels, rather than woven, it is not comfortable to lie on, and hence would most likely be used for shade. According to this opinion, any woven mat, even if it is large, is unfit to be used as s'chach. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 629:6) quotes the Rambam's interpretation. we may assume that it was made for shade; therefore, it may be used for s'chach unless it was [explicitly] made to lie on.4The Ramah (Orach Chayim, ibid.) mentions that in places where it is customary to affix mats permanently as the roofs for homes, they may not be used for s'chach. The Rabbis instituted this decree lest people remain in their homes on Sukkot without differentiating between them and a sukkah.If it has a border,5a small lip (Sukkah 20b) even a large mat may not be used as s'chach, because it is considered to be a receptacle.6Tosafot, Sukkah 20b quotes Ketubot 50b, which explains that such mats were used to collect dates. Even if the border were removed, it may not be used as s'chach, because it would be considered to be a broken utensil.7which, as explained in Halachah 2, may not be used as s'chach even though they are not susceptible to contracting ritual impurity.
Boards which are less than four handbreadths wide1In many places throughout the Talmud, four handbreadths is established as the minimum size of an area. Hence, a board of that size is considered significant and may not be used as s'chach (Sukkah 14a). may be used for s'chach even though they have been planed.2smooth, and thus are fit to be used in their present state (Sukkah 15a; Rabbenu Manoach). If they are more than four handbreadths wide, they should not be used as s'chach, even though they have not been planed. This is a decree [instituted] lest one sit under a roof and regard it as a sukkah.3A person might think: "What is the difference between the sukkah and my house - they are both covered with boards?" This is surely a false assumption. As explained in the following halachah, since the boards of a roof were not placed there for the purpose of shade, but rather to be part of the permanent structure of the house, they cannot be considered to be s'chach (Sukkah 14a; Rabbenu Manoach).If one placed a board which was more than four handbreadths wide over [a sukkah, the sukkah] is kosher.4The Maggid Mishneh explains that this applies only when the board is placed at the side of the sukkah. Thus, it could be considered to be an extension of the wall (דופן עקומה), as explained in Halachah 14. However, if it is in the midst of the sukkah, it is not acceptable. The Kessef Mishneh explains that this law can apply even in the midst of a sukkah, provided the sukkah already possesses its minimum size. His decisions in the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 632:1 follow this interpretation. However, one should not sleep under the board.5According to the Maggid Mishneh, because it is part of the wall; according to the Kessef Mishneh, because it appears to be a separate domain. A person who did sleep6or fulfilled any other of the activities which must be performed in the sukkah under the board has not fulfilled his obligation.There were boards that were four handbreadths wide, but less than four handbreadths thick. A person turned them on their side so that they would not be four handbreadths wide to use them as s'chach. This is not acceptable, because a board is unacceptable for use as s'chach whether one uses its width or thickness.7Sukkah 14b explains that after the Sages forbade the use of such boards, they are considered to be equivalent to iron poles.The Magen Avraham 629:22 writes that at present it is customary not to use boards as s'chach, even if they are less than four handbreadths wide. However, if there is no other s'chach available, one may use boards for that purpose even if they are more than four handbreadths wide.
A roof which is not covered by a ceiling1i.e., the plaster and the stones - but rather has only boards fixed in place, is not acceptable, since they were not placed there for the purpose of a sukkah - as required by the following halachah - i.e., the plaster and the stones - but rather has only boards fixed in place, is not acceptable, since they were not placed there for the purpose of a sukkah, but to be part of the house.Therefore, if one2performed two activities: lifted up the boards3from their place. (Though the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 631:9 does not mention this requirement, the Mishnah Berurah 631:4 does.) and removed the nails4holding the boards in position. (See the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:7.) Through these actions, one is considered to have nullified the previous placement of the boards, and it is considered as though they have been placed there... with the intent [that they serve] as a sukkah,5Therefore it is kosher.6for the boards are essentially fit to be used as s'chach. The only difficulty was the intention with which they were originally placed. A change of mind without an act is not sufficient, since, as explained in the commentary on the following halachah, we are required to "make" a sukkah and not use one which has already been made. [This applies provided] that each board is not four handbreadths wide.7as explained in the previous halachah. Rabbenu Asher states that in such a situation, the sukkah is acceptable even though the boards are more than four handbreadths wide.He explains that in the previous instance, the reason the Sages forbade using such boards was to differentiate between them and the boards of a house. In the present instance, the fact that the person took apart the roof of his house obviously implies that he realizes that it may not be used as a sukkah. Hence, there is no need for such a decree. This opinion is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch, ibid.Similarly, it is kosher if one removed a board from between two others and replaced it with kosher s'chach, with the intention [that it serve] as a sukkah.
A sukkah that was made for any purpose whatsoever - even if it was not made for the purpose of [fulfilling] the mitzvah - if it was made according to law,1Sukkah 8b quotes a baraita which contains the latter statement and questions: "What does 'according to law' mean?.That it was made for the purpose of shade."It appears that the Rambam uses the same expression, but with different implications. Since he explicitly states that the sukkah must be constructed for the purpose of shade, one might infer that the expression "according to law" is intended to include other concepts. Thus, it can be a reference to the requirements for a sukkah's size and the nature of the materials used for the s'chach, as mentioned in this and the previous chapter. it is kosher.2The Mishnah, Sukkah 1:1, states: An old sukkah: The School of Shammai deems it unacceptable, while the School of Hillel rules it kosherThe commentaries explain that the term "an old sukkah" refers to any sukkah that was constructed for purposes other than the fulfillment of the mitzvah. In its discussion of this law, the Jerusalem Talmud requires that one must make an addition or change to the s'chach. Though that decision is not quoted by the Rambam, Rabbenu Asher mentions it and it is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 636:1). Nevertheless, the Magen Avraham 636:1 explains that this is a desirable and proper step, but the sukkah is acceptable even though no changes have been made. However, it must be made for the purpose of shade.3Isaiah 4:6 states: "It shall be a sukkah for shade from the heat...," thus defining the purpose of such a structure. A sukkah constructed for the purposes of modesty is not acceptable (Rabbenu Manoach). Examples of this are sukkot made for gentiles, sukkot made for animals, and the like.4which are outside the entire framework of mitzvot. Sukkah 8b also mentions the sukkot made for shepherds and watchmen. Though the latter are obligated to keep the mitzvah of sukkah, they did not necessarily construct their sukkot with that intent in mind.In contrast, a sukkah that came about on its own accord5e.g., branches fell over a frame, and of course, any time a roof is covered for other purposes - e.g., the construction of a home, as mentioned in the previous halachah... is unacceptable, because it was not made for the purpose of shade. Similarly, when a person hollows out a place in a heap of produce and thus makes a sukkah, it is not considered to be a sukkah, 6Sukkot 12a explains that there is an added factor involved in this example. Deuteronomy 16:13 states: "Make a [celebration of] the Sukkot holiday for seven days." This refers to the construction of the sukkah and teaches that we must "make" a sukkah and not use what was already made. Therefore, despite the fact that the person hollowed out the space for the purpose of shade, the sukkah is not acceptable, because the produce was not originally placed there for that purpose.We find a similar principle concerning tzitzit. Deuteronomy 22:12 states: "Make yourself tassels on the four corners of your garments." On the basis of this command, Menachot 40b teaches that it is unacceptable to tie tzitzit to a three-cornered garment and then cut a fourth corner, since we are required to make tzitzit, and not use what is already made. because the produce was not piled there for this purpose.7The Ba'al Hamaor writes that if, originally, a person were to pile produce with the intention that later he would hollow out a sukkah, the sukkah would be acceptable. However, this opinion is not accepted by other authorities. Accordingly, were one to create a space one handbreadth [high]8We find the measure of one handbreadth considered to define a structure with regard to the laws of ritual impurity. Accordingly, it is given significance in this context as well. (See Sukkah 16a.) and seven [handbreadths]9by seven handbreadths in area for the purpose of a sukkah, and afterwards hollow it out till it reached ten [handbreadths],10the minimum height of a sukkah, as explained in Chapter 3, Halachah 1. it is kosher, since its s'chach was placed for the purpose of shade.11and then, the original structure was merely expanded.
We may not use bundles of straw, bundles of wood or bundles of reeds as s'chach.1Although, according to the Torah's requirements, these would be considered proper s'chach... This decree [was instituted]2by the Sages (Sukkah 12a)... lest one place those bundles on one's roof to dry out, and then change one's mind and sit under them with the intent [that they serve as] a sukkah. The person did not place the s'chach there originally for the purpose of shade. Thus, it resembles a sukkah that came about on its own accord.3which is unacceptable, as explained in the previous halachah.If one4placed bundles of these substances on a roof with the intent that they would be used as s'chach and... untied [the bundles], they are acceptable [for use as s'chach].5The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 629:17) explains that a different rule applies if the bundles were originally placed on the roof to dry out. For them to be acceptable as s'chach, untying them alone is insufficient, and one must also shift the position of their contents. A bundle is considered to be no fewer than twenty five units.6Thus, any lesser amount of these substances are acceptable as s'chach even though they are tied together.The Rambam bases his statements on the Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 1:6). Though the Ra'avad maintains that a bundle may be composed of even a smaller number of units, the Rambam's opinion is accepted as halachah by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 629:15.
Small bundles1The Kessef Mishneh questions the reason for the addition of the adjective, noting that if the bundles contain fewer than twenty five units, they are permitted, as stated in the previous halachah. Others mention that this refers to bundles of small branches. that were tied together [to be sold] by number2to be untied immediately thereafter (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 629:16). may be used as s'chach.3Sukkah 13b relates that bundles of this nature were frequently used in Sura, and that the Sages permitted them to be used as s'chach.Similarly, if one cuts off the top of a date palm and the branches are bound to it, it may be used as s'chach, because elements that are bound naturally are not considered to be bundles.4The Ba'al Hamaor questions whether this principle applies only with regard to s'chach, where it is logical to assume that a more lenient position would be taken, since the entire question revolves around a Rabbinic decree, or whether it also applies in all cases where Torah law itself requires a bundle. Furthermore, even if one tied the tops of the branches from one side, and they thus appear to be a single bundle with one of its two ends bound naturally and the other bound as a result of human activity, it may be used as s'chach. A single tree which is bound up is not considered to be a bundle, but rather a single piece of wood, since [the branches] are bound together naturally.5However, if one were to add even one branch and then tie them together, it would be considered to be a bundle (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 629:15).Similarly, any knot which is not strong enough to hold when carried is not considered a knot [and the resulting bundle may be used as s'chach].6Sukkah 13b mentions this principle when explaining why bundles of willows whose upper tie was loosened could be used as s'chach.
A person who constructs his sukkah under a tree is considered as though he built it within his home.1and the sukkah is unacceptable. This applies only when the shade the tree produces exceeds the open area. However, if there is more open space under the tree than shade, the sukkah may be kosher.The determination of whether such a sukkah is kosher depends on a number of principles, based on the interpretation of Sukkah 9b and 11a. The Rambam's interpretation of that passage, and thus the ground rules he establishes, differ from those accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 626:1-2).In the following halachah, the Rambam deals with the resolution of the question when no effort has been made to correct the problem of the non-kosher s'chach. As will be explained, there his interpretation is contested by other authorities. In this halachah, the Rambam describes the rulings which govern the situation when an effort has been made to rectify the situation by detaching the branches from their source of nurture. These are based on the Mishnah, Sukkah 11a, and are also accepted by other Rabbinic authorities. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 626:2.) If one draped the leaves and branches of trees [over the sukkah], and then placed s'chach over them, and only afterwards detached them,2As mentioned in Halachot 1 and 2, branches are fit to be used for s'chach only after they have been detached from their source of nurture. [the following rules apply:]If the amount of [kosher] s'chach exceeded [the branches], it is kosher.3Though at present, the branches would be acceptable as s'chach, as explained in the commentary on Halachah 9, the Torah requires that when s'chach is originally put in place, it must be kosher. Otherwise, it is unacceptable even though steps were taken to correct the disqualifying factors. This is based on the principle that one must make a sukkah and not use one which is already made.Nevertheless, since the prohibition against using these branches as s'chach does not relate to their essential nature, their presence may be nullified when there is a majority of kosher s'chach. This conforms to the principle of ביטול ברב. If the amount of s'chach which originally was kosher did not exceed [the branches],4the presence of the branches remains halachically significant. Hence,... one must move them after detaching them, so that they will have been put in place for the purpose of a sukkah.5Moving the branches negates their previous placement, and afterwards they are considered to be kosher s'chach, which was put in place for the purpose of creating a sukkah.
If one mixed a substance which may be used for s'chach with a substance that may not be used for s'chach1This may refer to a substance like metal, which is unfit for use as s'chach because it does not grow in the earth, or branches of a tree which have not been detached from their source of nurture. and used2the mixture of... the two as s'chach, even though the quantity of kosher s'chach exceeds that of the substance which was not acceptable as s'chach,3The presence of the substance which is not acceptable as s'chach is not nullified according to the principles of ברב ביטול, because it exists as a separate entity which can be distinguished from the kosher s'chach.Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, notes the apparent contradiction between this decision and Halachah 3, which states:[When one uses] branches from a fig tree which contain figs,...We see if the waste is more than the food; then we may use them as s'chach.That halachah also mentions kosher s'chach - the branches - and substances which are not acceptable as s'chach - the figs. However, if there is a greater quantity of branches, the presence of the figs is nullified. In contrast, in this halachah, that concept is not applied.Rav Avraham distinguishes between the two. In Halachah 3, the person does not intend to use the fruit for the purpose of shade; he merely wants to save the effort of removing it from the branches. Therefore, their presence may be nullified. In contrast, in this halachah the substances which are not acceptable as s'chach are being employed for the purpose of shade itself. Hence, their presence cannot be nullified. [the mixture] is not acceptable.4As mentioned above, this decision depends on the Rambam's interpretation of Sukkah 9b. That passage reads:A person who constructs his sukkah under a tree is considered as though he built it within his home...Ravva said: "The above applies only to a tree whose shade is greater than its open space. However, if its open space is greater than its shade, it is kosher.What difference does it make if its open space is greater than its shade, the substance not acceptable as s'chach will be combined with the kosher s'chach [and therefore, the sukkah will not be acceptable]?Rav Pappa said: בשחבטן.The Maggid Mishneh, the Ra'avad, and Rabbenu Manoach explain that the Rambam renders בשחבטן as "when he separated them." Thus, when the two substances were combined, the Rambam's opinion would be that the sukkah is not kosher, as explained in this clause of the halachah. When they are separate, the sukkah may be kosher according to the stipulations mentioned in the following clause of this halachah and the halachot to come.(The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam renders בשחבטן as "when he severed them." However, that difference in interpretation does not result in a difference in halachah.)Rashi and others interpret בשחבטן as "when he lowered them (and mixed them together with the kosher s'chach)." Thus, according to this opinion, the sukkah is acceptable when the kosher and non-kosher s'chach are mixed together. Thus, this view is diametrically opposed to the Rambam's, who maintains that such a mixture is of no avail.As noted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 626:1), there are two ways of understanding this interpretation of the passage. However, since both of them are not acceptable to the Rambam, their explanation will not be included here.If one covered the sukkah with the two substances and kept them separate,5When there is a majority of kosher s'chach, it is judged to be an independent entity. When there is a sufficient amount of kosher s'chach, the sukkah is kosher unless the substance that is not acceptable as s'chach is placed in a manner which can disqualify the entire sukkah, as is explained in this and the following three halachot. [the following rules apply:] If there are more than three handbreadths of the substance which is not acceptable as s'chach in one place,6The principle of l'vud, by which this substance could be considered to be a continuation of the kosher s'chach, cannot apply. However, if there is less than three handbreadths of the substance that is not acceptable as s'chach in one place, even though there are a number of such patches among the s'chach, the sukkah is kosher, as stated in Halachah 16. Furthermore, one may eat and sleep under the non-kosher s'chach (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 632:1). whether7the substance which is not acceptable as s'chach is placed... in the middle of the sukkah or at its side, it is not acceptable.8As stated in the following halachot, this is relevant only with regard to a sukkah which possesses the minimum area. The reason the sukkah is not acceptable is not that it is disqualified by the non-kosher s'chach, but that it does not have the minimum amount of kosher s'chach (Sukkah 17b).
Where does the above apply? In a small sukkah.1See the commentary on both the previous and following halachot. However, in a large sukkah,2which possesses a minimal amount of kosher s'chach, more lenient rules apply... where there is a substance that is unacceptable as s'chach in the middle, it disqualifies the sukkah if there are four handbreadths of it.3across the entire span of the sukkah, dividing the sukkah in half, it is considered to be significant (Rashi, Sukkah 17a), and hence the sukkah is disqualified.The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 632:2) emphasizes that even where the non-kosher s'chach is of this size, if the sukkah possesses seven cubits by seven cubits of kosher s'chach in one place, that portion may be considered to be a kosher sukkah and used during the holiday. [If there is] less than that,4the division is not as noticeable. Hence, the sukkah is kosher.5The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 632:1) states that one may eat and sleep throughout the entire sukkah. However, the Ra'avad and Rabbenu Nissim do not accept this leniency, and the Mishnah Berurah (632:3) advises following this stringency.Where the substance that is unacceptable as s'chach is at the side, it disqualifies the sukkah if there are four cubits of it.6Four cubits or more exceeds the measure of leniency provided by the Torah. [If there is] less than that, the sukkah is kosher.7on the basis of the principle of דופן עקומה explained below.For example,a) [the roof of] a house which was opened in the center and s'chach placed over the openingb)8This and the following examples are given by the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:10. a courtyard surrounded by an exedra9note the drawing accompanying Chapter 4, Halachah 8. which was covered with s'chachc)10Sukkah 17a explains that one might not necessarily have been able to deduce this example from the previous one, because in that instance the walls of the house were constructed for it. In contrast, the walls of the excedrah were not constructed for its sake, but for the houses on either side. a large sukkah over which was placed a substance that was not acceptable as s'chach near the sides of its walls.11Sukkah 17a explains that one might not necessarily have been able to deduce this example from the previous ones, because in those instances only kosher s'chach was placed over the opening of those structures. In this instance, a substance that is not acceptable as s'chach was placed on the roof intentionally.[In all these cases,] if there are four cubits [or more] from the edge of the kosher s'chach until the wall, it is not acceptable. If there is less than that amount, we view it as though the wall has been made crooked12i.e., the substance that is not acceptable as s'chach is considered part of the wall - Rabbenu Nissim states that this law applies only when the walls reach all the way to the s'chach. Otherwise, it is impossible to consider the non-kosher s'chach to be an extension of the walls. The Tur and the Taz quote more lenient positions and allow such a sukkah, even though the walls do not reach the s'chach. - i.e., the substance that is not acceptable as s'chach is considered part of the wall and it is kosher.13Though the sukkah as a whole is kosher, one may not eat or sleep under the non-kosher s'chach if it is four handbreadths or more in size (Shulchan Aruch, ibid.). The rationale behind this decision is that the non-kosher s'chach is considered to be part of the wall and not part of the s'chach. This concept is a halachah received by Moses on Mount Sinai.14The latter term refers to a law that was transferred from generation to generation reaching back to Mount Sinai. Nevertheless, there is no mention of - or even direct allusion to - it in the written Torah. See Eduyot 8:7.
What is a small sukkah?1referred to in the previous two halachot and in Halachah 20 Any [sukkah] whose area is no more than seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths.2As explained above, if there are three handbreadths or more of non-kosher s'chach in one place, the principle of l'vud cannot apply. Hence, the sukkah is not kosher, because it lacks the minimum amount of s'chach (Sukkah 17a). However, if there is less than that amount of non-kosher s'chach, the non-kosher s'chach is included as part of the sukkah and is counted as part of its minimum size (Shulchan Aruch, ibid.).[What is meant by] a large one? Any [sukkah] [whose area is large enough] that seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths of kosher s'chach will remain besides the s'chach which is not acceptable.3Since it is of sufficient size, it will be disqualified only when it is divided in half by a significant portion of non-kosher s'chach, or when it is too far, i.e., more than four cubits, removed from the walls.
If one used as s'chach substances that were acceptable as s'chach and substances that were not acceptable as s'chach, and placed them alongside each other, leaving no place with non-kosher s'chach more than three handbreadths in area,1so that even in a small sukkah, all the conditions mentioned in the above halachot are met, there is a further requirement before the sukkah is considered kosher. [the following rules apply:]If the total of the kosher s'chach exceeds that of the non-kosher s'chach, it is kosher.2This concept can be derived from the Mishnah (Sukkah 1:8): "If someone places iron staves or the frames of a bed as the roof of his sukkah, it is kosher, provided there is an equivalent amount of empty space."In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam emphasizes that the word "equivalent" should be interpreted loosely, since there must be more kosher s'chach than the non-kosher s'chach. If there was an exactly equal amount of both substances, it is not acceptable3This decision has raised questions from all authorities. Though the Rambam's decision is based on Sukkah 15a, Eruvin 15b states that a divider whose open portion is as great as its closed portion is considered to be a divider. Indeed, the Rambam himself quotes that decision in Hilchot Shabbat 16:16. If so, why does he not follow the same principle in this instance as well?The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam's decision is based on the fact that there is no way that there will not be some tiny open spaces within the kosher s'chach of a sukkah. Accordingly, even if the kosher s'chach is equal in area to the non-kosher s'chach, the tiny spaces between the kosher s'chach will tip the balance in favor of the non-kosher s'chach.The Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 631:8 quotes the Rambam's decision as halachah, but adds as a reason (a quote from Rabbenu Tam's text of Sukkah 15b): "for it is impossible to be exact." This implies that were it possible to know that the kosher s'chach is exactly equal to the non-kosher s'chach, it would be acceptable. See also commentary to Halachah 19. even though there is not a single place which has three handbreadths [of non-kosher s'chach].4in a small sukkah, or four handbreadths in a large sukkah. [This decision is rendered] because non-kosher s'chach is considered to be open space.
If one spread a cloth above [the s'chach]1for added shade (Sukkah 1:3) or spread one below it to catch [the leaves] which fall,2the bracketed additions are based on the Rambam's commentary on that Mishnah. it is unacceptable.3The cloth nullifies the presence of the kosher s'chach above or below it.(Tosafot explains that as long as the sukkah has sufficient s'chach without the cloth, the cloth will not necessarily nullify the presence of the kosher s'chach. However, the majority of the halachic authorities and the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 629:19 do not accept this view.)However, once the cloth is lifted away, the kosher s'chach is acceptable without any further activity. (See Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 626:3.) Thus, a roof can be constructed to protect a sukkah from rain, provided it is removed while the sukkah is being used. If one spread it [under the s'chach] as a decoration, it is kosher.4for a decoration is considered to be an extension of the article it adorns. Similarly, if one covered the sukkah with s'chach as required by law and adorned it5Rabbenu Manoach emphasizes how the s'chach should be set in place before the decorations. Otherwise, they could be considered as intervening substances. with various types of fruit, delicacies, and articles6Sukkah 10a describes the decoration of a sukkah with tapestries, nuts, pomegranates, grapes, and flasks of wine, oil, and flour. which hang from either the walls or the s'chach as a decoration, it is kosher.7and one is permitted to eat and sleep under the decorations.
Sukkah decorations do not reduce its height,1i.e., if the inner space of the sukkah is more than twenty cubits high and the sukkah is therefore not acceptable (Chapter 4, Halachah 1), the presence of the decorations is not considered significant to reduce that space to the legal requirements.Alternatively, if the sukkah is very low and the decorations reduce its inner space to less than ten handbreadths, it is still kosher. (See Halachah 2 with regard to branches.) They are considered to be part of the s'chach, and the space they take up is not taken into account (Kessef Mishneh, Rabbenu Manoach). but they do reduce its width.2The Bach (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639) explains that since we are forbidden to use these adornments throughout the holiday, they are considered to be a permanent part of the sukkah. Thus, the sukkah must have a full seven by seven handbreadths of open space besides them.If the sukkah decorations are four handbreadths or more3as mentioned frequently above, four handbreadths constitutes a significant space removed from the roof,4they are considered to be non-kosher s'chach, and if they are of the size mentioned in Halachot 13 and 14... it is unacceptable, because it is as though a person who sits there is not sitting under the s'chach, but rather under the decorations, which are foods and utensils that are not acceptable as s'chach.5See Chapter 5, Halachot 1 and 2.The Taz (627:5) cautions against hanging any decorations more than four handbreadths away from the s'chach regardless of how small they are.
The [following rules apply when the] s'chach has open spaces through which the sky can be seen: If the area of the open spaces is equivalent to1and of course, if it is more than that of the space covered by s'chach, it is not acceptable, because2Although the sukkah should be acceptable as long as the covered portion is equal to the open portion, in this situation... the portion exposed to the sun will be greater than the shaded portion.3Sukkah 22b explains that light spreads out. Accordingly, even though on the roof the portion covered by s'chach is equal to the uncovered portion, on the ground the area exposed to the sun will be greater than the shaded area. See also the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:1. Whenever the portion exposed to the sun is greater than the shaded portion, it is not considered as s'chach.4As mentioned in Halachah 9, a sukkah must be constructed for the purpose of shade. If the portion exposed to the sun is greater than the shaded portion, it obviously does not serve that purpose.If the s'chach exceeds the open space, it is kosher.5On the surface, the Rambam's choice of phraseology is slightly inexact, because everything depends on the amount of shade on the ground.
When does the above apply? When there is no one open space1To disqualify the sukkah, the empty space must extend across the entire span of the sukkah or create a place large enough for a person to stand in (Tosafot, Sukkah 17a; Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 632:2).Furthermore, if the sukkah area is more than seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths in addition to the open space, the remaining covered area of the sukkah is kosher. of three handbreadths.2Any space less than three handbreadths can be considered to be part of the s'chach on the basis of the principle of l'vud.Though the sukkah as a whole is kosher, it is forbidden to eat or sleep under the open portion (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 632:2). However, if there is an open space of three handbreadths3whether in the center - i.e., an empty space cutting the sukkah in two - whether in the center or at the side4i.e., an empty space that runs from one corner of the sukkah to the other. Rashi, on Sukkah 17a, explains that the concept of דופן עקומה, by which non-kosher s'chach is considered an extension of the wall, does not apply in this instance. Since it is merely empty space, it cannot be considered to be an extension of the wall.It must be emphasized that we are speaking about a sukkah with only three walls. If the sukkah has four walls, but there is an empty space between the s'chach and the fourth wall, the sukkah as a whole is kosher. - it is unacceptable until one reduces [the space] to less than three.5it is unacceptable until one reduces [the space] to less than three. If one used substances that were not acceptable as s'chach6e.g., pillows and blankets - to reduce the space, it is kosher - Non-kosher s'chach and open space are two different halachic categories. They have different measures with which they each disqualify a sukkah, and combinations of the two are not considered to be a single entity. Thus, if there is an open space three and a half handbreadths wide, one may correct the sukkah by putting one handbreadth of non-kosher s'chach in its place. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 632:3.) - e.g., pillows and blankets - to reduce the space, it is kosher if the sukkah is large.7The terms "large" and "small" are explained in Halachot 13-15. If it is a small sukkah, it is not acceptable8because the sukkah has less than seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths of kosher s'chach. unless [the space] was reduced with a substance that is acceptable as s'chach.9unless [the space] was reduced with a substance that is acceptable as s'chach.When the shaded portion of most of the sukkah exceeds the portion exposed to the sun, although in the lesser part of the sukkah the portion exposed to the sun exceeds the shaded portion,10i.e., there are two portions of the sukkah, one which is mostly shaded and one which is mostly exposed to the sun. because11when the sukkah is taken... as a whole the shaded portion exceeds the portion exposed to the sun, it is kosher.12and one may eat and sleep in the part of the sukkah where the portion exposed to the sun exceeds the shaded portion (Magen Avraham 631:1). The Ramah quotes a more stringent opinion which forbids using the portion with more sun if it is seven handbreadths by seven handbreadths in area.
The proper way1Shulchan Aruch HaRav (631:5) uses the expression לכתחילה - i.e., one should set out to construct a sukkah in this manner. is that s'chach should be thin, so that the large stars can be seen through it.2From the Jerusalem Talmud, Sukkah 2:3, the source for this statement, it appears that the expression "large stars" means stars large enough to be seen during the day. However, even though it is thick3like [the roof of] a house - and stars cannot be seen through it - The latter expression is quoted from the Mishnah, Sukkah 2:2. - like [the roof of] a house - and stars cannot be seen through it, it is kosher.4Shulchan Aruch HaRav (631:5) uses the expression בדיעבד (after the fact), implying that it is not desirable to construct a sukkah in this manner. Nevertheless, the Mishnah Berurah (631:5) quotes many Ashkenazic authorities who tend toward making the s'chach thick.The above applies only with regard to placing the s'chach. However, afterwards, even when the s'chach is thick, a person should have no compunctions about using such a sukkah.Though thick s'chach is kosher, the Magen Avraham 631:2 notes that if it is so thick that rain will not enter the sukkah, the sukkah is unacceptable, because then it resembles a house and not a temporary dwelling made for shade.If the s'chach is uneven5Sukkah 22a questions: "What is the meaning of the word מדובללת used by the Mishnah?" Shmuel (whom the halachah follows) replies: "One reed going upward and one reed going downward." - i.e., some of it high and some of it low6it is kosher - Even though there will gaps in the s'chach and during certain times of the day, when the sun shines at an angle, the portion of the sukkah exposed to the sun will exceed the shaded portion (Ramah, Orach Chayim 631:5). - it is kosher, provided there is less than three handbreadths between the upper and lower [portions of the s'chach].7As explained previously, any distance less than three handbreadths is not significant because of the principle of l'vud. If the upper portion [of the s'chach] is a handbreadth8by a handbreadth, the minimum size of a roof. (See Chapter 4, Halachah 7.) or more wide, even though it is more than three handbreadths above [the lower portion], we consider it to be descending and touching the edge of the lower portion.9This principle, referred to by Sukkah 22a as חבוט רמי - literally, "cast it down" - is one of the leniencies followed as a halachah received from Moses on Mount Sinai. It allows this uneven roof to be considered to be a single straight entity. The same principle is also applied in Hilchot Shabbat 15:25 and Hilchot Tum'at Meit 16:5. [This applies] provided it is aligned opposite the edge of the lower portion.10i.e., that the upper portion could be lowered into the space left open by the lower portion. However, if it would not fit exactly in between the spaces, this principle does not apply (Kessef Mishneh). The Lechem Mishneh, noting the Rambam's decision in Hilchot Shabbat, explains that even if the lower space is wider than the upper portion, as long as they do not overlap, it is acceptable.The Merchevat Hamishneh explains that the law differs here from Hilchot Shabbat, because there is a principle that two halachot received from Moses on Mount Sinai cannot be used simultaneously to have a sukkah considered to be kosher.In the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 631:5), Rav Yosef Karo quotes the opinion he stated in the Kessef Mishneh. However, Shulchan Aruch HaRav (631:7) and others follow the view of the Lechem Mishneh.
When a person constructs one sukkah on top of another sukkah, the lower one is unacceptable.1Sukkah 9b explains that the verse which commands us to dwell in sukkot (Leviticus 23:42  spells the word - סכת - omitting the letter ו, which is usually used. On that basis, the Sages explained that a single structure may be used for one sukkah, but not for two. Of the two, the lower sukkah is disqualified because... It is considered as though it had been constructed in a house.2since the floor of the upper sukkah is its roof, it may not be considered to be s'chach, because it was not placed there for purposes of shade alone, nor can the lower sukkah be acceptable because of the s'chach of the upper sukkah, for the floor intervenes between them. [However,] the upper one is kosher.3There is no reason that the presence of the lower sukkah should disqualify it.When do we say that the lower one is unacceptable? When the inner space of the upper sukkah is ten handbreadths or more [high]4the minimum height of a sukkah, as explained in Chapter 4, Halachah 1. and the roof of the lower sukkah is strong enough to hold the pillows and covers of the upper sukkah,5Otherwise, the upper sukkah is not fit to dwell in. Though a sukkah is only a temporary dwelling, it must be fit to be used for all the purposes for which one uses one's home, as explained in Chapter 6, Halachah 5. even if that is done with difficulty.6i.e., even if the floor of the upper sukkah shakes when pillows and covers are placed on it (Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:2).However, if the inner space of the upper sukkah is less than ten handbreadths [high], or the roof of the lower sukkah is not strong enough to hold the pillows and covers of the upper sukkah, even with difficulty,7and thus, is unfit to be used. even8The use of this word is questionable. It implies that both sukkot, the upper and the lower one, are kosher. The Kessef Mishneh states that if the upper sukkah is not fit to dwell in, it is not kosher, and therefore recommends striking the word "even" from the text. Though the Lechem Mishneh attempts to justify the use of the term, his arguments seem forced. However, it must be noted that most manuscripts and printings of the Mishneh Torah as well as the Rambam's and most other texts of the source for this halachah - the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:2 - include this word. the lower sukkah is kosher.9for the reason that since its roof is of no functional purpose, it is not considered an intervening substance between the sukkah and the upper s'chach. This applies provided the height of both together does not exceed twenty cubits,10the maximum height of the sukkah, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 1. since [use of] the lower sukkah is permitted because of the s'chach of the upper one.11In the Kessef Mishneh - and also in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 628:1) - Rav Yosef Karo explains that this applies only when the s'chach of the lower sukkah is not substantial enough to allow the use of the sukkah. However, if the s'chach of the lower sukkah alone produces enough shade to permit the use of the sukkah, it is kosher even though the s'chach of the upper sukkah is more than 20 cubits high.He continues to explain that even though the presence of non-kosher s'chach nullifies the kosher s'chach below it, that applies only when the substance used is by nature not acceptable for use as s'chach. In this instance, the s'chach of the upper sukkah is fit to be used; the only difficulty is its position: its placement above the maximum height of the sukkah.(Though this concept is found in Tosafot, Sukkah 9b, no allusion to it appears in the Rambam's statements. Indeed, the simple meaning of the Rambam's words implies the very opposite. Furthermore, in his commentary on the Mishnah [Sukkah 1:1], the Rambam explains that the reason s'chach placed higher than 20 cubits is unacceptable is that it makes the sukkah into a permanent dwelling. Thus, according to the Rambam, such s'chach can be compared to the boards of a house, which though originally kosher for use as s'chach, are disqualified because they became part of a permanent structure.)
A bed [with a canopy placed] inside a sukkah: If [the canopy] is more than ten handbreadths high,1the minimum height for a dwelling to be considered to be an independent structure (Sukkah 20b).In this and the following instances mentioned in this halachah, the ten handbreadths are measured from the ground to the canopy (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 627:2-3; Mishnah Berurah 627:5). a person who sits under it does not fulfill his obligation,2The Mishnah, Sukkah 2:1 relates:An incident occurred concerning Tavi, Rabban Gamliel's slave. He would sleep under a [canopied] bed [in the sukkah]. Rabban Gamliel told the Sages: "See my slave, Tavi. He is well-learned and knows that slaves are free of the obligation of [dwelling in] the sukkah. Hence, he sleeps under a bed." because it is considered to be a sukkah3with non-kosher s'chach within a sukkah.4even if it has no walls (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 627:1)Similarly, a canopy5placed over a bed with a roof6even as small as a handbreadth: - As mentioned frequently above, a handbreadth is the minimum measure of a roof. - even as small as a handbreadth: If it is ten handbreadths high, one may not sleep7or perform any other activity required to be performed in a sukkah. (Perhaps the Rambam mentions sleeping because it is an activity that may be performed only within a sukkah. Even a short nap should not be taken outside the sukkah. In contrast, a snack may be eaten outside a sukkah.) under it in a sukkah.8for the same reasons mentioned above. By the same token, if one sets up four pillars and spreads a sheet over them, if they are ten [handbreadths high], they are considered to be a sukkah within a sukkah.9Hence, we are forbidden to use the space below it as a sukkah.This halachah depends on the Rambam's interpretation of the Mishnah, Sukkah 1:3. However, Tosafot, Sukkah 10b and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 627:3) interpret the passage differently and forbid spreading a canopy over bedposts which are permanently affixed to the four corners of a bed, even if the canopy is less than ten handbreadths above the ground.
In contrast, should one spread a sheet over two pillars1Tosafot (ibid.) and the Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) differ with this decision as well, and explain that if these pillars are ten handbreadths high and permanently affixed to the bed, it is forbidden to spread a sheet over them. or [use] a canopy that has a roof of less than a handbreadth2If the canopy is not permanently affixed to the bed, even Tosafot and the Shulchan Aruch will permit its use. - no matter how high they are3i.e., even if they are more than ten handbreadths high. - it is permitted to sleep under them within a sukkah.4Sukkah 19a relates that Abbaye found Rav Yosef sleeping in a canopied bed in the sukkah. The latter explained that the canopy he was using was permitted because it did not have a roof. They are not considered to be a sukkah within a sukkah, because they do not have a roof.5As stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 7, such structures are not acceptable for use as a sukkah. Hence, they also cannot disqualify a sukkah.
A borrowed sukkah is fit [to be used on the holiday].1Although, as stated in Chapter 8, Halachah 10, a person cannot fulfill the mitzvah of lulav as prescribed by the Torah with a lulav belonging to a colleague, that concept does not apply with regard to a sukkah.Sukkah 27b explains the derivation of this concept as follows: Leviticus 23:42 states: "Every citizen of Israel shall dwell in sukkot." The latter word is written סכת, implying one sukkah. This prompted our Sages to declare: "All Israel are fit to dwell in a single sukkah."In his commentary, Rashi explains that the cost of such a sukkah would not be high enough to require every individual to pay a penny's worth. Hence, we must assume that some people would be using a borrowed sukkah, and, nevertheless, our Sages said that it was kosher. Similarly, a stolen sukkah is also fit [for use].2There is a slight imprecision with the Rambam's statements. A stolen object which the thief is obligated to return cannot be used to perform a mitzvah, because it is considered a mitzvah that came about through a sin (מצוה הבאה בעבירה). However, in the instances cited by the Rambam, the sukkah itself is never considered stolen property. Hence, the use of such a sukkah is not forbidden. However, in a number of instances (see below), the sukkah itself is considered to be stolen property and must be returned. Hence, it cannot be used to fulfill the mitzvah.What does the latter imply? If a person attacked a colleague, forced him to leave his sukkah, stole it, and dwelled in it, the attacker has fulfilled his obligation, because landed property cannot be stolen.3Hilchot Gezeilah 8:14 relates that "landed property is never acquired by a thief, but rather remains in the possession of its owner forever."Since the sukkah is built on the land, it is considered part of the property and the above rule applies to it as well. Thus, the sukkah is still considered to be the property of its original owner and the thief is viewed as merely "borrowing" the sukkah from him. As mentioned above, use of a borrowed sukkah is permitted.[Similarly,] if he stole wood and made a sukkah from it, he has fulfilled his obligation,4Sukkah 31a relates that a woman once came to Rav Nachman complaining that the exilarch's servants had stolen wood from her to build his sukkah.Rav Nachman answered that they had, nevertheless, fulfilled their obligation... because the Sages ordained that the owner of the wood is entitled only to the monetary worth of the wood.5but not the wood itself. Thus, the sukkah itself is the property of the thief. Though he is obligated to pay the owner for his wood, that obligation does not prevent the sukkah from being considered as his.Hilchot Gezeilah 1:5 explains this principle by stating:Anyone who steals is obligated to return the stolen property itself... If it was lost or changed, he is obligated to return its monetary value...Even if one steals a beam and builds a mansion [using it], since [the beam] has not been changed, the Torah law would require him to destroy the entire building and return the beam to its owner.Nevertheless, the Sages instituted a decree [to encourage] those who repent; they ordained that all that is necessary is for him to return [the beam's] monetary value, and thus he will not forfeit his building.Rabbenu Manoach asks: Since the mitzvah of sukkah is commanded by the Torah, and Torah law regards these boards as stolen, how can the Sages' decree change their status in this context?He explains that, as implied by the principle הפקר הפקר בית דין, the Torah has granted the Sages the right to determine the status of property. Their decree can alter entirely a person's rights to its title. Thus, in the present case, since Rabbinic law entitles the thief to use of the boards, he is permitted, according to Torah law, to use them as a Sukkah.The Magen Avraham (637:5) writes that if the thief refuses to pay for the wood, it is considered to be the property of its original owner, and the thief does not fulfill his obligation. Even if one stole boards and merely put them in place without attaching them or changing anything about them, he has fulfilled his obligation.6This is a special leniency granted out of respect for the mitzvah of sukkah (Sukkah, ibid.). Since the thief has not made any changes in the wood itself or built a permanent structure from it, the Rabbinic decree mentioned above would not apply. Thus, during the rest of the year (and even in this case, after the Sukkot festival), the wood would have to be returned. During the festival, the Sages considered it to be the property of the thief and he is allowed to use without any constraints throughout the festival (Hilchot Gezeilah, ibid.).Nevertheless, in his Kessef Mishneh and in his Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 637:3), Rav Yosef Karo gives two examples of a stolen sukkah which one is forbidden to use: a sukkah that had been constructed on a ship or one that had been constructed on a wagon. Since the thief did not build anything, the abovementioned Rabbinic decree does not apply; nor are they affixed to land, and hence the principle that landed property cannot be stolen is not relevant.If a person constructs his sukkah in the public domain,7Though the Jewish inhabitants of the city would surely not object to use of public property for this purpose, the gentile inhabitants of the city would. Since they also have a share in this property, building a sukkah there is equivalent to stealing from the public (Magen Avraham 637:3).Nevertheless, since the theft of land is involved... it is acceptable.8for the reasons mentioned above. Note the Magen Avraham, ibid. and the Bi'ur Halachah, who discuss whether or not it is permitted to recite a blessing when using such a sukkah.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
Women, slaves, and minors are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah of] sukkah.1The same laws that apply to hearing the shofar apply to Sukkah. Hence, women and slaves are free of obligation, as is the case regarding all mitzvot whose fulfillment is associated with a specific time. Minors have no obligations at all according to the Torah. (See the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 1.)See also the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 2 regarding a woman's right to perform the mitzvah if she desires, and whether permission is granted for her to recite a blessing. A tumtum and an androgynous are obligated because of the doubt [concerning their status].2See the commentary on the above halachah for a definition of these terms and their status. Note Halachah 13 regarding their recitation of a blessing. Similarly, a person who is half slave and half free is obligated.3See the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachot 1 and 3.A minor who does not require his mother's [presence]4Sukkah 28b offers two definitions of this term:a) a child who does not need his mother to help him after he relieves himself;b) a child who does not wake up in the night and call out: "Mommy! Mommy!"Nevertheless, based on Eruvin 82a, the Rambam provided us with a more definite guideline... - i.e., a child of five or six5is obligated [to fulfill the mitzvah] of sukkah according to Rabbinic decree - According to Rashi (Berachot 48a) and the Ramban (Milchamot Hashem, Berachot 20b), there is no obligation incumbent on the child himself. The child's father is obligated to educate him. If he has no father, the obligation falls on his mother and on the local Rabbinic court (Terumat Hadeshen 99).Tosafot (Berachot 48a) differs and explains that the Sages placed the obligation on the minor himself. From the Rambam's phraseology, it appears that he accepts this view.Support for this premise can be derived from the Rambam's decision in Hilchot Berachot 5:15-16, which states that an adult who ate a small meal can fulfill his obligation by listening to a child reciting the grace after meals (for both are obligated by virtue of Rabbinic decree). Though others object on the grounds that the child himself is not obligated in the mitzvah, the Rambam states that such a practice is acceptable. - is obligated [to fulfill the mitzvah] of sukkah according to Rabbinic decree, to train him in [the performance of] mitzvot.6The Rambam mentions the same concept in Hilchot Tzitzit 3:9, Hilchot Berachot 5:1, and Hilchot Lulav 7:19.
The sick and their attendants1Since the latter's performance of a mitzvah - tending to the sick - does not enable them to perform the mitzvah of dwelling in the sukkah, they are absolved from the obligation. (See Sukkah 25a, 26a.) However, this leniency is granted only during the time the sick person requires their assistance (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 640:7). are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah. This applies not only to a person who is dangerously ill,2who is free from the obligation to perform all mitzvot, even those as severe as the Sabbath or Yom Kippur; but also to one with a headache3or any other minor illness (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 2:4).This leniency is granted because of one of the basic principles related to the mitzvah of sukkah. Leviticus 23:42 states: "You shall dwell in sukkot (תשבו בסכת)." On that verse, Sukkah 26a comments: תשבו כעין תדורו - i.e., dwelling in the sukkah is comparable to living in one's own home. Thus, a person is not required to dwell in a sukkah under circumstances which would cause him to leave his own home.Since a person who is sick would seek the most comfortable lodgings possible and would not camp outside, he is not obligated to do so to fulfill the mitzvah of sukkah (Rabbenu Manoach). or a sore eye.4Sukkah 26a relates that Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel was granted permission to sleep outside the sukkah for this purpose.The Torah's prohibitions are suspended not only when a person's life is in danger, but also when a particular limb might be lost. Though this premise is accepted by the Rambam (see Hilchot Shabbat 2:4), it does not appear that he is referring to it here. Rather, it seems that he means a minor ailment comparable to a headache. See also Tosafot (Sukkah, ibid.).A person who is uncomfortable [when dwelling in the sukkah] is freed from the obligation [to fulfill the mitzvah] of sukkah.5based on the principle of תשבו כעין תדורו, as explained above. Just as a person would seek out a comfortable permanent dwelling, he is obligated to dwell only in a sukkah which does not cause him unpleasantness.Rabbenu Manoach states that this leniency does not apply on the first night of Sukkot, on which there is a binding obligation to eat in the sukkah. (See Halachah 6.) The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 640:4) quotes this statement as halachah. This applies to the person himself, but not to his attendants.6Some earlier texts of the Mishneh Torah stated that leniency was also granted to such a person's attendants, but that is surely a printing error (Rabbenu Manoach).Who is "a person who is uncomfortable [when dwelling in the sukkah]"? A person who cannot sleep in the sukkah because of the wind or because of the flies, mites, or the like, or because of the smell.7The Tur, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 640:4), and the Ramah emphasize that this law applies only when the discomfort is an unexpected occurrence. However, a sukkah which is constructed in a place where the discomfort will surely come is considered to be unfit to dwell in and is unacceptable for the performance of the mitzvah.
A mourner1The term אבל refers to a person in the seven days of mourning which follow the burial of a father, mother, wife, brother, sister, son, or daughter. An אונן (a person in mourning for these relatives before their burial) is freed from the obligation of sukkah, because he is absolved of the duty to perform all mitzvot (Hilchot Eivel 4:6).It must be noted that none of the mourning rites should be followed during a festival. If a close relative dies before the festival, the shiv'ah (seven days of mourning) is completed at the festival's commencement, even though all seven days have not passed (Hilchot Eivel 10:3, 8). is obligated [to fulfill the mitzvah] of sukkah.2Sukkah 25b explains that a mourner (אבל) is obligated to fulfill all the mitzvot. Nevertheless, one might suppose that just as a person who is uncomfortable is freed from the obligation of sukkah, a mourner would also be absolved. Therefore, the Talmud includes a special teaching to emphasize the mourner's obligation, explaining that one is absolved only for discomfort which comes from external factors. In this case, the mourner brings discomfort upon himself. He should compose himself and concentrate his attention on the mitzvah.Nevertheless, Shulchan Aruch HaRav (640:13) writes that if dwelling in a sukkah will cause a mourner more discomfort than dwelling in his home, he is allowed to choose the latter alternative.A groom,3because he is involved in the mitzvah of marriage. Sukkah 25b adds that generally, a sukkah is to small to carry out the wedding celebrations in the proper manner. Furthermore, the groom is obligated to rejoice together with his wife, and the sukkah is not an appropriate setting. his attendants,4In Hilchot Zechiyah Umatanah, Chapter 7, the Rambam describes the custom of שושבינות (attending a groom). and all the members of the wedding party5They are absolved of the mitzvah only while they are involved in the mitzvah of celebrating together with the bride and groom, however, when they leave, they are obligated. Furthermore, there are many authorities who require that the meals served the groom and his attendants be served in a sukkah. (See Mishnah Berurah 640:33.) are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah throughout the seven days of [the wedding] festivities.6It must be emphasized that the wedding must have taken place during the four days between Yom Kippur and Sukkot. Weddings are not held during the Ten Days of Repentance, nor on Chol Hamo'ed.
Emissaries charged with a mission involving a mitzvah1e.g., to study Torah, to greet a Sage under whom one studied Torah, or to redeem captives (Rashi, Sukkah 25a). are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah2i.e., they are not required to eat, sleep, or perform any of the activities in a sukkah described in Halachot 5-9. both during the day and at night.3Rashi (Sukkah 25a, 26a) states that this applies even when they are lodging overnight. Since, at night they are also involved with thinking about how to fulfill the mitzvah, they are still considered as occupied with the performance of a mitzvah and are not required to seek out a sukkah. An example of this principle quoted by the Talmud supports this interpretation: When Rav Chisda and Rabbah bar Rav Huna would attend [the lecture delivered] at the home of the exilarch on the Sabbath of the festival, they would sleep along the river banks of Sura. They explained: "We are emissaries involved in a mitzvah" (Sukkah 26a).Though these Sages were visiting a city which served as a center of Jewish life and surely could have found a sukkah to lodge in, they did not see the necessity for doing so. (See also Sukkah 10b.)Nevertheless, Tosafot, Sukkah 10b, interprets the passage differently and explains that leniency is granted these emissaries only when dwelling in the sukkah would in some way prevent them from carrying out the mitzvah which they set out to perform. If it is possible to do both - perform the mitzvah they set out to do and fulfill the mitzvah of sukkah - one must endeavor to do so.The Maggid Mishneh explains that the Rambam shares Rashi's view. However, the final halachic position followed by most Ashkenazic authorities is closer to Tosafot's position: i.e., these emissaries are not obligated to trouble themselves to find a sukkah. However, if there is a sukkah available, they should make use of it. Nevertheless, if sleeping in the sukkah would prevent them from getting proper rest, and thus hold them back from fulfilling their mitzvah in a proper manner, they are not required to sleep in a sukkah (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 640:18; Mishnah Berurah 640:38).(Abstractly, it is possible to differentiate between the two positions as follows. According to Rashi, there is no obligation of sukkah incumbent on this person whatsoever. In contrast, Tosafot would maintain that the person is obligated to perform the mitzvah. However, at all times he is bound by another commitment which takes precedence.) People who journey during the day are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah during the day4i.e., while they are traveling. Tosafot, Sukkah 26a explains that this concept is derived from the principle: תשבו כעין תדורו - i.e., dwelling in the sukkah is comparable to living in one's own home. Since a person will occasionally leave his home on a journey, he is also entitled to leave his sukkah. and are obligated at night.5if they lodge in a settled place (Tosafot, ibid.). People who journey during the night are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah at night6i.e., while traveling and are obligated during the day.7if they lodge in a settled area.A city's day watchmen are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah during the day8when they are on duty. and are obligated at night.9when they are replaced by their colleagues. Conversely,... Its night watchmen are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] of sukkah at night and are obligated during the day. The watchmen of gardens and orchards10who spend their entire day guarding the produce (Rashi, Sukkah 26a) are freed from [fulfilling the mitzvah] during the day and the night, because if the watchman constructs a sukkah, a thief will realize that the watchman has a fixed place and will go to steal from another place.11Sukkah, ibid., explains that based on this principle, the leniency is granted only to watchmen charged with guarding an entire orchard or farm. However, if a watchman is charged with guarding produce which is collected in one place, he is capable of fulfilling the mitzvah and discharging his duty. Hence, he is obligated to construct a sukkah there.
How must the mitzvah of dwelling in the sukkah be fulfilled? A person must eat, drink, and live1performing all the activities mentioned in this halachah and Halachot 6-9. in the sukkah throughout all seven days [of the festival],2These statements and the Rambam's introduction to these halachot imply that each moment a person dwells in the sukkah throughout the seven days of the festival, he fulfills a mitzvah. (Accordingly, a blessing is recited whenever one makes use of the sukkah [Halachah 12]. See Halachah 7.) both during the day and at night,3Sukkah 43a derives this concept by drawing an analogy (גזרה שוה) to the seven days of preparation for the dedication of the Sanctuary. Thus, just as the priests were required to stay in the Sanctuary for seven days - day and night - similarly, the mitzvah of sukkah must be observed in the same manner. in the same manner as he dwells in his home throughout the year.4following the principle of תשבו כעין תדורו mentioned above.During these seven days, he must consider his house as a temporary dwelling and the sukkah as his permanent home,5This statement is a quote from the Mishnah, Sukkah 2:8. In his commentary on that Mishnah, the Rambam defines קבע as "of primary importance and a constant practice." as [Leviticus 23:42] states: "You shall dwell in sukkot for seven days."What does this imply? His attractive utensils and attractive bedding [should be brought] to the sukkah. His drinking utensils - i.e., his cups and crystal pitchers - [should be brought] to the sukkah.6Doing so is a sign of honor and respect for the mitzvah. However, utensils used for food - i.e., pans and plates - [may be left] outside the sukkah.7Obviously, during the meal one's plates must be in the sukkah. The Rambam's intent is that after the meal there is no necessity to keep one's plates in the sukkah, because they are not attractive and are generally stored in pantries outside the home. In contrast, it is customary in many communities not to bring pots into the sukkah, even while eating (Mishnah Berurah 639:5). [Needless to say, plates that must be washed must be removed from the sukkah.]The printed (as opposed to certain manuscripts) text of Rashi (Sukkah 29a) also shares the Rambam's interpretation. Tosafot explains the passage slightly differently, rendering "utensils used for food" as "utensils used in the preparation of food" - i.e., pots and pans. A candelabra8i.e., the source of light [should be brought] to the sukkah.9even when it is not burning, since it is attractive. However, if the sukkah is small, it should be left outside the sukkah.10lest it cause a fire (Tosafot, Sukkah, ibid.). This differs from Rashi's interpretation of Sukkah, ibid., which explains that the Talmud is referring to an earthenware lamp. Thus, we may assume that it should not be brought into the sukkah because it is unattractive. This, appears to justify the statements of the Maggid Mishneh, who writes that the lamp should not be brought into the sukkah when it is not burning. Both opinions are quoted by the later halachic authorities (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 639:3; Mishnah Berurah 639:7-8).
We should eat, drink, and sleep in the sukkah through the entire seven days [of the festival], both during the day and at night. It is forbidden to eat a meal1i.e., a meal of bread or food prepared from the five species of grain outside the sukkah for the entire seven [day period].2The B'nei Binyamin explains that this expression includes the Sabbath and festivals, thus excluding the opinions which maintain that any meal of bread eaten on the Sabbath or festivals is significant and cannot be considered as a snack. See the commentary of Rabbi Akiva Eiger. However, [there is no prohibition] if one eats a snack3even of bread, outside the sukkah.Sukkah 26a defines "a snack" as "what the students will eat before they enter the study sessions." In his commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 2:4, the Rambam explains it as "a small amount, [eaten] without considering it as a meal, in order to satisfy one's hunger [temporarily], until one can complete eating afterwards."Rabbenu Manoach explains that though there is no prohibition involved, it is not desirable to eat even a snack of bread outside the sukkah. the measure of a k'beitzah or less,4The Mishnah (ibid.) relates that less than a k'beitzah of bread was brought once to Rabbi Tzadok and he ate it outside the sukkah. or even slightly more.5The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 639:2) restricts the leniency to a k'beitzah (approximately 56 cubic centimeters according to Shiurei Torah and, in this instance, 41 cubic centimeters according to the Chazon Ish) alone (See Tosafot, Yoma 79a.) The same principles are also applied to cooked foods made from the five species of grain.One may not sleep outside the sukkah at all, even a brief nap.6In contrast to eating, where there is a difference between a fixed meal and a snack, no such difference exists regarding sleep. At times, even a rest of a few moments can have a major effect on a person. (See Sukkah 26a; Jerusalem Talmud, Sukkah 2:5.)At present, there are many communities where leniency is taken in this regard. In some climates, the cold will cause everyone to consider sleeping in the sukkah as uncomfortable and, hence, they are freed of that obligation. Furthermore, in many communities, there is also a danger involved. In addition, if a husband would sleep in a sukkah, he would deprive his wife of some of the happiness and satisfaction that should accompany a festival. (See Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639:2.)Nevertheless, many authorities explain that these leniencies apply only at night, but during the day one is obligated to sleep in the sukkah. It is permissible to drink water7or any other beverage, including wine (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639:2), outside the sukkah. There is a difference of opinion among the later halachic authorities if this decision also applies when one sits down to a party centering on drinking wine (קובע עצמו לשתות). Some (the Bach and Shulchan Aruch HaRav 639:12) require that such drinking be carried out in a sukkah. However, others (the Vilna Gaon and the Mishnah Berurah 639:13) are more lenient. and eat fruit outside the sukkah.8for these do not constitute a significant meal.Sukkah 27a relates that Rabbi Elazar ben Shamu'a ate dates and grapes outside the sukkah, because "fruit does not require a sukkah."Rabbenu Manoach and some other commentaries maintain that this leniency applies only to fruit. In contrast, meat, fish, cheese, and other substantial foods which form the basis of a meal must be eaten in a sukkah. While many later halachic authorities do not accept this view, some maintain that one should not sit down with company to a meal of such foods outside a sukkah. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 639:11; Mishnah Berurah 639:15.) However, a person who follows the stringency of not drinking even water outside the sukkah is worthy of praise.9To exemplify this principle, the Mishnah (ibid.) quotes the following:Once they brought a cooked dish for Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai to taste, and two dates and a pitcher of water for Rabban Gamliel. They said: "Take them up to the sukkah."Sukkah 26b explains that often our Sages counselled against accepting extra stringencies upon oneself, lest one take pride in one's piety. However, in this instance they make no such reservations.
Eating in the sukkah on the first night of the festival is an obligation.1Sukkah 27a draws an analogy between the first night of Sukkot and the first night of Pesach. Just as eating a k'zayit of matzah on the fifteenth of Nisan is a mitzvah, so too, each Jewish male is required to eat in the sukkah on the fifteenth of Tishre. If a person eats merely a k'zayit of bread,2This is the minimum amount required by the Torah in all mitzvot that involve eating. In modern measurements, the figure corresponds to 28 cubic centimeters according to Shiurei Torah, and 48 cubic centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. he fulfills his obligation. Afterwards, [the matter is left to one's] volition.3The difference in the requirement between the first night and the remaining days has other ramifications. As mentioned in Halachah 2, a person who is uncomfortable in the sukkah is freed from his obligation. However, this leniency applies only on the first night after the mitzvah of eating a k'zayit has been fulfilled (Maggid Mishneh; Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639:3). If one desires to eat a meal,4including bread, or according to some authorities, other hearty foods, as mentioned above one must eat it in the sukkah. If one desires, throughout the seven [days of the festival], one may eat only fruit or roasted grain5which may be eaten... outside of the sukkah.6The Lechem Yehudah explains that the Rambam is speaking only from the perspective of the mitzvah of sukkah. However, one is obligated to eat three meals on the Sabbath as an expression of the mitzvah of honoring the Sabbath and taking pleasure in its celebration. (See Hilchot Shabbat 30:9.) Similarly, one is required to eat festive meals on the first day of Sukkot in honor of the holiday. These meals must be eaten in the sukkah. The same laws apply as those regarding the eating of matzah on Pesach.7The Rambam's intent is that, as explained in Hilchot Chametz U'matzah 6:1, after the first night of the festival a person is not obligated to eat matzah and may subsist on other foods. Similarly, on Sukkot one may eat foods that do not require consumption within a sukkah.However, according to most authorities, his choice of words is not exact. The mitzvah of sukkah differs from that of matzah. In the latter instance, there is no mitzvah involved in eating matzah after the first night of the holiday. In contrast, every activity performed in the sukkah constitutes a further fulfillment of the mitzvah.Accordingly, after the first night of the festival no special blessing is recited before partaking of matzah. In contrast, as stated in Halachah 12, a blessing is recited every time we make use of the sukkah. See also the Moznaim publication of Hilchot Chametz U'Matzah 6:1.
It is forbidden for a person to sit and eat with his head and the majority of his body inside a sukkah while his table is in his home or outside the sukkah.1The Mishnah (Sukkah 2:6) records a difference of opinion on this matter between the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel. In this instance, the halachah follows the School of Shammai. It is considered as if he did not eat inside the sukkah.2The Mishnah (ibid.) continues:An incident occurred when the elders of the School of Shammai and the elders of the School of Hillel went to visit Rabbi Yochanan ben Hachoroni and found him sitting with his head and the majority of his body in the sukkah while his table was in his house...The elders of the School of Shammai told him: "If this has been your practice, you have never fulfilled the mitzvah of sukkah."Rabbenu Nissim questions how the Sages' decree can negate the fulfillment of a mitzvah, and thus explains the last phrase to mean: "You have never fulfilled the mitzvah as desired by our Sages." However, Tosafot, Sukkah 3a explains that the Sages' decree is powerful enough to nullify the person's actions entirely, and it is considered as if he never fulfilled the mitzvah at all. [Rather,] the table must also be inside the sukkah. This was decreed lest one be drawn after one's table. This law applies even in a large sukkah.
Throughout the seven days [of the festival], a person should read in the sukkah.1Since the person must regard his sukkah as his home throughout the festival, in addition to eating and sleeping, he must perform all his other day-to-day functions inside of it. Hence, he should also read in the sukkah. However, when he attempts to comprehend what he reads in depth and appreciate its details, he should do so outside the sukkah,2Sukkah explains that any time it is necessary to study a concept in depth, one should do so outside the sukkah... so that his mind will be settled.3while he studies. The Magen Avraham 639:13 adds a further reason to study at home: the difficulty in bringing one's texts back and forth from the sukkah. The Magen Avraham explains that this matter also depends on the individual person. If he is as comfortable studying in the sukkah as studying at home, he is obligated to do so.When a person prays,4at a time when he is unable to pray in the synagogue (Magen Avraham 639:14) he may pray inside the sukkah or outside the sukkah, as he desires.5depending on where he will be able to concentrate more.
If rain descends, a person may enter his home.1The descent of rain on Sukkot implies that our actions are not desired by God. The Mishnah (Sukkah 2:8) compares the matter to a servant who came to serve his master drink and the latter poured the pitcher in his face.Tzafenat Paneach explains that there is a fundamental difference between this law and the case of a person who is uncomfortable while in the sukkah. In the latter instance, in essence, the person is obligated to fulfill the mitzvah. However, because of his discomfort, his obligation is temporarily waived. In contrast, when rain descends it is impossible to fulfill the mitzvah at all, because the sukkah is not fit to dwell in. Hence, there is no obligation whatsoever.There is a practical difference between these two abstract positions regarding the question whether a person is obligated to eat in the sukkah on the first night of the holiday even when it rains. (See the commentary on Halachah 7.) According to the Tzafenat Paneach, under these circumstances there is no mitzvah which one is required to fulfill. Thus, one may eat at home. In contrast, most authorities do not differentiate between rain and other uncomfortable situations. Thus, since eating in the sukkah on that night is a binding obligation, they require a person to fulfill the mitzvah.There is a further aspect to this concept. The Maharil explains that a person who eats in a sukkah when he is not obligated to do so is a simple person and receives no reward for his "piety." On this basis, in many communities, people make no effort to stay in the sukkah when it rains. In contrast, there are some communities where people will continue to eat in the sukkah despite pouring rain.What is the difference between these two approaches? The first approach follows the perspective that, during the rain, there is no mitzvah to dwell in the sukkah whatsoever. Hence, there is no need to strain oneself to remain there. In contrast, the second perspective does not differentiate between rain and any other uncomfortable circumstances, but maintains that, in essence, dwelling in the sukkah is a mitzvah even under such circumstances. Accordingly, they remain in the sukkah, because while they are involved in fulfilling God's will they do not feel even the slightest trace of discomfort. When is one permitted to leave [the sukkah]?2The Maharil writes that when a person is forced to leave the sukkah because of rain, he should depart with humility rather than with anger. When enough raindrops descend into the sukkah so that they would spoil a cooked dish3We need not wait until the food actually spoils. As soon as enough rain descends to spoil the food, one is free to enter one's home (Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639:5). - even a dish of beans4i.e., a dish made from bean meal, which spoils quickly (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 2:8). - were they to fall into it.5were they to fall into it.If a person was eating in the sukkah and rain descended, and hence, he entered his home, if the rains stop we do not obligate him to return to his sukkah6to finish his meal... {that entire night}7This phrase is set off by brackets because it is most likely a printing error. It is not easily understood, nor is it found in the manuscript copies of the Mishneh Torah or in the quotation of this halachah in the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 639:6). until he is finished eating.8However, after he concludes eating he must return to the sukkah.If he was sleeping and rain descended,9The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639:7) emphasizes that even the slightest amount of rain is sufficient to free one from the obligation of sleeping in the sukkah. and hence, he entered his home, we do not obligate him to return to his sukkah that entire night should the rains cease.10The same law applies if it was raining when he desired to go to sleep, and hence, he never slept in the sukkah at all (Mishnah Berurah 639:39). Rather, he may remain sleeping in his house that entire night11even if he wakes up in the middle of the night and it is no longer raining, he is not required to move to the sukkah. until dawn.12The Maggid Mishneh and Rabbenu Manoach note that the Rambam's choice of phraseology implies that the person cannot sleep his normal measure, but must rise at dawn to return to the sukkah. They are not stringent and allow the person to remain sleeping at home until he wakes up. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 639:7) quotes the Rambam's statements verbatim. However, the Ramah includes this leniency.
A person should not take apart his sukkah after he finishes eating on the seventh day [of Sukkot].1lest he require it later during the day. However, from the afternoon on, he may take down his utensils and remove them.2Keeping one's utensils in the sukkah is included in the mitzvah of dwelling within it, as mentioned in Halachah 5. Nevertheless, one is allowed to take them home to prepare them for use on Shemini Atzeret as a sign of deference to that holiday. (See Sukkah 4:7.)If he has no place to put the utensils,3i.e., if he used his home as a sukkah, and thus must continue to remain there on Shemini Atzeret (see Sukkah 48a)... he should reduce its space4by opening up [a portion of s'chach] by at least four handbreadths by four handbreadths.5to make the sukkah, or at least a significant portion of it, unfit for use. This safeguards against the violation of the command of בל תוסיף (Deuteronomy 13:1 , which forbids adding to the mitzvot of the Torah. These acts will differentiate between his eating in the sukkah during the festival, when he is required to do so in fulfillment of the mitzvah, and eating there afterwards, once the mitzvah has been completed (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 666).The Ramah adds that this requirement applies only when one desires to eat in the sukkah on Shemini Atzeret. Once that holiday passes, one may eat in a sukkah without making any changes.If he has to eat later that day,6even if he has removed his utensils or taken away part of the s'chach... he must eat in the sukkah, because the mitzvah extends throughout the seven days.
Whenever a person enters a sukkah with the intention of sitting down throughout the seven [days of Sukkot], he should recite the following blessing1Note the commentary on Halachah 7, which explains the difference between this law and the rules governing the blessing recited before eating matzah. before sitting:[Blessed2The Rambam maintains that by sitting or doing any other activity which one would perform in one's home in the sukkah, one fulfills the mitzvah. Hence, the blessing is recited before one performs the mitzvah, as required by Hilchot Berachot 11:2.The Maggid Mishneh questions why the blessing is not recited before one enters the sukkah, noting that the interpretation of the command לישב בסוכה is "to dwell in the sukkah," not "to sit in the sukkah." However, the Taz 643:2 explains that merely passing through the sukkah is not part of the mitzvah. Rather, one must perform an activity that reflects "dwelling." Hence, the blessing is not recited until one sits down, because previously it is not obvious that one wants to perform a significant activity in the sukkah.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's decision, maintaining that one should recite the blessing only before partaking of a meal in the sukkah. This reflects the decision of the Ashkenazic authorities, who maintain that though the performance of all one's activities in the sukkah is a mitzvah, it is not customary to recite the blessing except when eating. When reciting the blessing on that occasion, one should intend to include all other activities. (See Tur and Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 639:8.) are You...] who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to dwell in the sukkah.3The Maggid Mishneh states that there is no limit to the number of times one recites the blessing each day. Nevertheless, if one left the sukkah for a brief interval or left with the intent of performing an activity which would improve the sukkah, that departure is not considered an interruption and no blessing is required upon one's return.On the first night of the festival, one should first recite the blessing on the sukkah, and then the blessing for the occasion.4i.e., the blessing shehecheyanu, which thanks God for enabling us to reach this occasion. This blessing is recited whenever one performs a mitzvah that can be fulfilled only from time to time (Hilchot Berachot 11:9).That halachah and, similarly, Sukkah 46a, imply that, at the outset, one should recite the blessing shehecheyanu upon construction of the sukkah. Though the Rambam makes no mention of that concept here, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 641:1) states that one should have the construction of the sukkah in mind when reciting shehecheyanu at night.One should recite all the blessings over a cup of wine.5as did Rav Kahana (Sukkah 46a). Thus, one should recite kiddush6for the festival while standing,7The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 643:2) states that kiddush may be recited while sitting. recite the blessing leishev basukkah,8Though one might presume that shehecheyanu would be recited first, since it is more frequent, precedence is given to leishev basukkah, because it is "the mitzvah of the day" (Rabbenu Manoach). sit, and then recite the blessing shehecheyanu.9On the second night, it is Ashkenazic custom to recite to the blessing shehecheyanu before the blessing leishev basukkah, since on that occasion the blessing is associated with the celebration of the festival and not the mitzvah of sukkah. (See Bnei Binyamin.)This was the custom of my teachers and the Rabbis10Rav Kapach notes that most of the manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah state רבי "the great men of" and not רבני, "the Rabbis of." of Spain:11The Ra'avad objects and comments that even in Spain such a custom was not followed. to recite kiddush while standing on the first night of the Sukkot festival, as explained.
At present,1in the Diaspora and in certain places in Eretz Yisrael (Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh, Chapter 9) when we celebrate holidays for two days,2because originally, the messengers sent by the Sanhedrin could not reach there in time to notify them when the holiday should be celebrated. Hence, even now, when we follow the fixed calendar, we continue to follow this custom. (See Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh, Chapters 3 and 5.) we dwell in the sukkah for eight days.3In deference to the possibility that the festival could have begun on the second day and the seven days should be counted from then.The commandment בל תוסיף (Deuteronomy 13:1  forbids adding to the mitzvot of the Torah. Indeed, in Halachot 11 and 14, we find certain safeguards instituted because of this commandment. Nevertheless, dwelling in the sukkah on the eighth day does not constitute a violation of this commandment, because the time when the mitzvah is to be performed has already passed. Placing a fifth passage in one's tefillin during the day violates this commandment, because we are obligated to perform the mitzvah at this time. However, once the seven days of Sukkot pass, there is no mitzvah associated with the sukkah whatsoever (Rosh Hashanah 28b).Nevertheless, many Ashkenazic authorities would carry out additional safeguards regarding this matter. For example, the Tur relates (though he opposes this practice himself) that some follow the custom of eating in the Sukkah only on the day of Shemini Atzeret, but not the night. Many of the Rabbis who would sleep in the Sukkah throughout the festival refrain from doing so on Shemini Atzeret. (See K'tav Sofer, Responsum 120.) On the eighth day, which is the first day of the holiday of Shemini Atzeret,4As its name implies, Shemini Atzeret is the eighth day of Sukkot. However, it also has certain aspects in which it is considered a holiday in its own right (Sukkah 48a). we dwell in the sukkah, but do not recite the blessing leishev basukkah.5because as the Rambam explains, a blessing is not recited when a mitzvah is performed only because of a doubt.Sukkah 47a relates that "Rav Huna bar Bizna and all the great Sages of the generation dwelled in a sukkah on the eighth day - which might have been the seventh day - [of the festival], but did not recite a blessing."Similarly, a tumtum and an androgynous6See Chapter 2, Halachah 1 for a definition of these terms and these individuals' status. never recite the blessing leishev basukkah, because their obligation [to perform the mitzvah is based] on doubt,7i.e., they are required to perform the mitzvah because of the doubt concerning their status: maybe they are to be considered men. and a blessing is never recited when one is doubtful [of one's obligation].8This follows the rationale that when there is a doubt concerning one's obligation in matters required by the Torah itself, one must follow the more stringent view. However, regarding obligations of a Rabbinic nature, one may opt towards leniency. Since the mitzvah is required by the Torah, even a person in doubt must perform it. However, the blessing is a Rabbinic requirement; hence, there is no necessity in reciting it. Furthermore, by reciting the blessing when one is not required, one uses God's name in vain.This perspective is not accepted by all authorities. As explained in the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 1, the Ashkenazic practice is to allow women and others who are not obligated in the performance of a mitzvah to recite a blessing when fulfilling it.The above applies only regarding the doubts concerning the obligations of a tumtum and an androgynous. However, on Shemini Atzeret, when there is a doubt concerning the obligation of the entire Jewish people even the Ashkenazic authorities would agree that a blessing should not be recited.
After a person finishes eating on the eighth day [of Sukkot], he should take down his utensils and remove them.1from the sukkah and bring them home, where he will eat on Simchat Torah.When a person has no place to put the utensils,2and desires to continue eating in the sukkah on Simchat Torah, [the following rules3safeguards adopted to differentiate between eating in the sukkah as required, and eating there afterwards. apply]: If it is a small [sukkah], he should bring his candelabra into it;4As mentioned in Halachah 5, a candelabra should not be brought into a small sukkah for Sukkot.It must be noted that the Rambam changes the text of Sukkah 48a, which states: "light his lamp there." (See Kessef Mishneh, Halachah 5.) if it is a large sukkah, he should bring in his pots, plates, and the like,5which are generally kept outside the sukkah, as explained in Halachah 5. to bring to mind that it6the sukkah is no longer acceptable and that its mitzvah is completed. Since the day is a holiday, one may not reduce its space and nullify it.7as suggested in Halachah 11.
A person who did not construct a sukkah [before the holiday]1whether intentionally or unintentionally - Sukkah 27b explains that not only a person whose sukkah fell down in the middle of the festival should reconstruct it, but even one who never built a sukkah at all is entitled to do so. - whether intentionally or unintentionally - should construct a sukkah on Chol Hamo'ed.2The literal translation of Deuteronomy 16:13 is: "Make the Sukkot festival for seven days." Sukkah 27b interprets this verse to mean that a sukkah may be built during the seven days of the festival.The Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 2:7) explains that Rabbi Eleazar wanted to forbid a person who purposely did not build a sukkah from doing so during the festival, as a punishment for his failure to prepare for the festival. However, the Sages did not accept that premise.A sukkah may not be constructed on the first day of the festival, even if the walls are already built and all that is necessary is to spread s'chach over it. However, even though certain types of work are forbidden on Chol Hamo'ed, there is no prohibition in this instance (Bi'ur Halachah 637). One should even construct a sukkah on the final moments of the seventh day, because its mitzvah lasts throughout the seventh day.3See Halachah 11.The wood with which the sukkah was constructed is forbidden [to be used for other purposes]4e.g., for use as a toothpick. This prohibition applies even in the event the sukkah falls. Also, in contrast to the decorations, as mentioned in the following halachah, this prohibition cannot be nullified by making a condition that one desires to use them for one's own purposes (Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 638:1). on all eight days of the festival.5Sukkah 9a derives the prohibition against using the wood of the sukkah for other purposes throughout Sukkot from Leviticus 23:34: "The Sukkot festival shall be seven days unto God." The latter term is used also regarding the Chaggigah offering sacrificed on the festival. Thus, its use in this context implies that the entities which enable us to celebrate the Sukkot festival must be consecrated "unto God" like those sacrifices.The reason why the wood of the sukkah may not be used on the eighth day is explained below. This applies to both the wood used for the walls and the wood used for the s'chach.6Rabbenu Asher differs and explains that the essential element of the sukkah is its s'chach. Hence, the prohibition applies only to the s'chach and not to the sukkah walls. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 638:1) quotes the Rambam's opinion. However, the Taz (638:1) explains that the prohibition against using the walls is only Rabbinic in nature.Rav Chayim Soloveitchik explains that though the word sukkah as used by the Torah refers to the s'chach and not to the walls, a different principle is involved in this instance. The Torah teaches us that all the entities which enable us to fulfill the mitzvah of sukkah may not be used for other purposes. Since the sukkah walls also serve that purpose, because a sukkah is not kosher without walls, they are also included in that prohibition. Throughout [these] eight days,7Note the contrast to the etrog in Chapter 7, Halachah 27. no benefit may be derived from it for other purposes.8However, if the sukkah falls, it may be rebuilt using the same wood. Furthermore, the wood used for s'chach may be used for the walls and vice versa.[They are prohibited on the eighth day] because the sukkah is muktzeh9Muktzeh literally means "set aside." In this context, it refers to objects which may not be used for mundane purposes. the entire seventh day, including the period beyn hash'mashot.10Beyn hash'mashot is the period between sunset and the emergence of three stars. Since it was muktzeh during the period beyn hash'mashot, it is muktzeh on the entire day [that follows].11Hilchot Shabbat 25:10 states: "Any utensil which is forbidden to be moved during beyn hash'mashot is forbidden to be moved throughout the entire Sabbath, even after the factor that caused its prohibition has passed."
Similarly, it is forbidden to take from the food and beverages that were hung in the sukkah as decorations1even if they fall (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 638:2). As mentioned in the commentary on Halachot 17 and 18, the sukkah decorations are not considered an independent entity, but rather as part of the sukkah itself. Furthermore, employing articles used to decorate a mitzvah for other purposes demonstrates lack of respect for the mitzvah (Rabbenu Nissim, Beitzah). Hence, the same restrictions that apply to the sukkah apply to it. for all eight days [of the festival].2as is the sukkah itself. However, if at the time one hung [the decorations],3Rabbenu Manoach questions what the law would be if the condition were made after the decorations were hung but before the holiday commences. he made the condition: "I will not refrain from using them during the entire period of beyn hash'mashot,"4Everything depends on the status of the decorations at the time the festival begins. If they are not considered part of the sukkah at that time, the "sanctity of the sukkah" does not affect them throughout the festival (Sukkah 10b).The Ramban and the Ramah differ, and require that the person stipulate that he will not refrain from using the decorations during the entire period of beyn hash'mashot of each of the eight days of the festival. If he makes the condition regarding the first day alone, the decorations become forbidden on the subsequent days of the festival. he is entitled to use them whenever he desires,5In contrast to the walls or s'chach, in this instance the condition has an effect. It is possible for a sukkah to exist without decorations, but not without walls (Rabbenu Manoach). because he did not set them aside, nor did the sanctity of the sukkah encompass them, nor are they considered part of it.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
The term "the frond of the date palm" employed by the Torah1Leviticus 23:40. refers to the branches of a date palm2The Tzafenat Paneach questions whether or not the tree from which the lulav is taken must actually produce dates. as they sprout, before their leaves separate3Thus, if the leaves spread out and were later bound together by human activity, it is not acceptable (Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 645:2). and spread out in various directions.4Periodically, the date palm sprouts forth new branches. Initially they are closed, and as time passes they spread out to a fanlike shape. The Torah requires that they be used for the lulav while they are still in their initial state.This obligation is derived from the fact that the Torah spells the word כפת, without a ו, implying that the date branch should appear to be a single entity (Sukkah 32a).There is a homiletic aspect to using the lulav while its leaves are closed. Vayikra Rabbah 30:12 emphasizes how the mitzvah of lulav and etrog expresses the unity and oneness which pervade the Jewish people. Not only is this unity expressed by the combination of the four species into a single mitzvah, it is reflected in each of the species themselves. Thus, the lulav is used while its leaves are together as one, before they separate into distinct entities. Rather, they should appear as a scepter.5Here, too, our Sages have emphasized the homiletic lesson to be derived from this shape. Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur are days of judgement. The lulav can be considered as the Jews' scepter of victory, acknowledging that they have prevailed (Medrash Tanchumah, Emor). This is called a lulav.6This is called a lulav.
The "fruit of the beautiful tree" mentioned in the Torah1Leviticus, ibid. is the etrog.2Sukkah 35a explains that this term is used to refer to the etrog because of a unique quality possessed by this fruit. The taste of the tree itself resembles the taste of the fruit. Alternatively, the word הדר can be interpreted to mean "which dwells," and thus refer to the etrog, which can grow on the tree for an entire year.The "boughs of covered trees" mentioned in the Torah3Leviticus, ibid. refer to the [species of] myrtle whose leaves surround its branch;4thus, covering the branch i.e., there will be three or more leaves in each ring.5on the same level.Our translation follows the interpretation of the Maggid Mishneh, who requires that the three leaves be on the same level over the entire length of the myrtle. However, other opinions interpret the Rambam's words to mean that a myrtle may be used if the leaves of merely one ring are on the same level. The Kessef Mishneh (and similarly, the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 646:5) maintain that a myrtle is kosher if the leaves grow properly over three handbreadths (its minimum size), or at least the majority of that distance. However, if there are two leaves on one level, with a third leaf slightly higher than them, that is not considered to be "covered."6but rather from a different species of tree. Hence, it can never be used in the lulav (Or Sameach). Rather, it is called a wild myrtle.7since its leaves do not grow in the normal pattern.
The term "willows of the brook" mentioned by the Torah1Leviticus, ibid. does not include just any plant that grows by a brook, but rather a particular species, which is called the "willows of the brook."Its2That species is defined as follows: leaf is extended as a brook,3i.e., it comes to a point, rather than being rounded (Sukkah 33b).This characteristic is also quoted as an explanation of the name "willows of the brook" (Rabbenu Asher). its edge is smooth,4rather than jagged (Sukkah ibid.). and its stem is red. It is called a willow. The majority of this species grow near brooks. Therefore, it is called the "willows of the brook."5However, the use of that name is not meant to be exclusive... Even if this species grew in the desert or on a mountain, it would be kosher.6for the fulfillment of this mitzvah.
There is another species which resembles the willow. However, its leaf is rounded, its edge resembles a saw,1i.e., its edge is very jagged, with large protrusions and its stem is not red.2but white (Sukkah 34a). This is called a tzaftzefah. It is unfit [to be used for the mitzvah].3for it is not considered to be merely a different type of willow, but rather another species entirely.There is another type of willow, whose leaf4is also extended does not have a smooth edge, but it is not like a saw. Rather, it has tiny juttings, like the edge of a small sickle. It is kosher.5The Mishnah Berurah 647:6 mentions that willows are frequently picked by young children who are not learned and may mistake a non-kosher species for a kosher one. Hence, the purchaser should carefully examine the willows before purchasing them.All the above definitions were explained according to the oral tradition transmitted by Moses, our teacher.6Indeed, in his introduction to his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam uses the definitions of the four species as examples of how the oral tradition is explained in the Talmud:The explanations which we have received from Moses are not contested at all. Throughout all the ages, from Moses' time until the present, we have not heard of a dispute started by a Sage whether... the expression "a fruit from a beautiful tree" refers to the etrog. Nor have we heard of a dispute that the "covered tree" refers to the myrtle...Concerning these and the like, it has been said: "The entire Torah, [both the mitzvot] in general, and all their particulars were given to Moses on Mount Sinai." Though the tradition was received and there is no dispute about it, one can also derive these definitions through the accepted processes of exegesis.Thus, when the Talmud debates and discusses a concept and offers a suggestion...that perhaps, "the fruit of the beautiful tree" is a pomegranate...[and does not resolve the matter] until they bring proof from the exegesis of the verse..., one should not conclude that the matter was left in doubt until this point of exegesis was discovered.Rather, from the time of Joshua onward, we saw that the etrog was the species taken with the lulav and there is no debate about that. They were merely investigating how they could find support from the Torah for the interpretation that had been transmitted.
These four species are considered to be one mitzvah,1In contrast to putting on the head tefillin and the arm tefillin, which are considered to be two mitzvot. Here, taking all four species is considered to be a single mitzvah... and2therefore,... each one3of the species... is required for its performance.4and only then is the mitzvah performed. Nevertheless, as explained in Halachah 6, the species need not be bound together; it is sufficient to take them one after the other.This statement is taken from the Mishnah, Menachot 3:6, which includes the four species of the lulav in a long list of mitzvot in which all the particular elements that make up the mitzvah are required for its performance to be acceptable. All of them [together] are called the mitzvah of lulav.5Since the lulav is the tallest of all the species, the entire mitzvah is referred to by this name (Sukkah 37b). One may not diminish them6doing so violates the commandment בל תגרע (Deuteronomy 13:1 , which forbids diminishing the Torah's commandments. or add to them.7doing so violates the commandment תוסיף בל (Deuteronomy 13:1 , which forbids adding to the Torah's commandments. If one of the species cannot be found, a similar species8e.g., a tzaftzefah for the willow, or a lemon for the etrog may not be substituted for it.9Rather, the mitzvah cannot be fulfilled at all. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 651:12) recommends taking the species that are available, as a remembrance of the mitzvah. However, in such circumstances, a blessing should not be recited.
The most desirable way of performing the mitzvah is to bind the lulav, myrtle, and willow together, thus making a single, unified entity from the three of them.1Sukkah 11b explains that binding the three species together is considered more attractive than taking them each individually. Thus, taking the species in this manner conforms to the general directive requiring us to perform the mitzvot in the most esthetically appealing manner possible.Sukkah 34b mentions an exegetic teaching that explains why the etrog is not bound together with the other species.Before one takes them to perform the mitzvah, he should recite the blessing2for the blessings should always be recited before the performance of the mitzvot. on the mitzvah of taking the lulav,3Our translation follows the commentary of the Kessef Mishneh, who notes that in Hilchot Berachot 11:15, the Rambam states that if one recites the blessing before taking the lulav in his hand, he should conclude the blessing ...v'tzivanu litol lulav. The blessing should be concluded ...v'tzivanu al netilat lulav only if one has already taken the lulav in his hands. for all the others are dependent upon it.4As mentioned in the previous halachah and commentary, since the lulav is the tallest of all the species, its name is used to refer to the entire mitzvah.Afterwards, he takes this bound entity in his right hand and the etrog in his left hand.5Since three of the four species are bound together, they are held in the hand which the Torah considers of greater prominence (Sukkah 37b). He must take them as they grow6Sukkah 45b derives this concept from Exodus 26:15, which states: "upright beams of acacia wood." Implied is that all mitzvot fulfilled with agricultural products must be performed while they are in an upright position. (See also Halachah 9.) - i.e., their roots below towards the earth, and their heads upward towards the sky.7Even though the etrog hangs from the tree with the pitam downwards, its "upright" position is when the pitam faces upward (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 651:12).If a person did not bind them together, but rather took them one by one, he has fulfilled his obligation, provided he possesses all four species.8Sukkah 11b states that it is a mitzvah to bind the three species together, but one may fulfill the mitzvah even when one has not done so.This law is accepted as halachah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:12). The preference of the Rabbis for binding the species together is so great that if one has not bound them together before the beginning of the festival, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 651:1) recommends binding them together with a loop on the holiday rather than taking each one individually. However, if he has only one species or he is lacking one species, he should not take them until he acquires the remaining species.9as explained in the previous halachah.
How many does one take of each of them? One lulav,1Sukkah 34b derives this concept from the fact that Leviticus 23:40 writes כפת without a ו, implying a single entity, as mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 1. one etrog,2because the above verse mentions "a fruit (singular) from the beautiful tree" (Sukkah, ibid.). two willow branches,3because the above verse states "willows of the brook," using the plural, and thus two are required (ibid.) and three myrtle branches.4The above verse uses three words ענף עץ עבות, each word implying the addition of another branch (Rashi, Sukkah, ibid.). If one would like to add more myrtle5Some editions of the Mishneh Torah also add "and willow." However, most of the manuscripts and texts of the Mishneh Torah omit that phrase. Furthermore, in one of his responsa, the Rambam states that since the Talmud mentions adding only myrtles, it is improper to add any of the other species. branches so that the bundle will be larger, he may. Indeed, it is considered to be an adornment of the mitzvah.6The latter statement can be understood to be an explanation of the former. In contrast to the other species, the myrtle is considered an adornment of the mitzvah. Since the extra myrtle branches are viewed as adornments, they are not considered to be an intervening substance separating the person from the mitzvah. (See the commentary on Halachah 11.) Nor is including them considered to be adding to the mitzvah (and thus, a violation of בל תוסיף). (See also Rabbenu Nissim and the Rashba, Vol. I, Responsum 535.)There are some authorities who allow additional myrtle branches to be included even though they do not meet the requirement of having all three leaves on the same level. However, others do not accept this leniency (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:15). However, it is forbidden to add to or reduce the numbers of the other species.7because they are not considered to be "adornments." If one adds to or reduces their number, it is not acceptable.8The Ra'avad objects to this statement, arguing that the adding to the numbers of the other species does not nullify the performance of the mitzvah. Rav Avraham, the Rambam's son, writes that, based on Sanhedrin 88b, the Rambam amended his own manuscript copy of the Mishneh Torah to state "it does not nullify it" (Birkat Avraham 31).
What is the required length of each of these species?1The Mishnah Berurah 650:8 states that if the species are smaller than the minimum limits established, they may not be used throughout the festival. Though certain leniencies are granted after the first day, they do not apply regarding this matter. The lulav may not be less than four handbreadths.2The Mishnah (Sukkah 3:1) describes the length of the lulav as "three handbreadths [and more], so that it can be shaken," implying that, like the other species, it should be three handbreadths in length. However, since all three handbreadths of the lulav must be shaken (see the following two halachot) an additional handbreadth was required for the person to hold the lulav in his hand (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah).[Rashi and most other commentaries based on Sukkah 32b consider the handbreadth of the lulav that extends beyond the myrtle and the willow as the addition included "so that it can be shaken." From the latter clauses of this halachah, it appears that the Rambam may have also adopted this interpretation.]A handbreadth is 8 centimeters according to Shiurei Torah, and 9.6 centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. In his commentary on the above Mishnah, the Rambam emphasizes that the measure refers to three full handbreadths, each four fingerbreadths in length. This is necessary to negate the opinion of certain authorities (see the Ra'avad), who state that here the intent is three "small" handbreadths, so that the total length is only 10 fingerbreadths.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 650:1) accepts the Ra'avad's opinion. Nevertheless, the Ramah suggests following the Rambam's view if possible. [Beyond that,] regardless of its length, it is kosher.3Menachot 42a states that a lulav has a minimum length, but no maximum length. Its length is measured only from its shidrah4i.e., what is measured is its center stem from its base until the portion which separates into two twin leaves that cling to each other. and not from the tips of the leaves.5i.e., its full length.The myrtle and the willow may not be less than three handbreadths. [Beyond that,] regardless of their length, they are kosher.6The latter principle is derived from the laws of the lulav. Even if each branch has only three fresh leaves on it, they are kosher, provided the leaves are at the top of the branch.7Sukkah 33a states:If most of [the myrtle's] leaves dried out, but three fresh leaves remain, it is kosher.Rav Chisda said: "Provided they are at the top of each branch."The Rambam maintains that the same principles can also be applied to the willow.[Note the commentary on Halachah 8:5, which mentions certain relevant principles. Indeed, in general, this clause appears to be more closely related to the principles mentioned in the following chapter, where the Rambam mentions the characteristics that disqualify the various species, rather than in this chapter, where he relates the fundamental requirements of each one. Based on Sukkah 34a, which relates that myrtles which are not dry (a factor still common in many Diaspora communities today) are very difficult to find, we can interpret this as an almost parenthetical expression teaching that freshness is not among the fundamental requirements for a myrtle.]If one has bound [the other species together with] the lulav, the shidrah of the lulav must extend beyond the myrtle and the willow a handbreadth or more.8The Rambam maintains that regardless of the length of the myrtles and the willows, the shidrah of the lulav must extend beyond them an additional handbreadth, so that it can be shaken. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.:2) does not require adherence to the Rambam's view. Nevertheless, it is accepted without question by Shulchan Aruch HaRav 650:2.The minimum size of an etrog is the size of an egg.957.6 cubic centimeters according to Shiurei Torah; in this context, 100 cubic centimeters according to the Chazon Ish. [Beyond that,] regardless of its size, it is kosher.10Sukkah 36b relates that Rabbi Akiva came to synagogue with an etrog so large he had to sling it over his shoulder. (This is not out of the question, because, as mentioned above, an etrog is capable of remaining on its tree for an entire year and can attain quite a large size.)
Once a person lifts up these four species1whether he lifts them up together - as described in Halachah 6. - whether he lifts them up together or one after the other2lifting up each of the four species individually. However, a person must have all four species before him when he fulfills the mitzvah. - whether in his right hand or in his left hand3Although, in Halachah 6, the Rambam suggested holding the lulav together with the myrtle and willows together in his right hand and the etrog in his left, this is the most desirable way of fulfilling the mitzvah. However, even if a person does not lift up the species in this manner... - he has fulfilled his obligation.4Rabbenu Chanan'el does not accept this decision. He interprets Sukkah 42a, "If he lifted it up in an opposite manner, he did not fulfill his obligation," as referring to such a circumstance. Nevertheless, the Rambam (and similarly, most halachic authorities, including the Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:3) interpret that statement as referring to lifting them up opposite to their natural pattern of growth. [This applies] only when he lifts them up as they grow.5See Halachah 6 and the commentary on it. However, if he does not lift them up as they grow, he has not fulfilled his obligation.6For this reason, it is customary in many communities to hold the etrog upside down before reciting the blessing, and then to turn it right side up after the blessing has been recited.The fulfillment of the mitzvah as the law [requires is as follows]: One should lift up the three species as they are bound together in one's right hand and the etrog in one's left hand.7holding the etrog together with the lulav (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:11).In the Beit Yosef, Rav Yosef Karo quotes the following story from the Recanti. The latter dreamed that he saw a particular pious individual writing God's name with a space separating the last ה from the first three letters. He could not comprehend the dream at all until the next day, when he saw that individual holding his etrog separate from his lulav (Mishnah Berurah 651:21). Then, one should pass them back and forth, up and down,8The Ari suggests that one should face the east and pass the lulav back and forth in the following order; first to the south; then to the north, then east, up, down, and to the west (Mishnah Berurah 651:20). Sukkah 37b relates that shaking the lulav in all directions prevents unfavorable winds.When shaking the lulav downward, one should not turn it upside down, for this is opposite its natural pattern of growth. (See Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:9.) and shake the lulav three times in each direction.
What does the above entail? One passes the lulav forward1once in each direction and shakes the top of the lulav three times,2while the lulav is extended outward in that particular direction. brings it back3to one's chest and shakes the top of the lulav three times.4while holding the lulav close to oneself.The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:9) explains that passing the lulav back and forth is itself considered to be shaking it. Hence, rather than shake the lulav three times while it is extended, one must shake it as one extends it and brings it back, and repeat that process a total of three times in each direction. One follows this same pattern when lifting it up and down.5Thus, one will have shaken the lulav a total of 36 times.At what point [in prayer]6Rabbenu Manoach states that the lulav was also passed back and forth and shaken at the time the blessing is recited. This is our custom at present. does one pass the lulav back and forth? During the reading of the Hallel,7which is recited in its entirety on each day of the Sukkot festival. at the first and final recitation of the verse [Psalms 118:1, 118:29]: Hodu8Tosafot, Sukkah 37b explains the derivation of this practice as follows: 1 Chronicles 16:33 states: "Then all the trees of the forest will rejoice." The following verse (ibid. 34) states "Hodu Lado-nai...," and the subsequent verse: "Let them say Hoshi'eynu...."The rejoicing of the trees - the shaking of the lulav - is thus associated with the verse "Hodu..." and the verse "Ana Ado-nai hoshi'ah na." Lado-nai ki tov... and at the verse [Psalms 118:25]: Ana Ado-nai hoshi'ah na.9It is customary to repeat this verse when reciting the Hallel. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 651:8) relates that the lulav is passed back and forth both times the verse is recited.It is acceptable to take the lulav throughout the entire day.10However, one should not delay the performance of the mitzvah unnecessarily. Indeed, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 652:2) forbids eating before fulfilling the mitzvah. However, it is not taken at night.11Megillah 20b derives this concept from Leviticus 23:40: "On the first day take...." We may infer: "the lulav is to be taken by day, and not by night."
If one wraps a cord of silver or gold around [the three species] as they are bound together,1The Mishnah (Sukkah 3:8) relates that the inhabitants of Jerusalem would wrap their lulavim together with golden cords. or wraps a [decorative] cloth around them and takes them, one fulfills his obligation.2Though we are commanded to take the lulav, that does not necessarily imply actually holding the lulav in one's hands, because... Taking the lulav through another medium is still considered to be taking it,3i.e., holding another substance in which the lulav is contained is still considered to be holding the lulav... provided [that medium] is one which gives honor and beauty [to the mitzvah, because]: "any entity which makes a substance more attractive is not considered to be a separation."However,4between one's hands and the lulav. The substance used to bind the lulav is not considered to be an independent entity, but rather an extension of the lulav. This principle is also mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 7 of this chapter and Halachot 5:17-18. The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:8) states that it is customary to remove rings or other intervening substances that cover even small portions of one's hands before taking the lulav. if one placed these species in a vase or a pot5Sukkah 42a explains that this is unbecoming to the mitzvah. and took them, one has not fulfilled one's obligation.6The Mishnah Berurah 651:31 states that this applies even if the container in which one placed the species is made of silver or gold.
If one binds the lulav together with the myrtle and the willow and separates between the lulav and the myrtle with a cloth or the like,1i.e., a substance which does not contribute to the lulav's attractiveness it is considered to be a separation.2between the various species. Taking the lulav in this manner is not acceptable. The Ramah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:1) notes that the myrtle branches are frequently bound together with a cord. This must be removed before using them to fulfill the mitzvah. If one separates between them with myrtle leaves,3i.e., if the myrtle leaves fall off and collect between the lulav and the myrtle branches, it is not considered to be a separation, because an entity does not separate between its own kind.4This principle applies in many different contexts. (See also Hilchot P'sulei Hamukdashin 1:21 and Hilchot Ma'aseh Hakorbanot 19:5.)One may bind the together with a string, a cord, or with any substance one desires,5i.e., using substances other than the three species used in the lulav since binding it together is not a required element of the mitzvah.6the substance used to bind it is not considered to be significant. Therefore, using a different substance is not considered as adding a new entity to the mitzvah. However, if the binding were required, as one opinion (Sukkah 6b) maintains, it would be forbidden to use a different substance.
The mitzvah of taking the lulav in every place,1i.e., even outside Jerusalem during every age2i.e., whether or not the Temple is standing - even on the Sabbath3applies only on the first day of the festival, as [Leviticus 23:40] states: "And on the first day, you shall take..." - See Halachah 16. See also the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 4:2). - applies only on the first day of the festival, as [Leviticus 23:40] states: "And on the first day, you shall take..."In the holy place alone,4In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:10), the Rambam states that the term מקדש refers to Jerusalem in its totality, not only the Temple Mount. Thus, the Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 3:11) states:"And you shall rejoice before God, your Lord, seven days" - in Jerusalem.(See also the commentary on Halachah 2:8.) it is to be taken on each of the seven days of the festival, as [the above verse] continues: "and you shall rejoice before God, your Lord, [seven days]."When the Sabbath falls during the [later] days, [the lulav] is not taken on the Sabbath.5neither in Jerusalem (where taking the lulav is a mitzvah according to the Torah) nor outside the holy city (where taking the lulav is a Rabbinic decree, as stated in Halachah 15). This is a decree6instituted by the Rabbis (Sukkah 43a) lest one carry it four cubits in the public domain, as decreed regarding the shofar.7See Halachah 2:6.
Why was this decree not put in effect on the first day of the festival? Because [taking the lulav on that day] is a mitzvah from the Torah even outside of Jerusalem. Thus, the laws applying to it are not the same as those applying to the remaining days,1Taking the lulav on the first day was obviously a matter of great importance. Hence, the Sages did not feel that the fear that perhaps a person might carry the lulav in the public domain was sufficient reason to nullify the mitzvah. In contrast, on the subsequent days the mitzvah is not considered to be so severe a matter. Hence, the mitzvah could be nullified in Jerusalem as well.The Rabbis question why the Sages differentiated between the lulav and the shofar, and (as explained in Halachah 2:6), nullified the mitzvah of hearing the shofar when Rosh Hashanah fell on the Sabbath. As explained in our commentary on that halachah, in Rabbenu Nissim's commentary on the tractate of Sukkah, he states that this decree was instituted only because in most Jewish communities, the people were not aware of the date the court had established for Rosh Hashanah. (Note the details of the explanation there.) because on the subsequent days of the festival a person is obligated to take the lulav only in the holy place.2Thus, while the Temple was standing, the lulav would not be taken outside Jerusalem during the subsequent days of the festival.
When the Temple was destroyed, [the Sages] ordained that the lulav be taken everywhere for the entire seven days of the festival, as a remembrance of the Temple.1Sukkah 41a explains the source for the establishment of remembrances for the Temple practices:[Jeremiah 30:17] states: "'I will restore health to you. I will heal you of your wounds," says God. 'Because they called you an outcast. Zion, for whom no one cares.'The verse states "for whom no one cares," implying that a show of our care is required.On this basis, Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai established a number of practices in remembrance of the Temple practices.On each day,2but only once a day (Ramah, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 651:5). one recites the blessing on it:[Baruch Attah Ado-nai...] asher kid'shanu b'mitzvotav v'tzivanu al netilat lulav.because3As mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 6, the Rambam explains in Hilchot Berachot 11:15 that it is preferable to conclude the blessing, litol lulav. The Kessef Mishneh maintains that the Rambam's present statement is only a reference to his previous one, and not a reversal of his opinion. Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 651:5) and all later authorities recommend reciting al netilat lulav. it a mitzvah ordained by the Rabbis.4In Hilchot Berachot 11:3, the Rambam writes that a blessing should be recited before the performance of a Rabbinic commandment. It is appropriate to say v'tzivanu (and He commanded us) because the commandment to follow the Sages includes the observance of all their enactments.This enactment, like the other enactments instituted by Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai when the Temple was destroyed [is only temporary]. When the Temple is rebuilt, these matters will return to their original status.5The Tosefta, Rosh Hashanah 2:7, states this concept explicitly. It is also obvious from Beitzah 5b, which explains that "when in the near future, the Temple will be rebuilt," difficulties may arise from following Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai's decree.
While the Temple was standing,1and the day when a new month began was established through the testimony of witnesses who saw the new moon. the lulav would be taken [in the holy place2i.e., the city of Jerusalem even] when the first day of Sukkot fell on the Sabbath.3as stated above in Halachah 13. The same applies in other places4throughout Eretz Yisrael and the Diaspora where they were certain that this day5the fifteenth of Tishre was celebrated as a holiday in Eretz Yisrael.6As mentioned in Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh, Chapter 3, the Sanhedrin would send messengers to all Jewish communities to inform them when each new month had begun. The communities which received this information before the Sukkot festival celebrated the holidays for only one day. They would be allowed to take the lulav when the first day of Sukkot fell on the Sabbath.Sukkot 41b relates:When the first day of the festival fell on the Sabbath, everyone would bring their lulav to the synagogue [on Friday]. On the following day, everyone would recognize his lulav and take it.This was the practice outside Jerusalem. Sukkot 42b describes the practice in the Temple.They would bring their lulavim to the Temple Mount [on Friday]. The attendants would take them from them and place them on benches. The elders would place their lulavim in chambers. They would teach them to say: "Whoever receives my lulav may consider it as a gift."In the morning, they would arise and come [to the Temple]. The attendants would throw [the lulavim] to the people. They would grab them from one another and even come to violence. When the court saw that the situation was becoming dangerous, they ordained that each person should take [the lulav] in his own home. However, the places which were distantly removed from Jerusalem7and were not informed of the day on which Rosh Hashanah had fallen, would celebrate two days. Therefore, they... would not take the lulav on this day because of the doubt8whether or not the day was, in fact, Sukkot involved.9i.e., had they known for sure that the holiday began on this day, they would have taken the lulav. However, since they were not sure of that fact, the Sages did not want to risk the possible violation of the Sabbath laws.
When the Temple was destroyed,1even though the new moon was still sanctified according to the testimony of witnesses. (That practice continued several hundred years after the destruction of the Temple - Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 5:3.) the Sages forbade even the inhabitants of Eretz Yisrael who had sanctified the new month2and thus knew that they were certainly obligated to perform the mitzvah to take the lulav on the Sabbath on the first day of Sukkot.3for the reasons mentioned in Halachah 13.[This was instituted] because of the inhabitants of the distant settlements, who were not aware of when the new month had been declared. Thus, a uniform guideline was established, rather than having some take the lulav on the Sabbath and some not.4The Sages did not want confusion to arise because of a difference in local custom. Accordingly, they were willing to decree that many Jews forego the performance of a mitzvah from the Torah, in order to establish uniformity throughout the Jewish people. [The guiding principle was] that the obligation [of taking the lulav] on the first day applies in all places,5and the people in the distant communities could not take the lulav when the first day fell on the Sabbath because of the doubt involved and there is no longer a Temple to use as a point of distinction.6i.e., while the Temple was standing, the difference in practice between the people living in places where the date of the month was known and those where it was not known could be explained because everyone knew that the lulav was taken on the first day in the Temple. However, when the Temple was destroyed, there was no point of distinction, and the Sages established a totally uniform practice.The Lechem Mishneh questions why Sages did not institute the celebration of the second day of each festival in Eretz Yisrael as well. If their desire for uniformity of observance was so great, why did they not establish a single practice in this regard as well?He explains that the Sages were more reluctant to exercise their authority when they had to establish a new practice (קום ועשה) - celebrating an additional day as a festival - than when all that was necessary was to have the people refrain from the performance of a mitzvah (שב ועל תעשה), as in the case of the lulav.Another concept can be derived from this halachah. The Hebrew word translated as Temple - מקדש - is used by the Rambam to refer to the entire city of Jerusalem. Thus, we can infer from the statement "there is no longer a מקדש" that this distinction is conferred on the holy city only while the Temple is standing.
At present, when everyone follows a fixed calendar,1See Chapter 5 of Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh. the matter remains as it was, and the lulav is not taken on the Sabbath in the outlying territories or in Eretz Yisrael2or in Jerusalem even on the first day [of the festival].3when the obligation to do so is from the Torah itself. [This applies] even though everyone knows the actual day of the month.4As mentioned regarding the celebration of the second day of a festival (Beitzah 4b; Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 5:5), according to Torah law this practice should not be followed. Nevertheless, as a mark of respect for established custom, the practice is continued.As explained,5in Halachah 13, the reason for the prohibition of taking the lulav on the Sabbath is a decree lest one carry it four cubits in the public domain.
Whoever is obligated to fulfill [the mitzvot of] shofar and sukkah is obligated to take the lulav. Whoever is not obligated regarding shofar and sukkah is not obligated to take the lulav.1i.e., the lulav, like the shofar and the sukkah, is a positive commandment whose observance is restricted to a specific time. Accordingly, women and slaves are under no obligation. (See Halachot 2:1 and 6:1.)A child who knows how to shake [the lulav]2according to the instructions of our Sages (Rabbenu Manoach). (See Halachot 9 and 10.) is obligated3See the note on Halachah 6:1. regarding the lulav by Rabbinic law, in order to train him in the performance of mitzvot.4Note the specific instructions in Halachah 8:10 regarding a child's performance of the mitzvah on the first day of the festival.
It is a halachah conveyed by Moses from Mount Sinai1i.e., a commandment that has the status of Torah law even though there is no explicit commandment to that effect in the Torah. that2in addition to the willow of the lulav - There is another totally different mitzvah performed with the willow. - in addition to the willow of the lulav - another willow branch was taken in the Temple.3as described in the following halachot.Rashi and Tosafot, (Sukkah 43b) explain that the mitzvah of the willow branch was only performed by the priests for only they were allowed to approach the Temple altar where the branches were arranged. However, from halachah 22, it appears that the Rambam does not share this opinion.Sukkah 44a, b also mentions that outside the Temple there was a custom of established in the time of the prophets requiring the taking of the willow by all Jews. (See also Hilchot Berachot 11:16.) A person does not fulfill his obligation with the willow branch in the lulav.4even if after using for the lulav, he detaches it and takes it by itself (Sukkah 44b, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 664:6).The minimum requirement [to fulfill this mitzvah] is one branch with one leaf.
The Willow Branches Placed Around The Temple AltarHow was this mitzvah performed?On each of the seven days [of the festival], branches of willows were brought1from Motza, a small town slightly west of Jerusalem (Sukkah 45a). and stood upright near the altar2From this fact, Rashi and Tosafot conclude that the willows were taken by priests only because Israelites were not allowed to approach the Temple altar. with their tops bent over the altar.3These willow branches were eleven cubits high and were placed on the base of the altar.Afterwards, they would be taken by the people, as stated in the following halachah. Rabbenu Manoach maintains that the priests would take the willow branches and give them to the people because Israelites were not allowed to approach the altar, as above. However, he notes that Rav Yitzchak ibn Giat's description of the mitzvah could be interpreted to mean that the Israelites themselves were permitted to approach the altar on this occasion. When they would bring them and arrange them [near the altar,] a series of [shofar blasts]4teki'ah, teru'ah, and teki'ah - were sounded - as an expression of happiness (Tosafot, Sukkah, ibid.). The shofar was also sounded in connection with the communal sacrifices and other rites carried out in the Temple. - teki'ah, teru'ah, and teki'ah - were sounded.When the Sabbath fell in the midst of the festival, the willows would not be arranged [near the altar]5on the Sabbath, since the mitzvah of lulav was negated on such an occasion (Halachah 13). Indeed, in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 4:3), the Rambam writes that the reason the mitzvah of taking the willow on the Sabbath was negated was so that people would not extend the leniency and take the lulav as well. unless the seventh day fell on the Sabbath.6The seventh day of Sukkot falls on the Sabbath only when Rosh Hashanah is celebrated on Sunday. Since the Sages attempted to prevent the latter occurrence (Hilchot Kiddush Hachodesh 7:7) - indeed, it is impossible according to today's fixed calendar - it was rare that the seventh day of Sukkot would fall on the Sabbath. [On such an occasion,] the willows were arranged [near the altar],7and the willows were taken as during the week. Though the mitzvah of lulav would not be performed on such an occasion, an exception was made regarding the willows, in order... to publicize the fact that [taking] them is a mitzvah.8Since the willows were placed near the altar by the priests, and the performance of the mitzvah was under the supervision of the court, there was no need to worry about people carrying willows in the public domain (Sukkah 43b).In a related context, Sukkah 43b relates that the followers of Boethus, who did not respect the Oral Law, once tried to prevent the people from following the mitzvah of the willow branches on the Sabbath. Indeed, precisely because the source for the mitzvah is the oral tradition alone, the Sages made a point of allowing it to be observed on the Sabbath at least under such circumstances (Rabbenu Manoach).The actual performance of the mitzvah on the Sabbath is described in the following halachah.
How would they fulfill [this mitzvah on the Sabbath]?They would bring [the branches] to the Temple on the Sabbath eve and place them in golden containers, so their leaves would not dry out.1Some commentaries explain that the golden vessels were used as an expression of respect for the mitzvah. However, the Ma'aseh Rokeach explains that, in comparison to containers made of other metals, golden ones are more beneficial in preserving the willows' freshness. On the following morning, they would be placed next to the altar and the people would take them in the same manner as they did each day.2Note the commentary on the previous halachah.Since the willow is not explicitly mentioned in the Torah,3The Maggid Mishneh's text of the Mishneh Torah reads: "it is not explicitly [an obligation] from the Torah." Accordingly, he and the other commentators debated whether the Rambam considers a halachah conveyed by Moses from Mt. Sinai as a Torah obligation or not. In Hilchot Tum'at Meit 2:10, the Rambam specifically states that a halachah conveyed by tradition has the power of Torah law. it is not taken on each of the seven days of the festival as a remembrance of the Temple.4as is the lulav (Halachah 15). Rather, at present it is taken only on the seventh day.5Hoshanah Rabbah.What is done?6to fulfill the mitzvah at present? One takes one7willow branch or many branches8At present, it is customary to take five. in addition to the willow of the lulav, and hits the ground9The Zohar mentions this practice or a utensil with them two or three times.10According to Kabbalah, the custom is to hit the ground five times. No blessing is recited, because this practice is a custom instituted by the prophets.11In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 4:3), the Rambam writes: "The willow is a halachah conveyed by Moses....It was a custom of the prophets to take it without a blessing."However, in Hilchot Berachot 11:15, he writes:Every practice which is a custom - even if it a custom of the prophets (e.g., taking the willow on the seventh day of the festival)... - [does not require] the recitation of a blessing.It is possible to reconcile the two statements as follows: A blessing was never recited upon taking the willow in the Temple (though it could have been), because of the custom of the prophets mentioned in his Commentary on the Mishnah. There was never any reason to recite a blessing over taking the willow outside the Temple because it was only a custom.
On each day of the festival,1in the Temple they2There is a question if this practice was carried out only by the priests, or by Israelites as well. (See the commentary on Halachah 21.) would walk around the altar once, carrying their lulavim3Sukkah 43b mentions an opinion that states that the people would walk around the altar carrying the willow branch, but concludes as the Rambam does. (See also Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 664:4.) in their hands, reciting: "Please, God, save us. Please, God, grant us success"4Many manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah state "Please, God, save us" twice, repeating that verse as is our custom in the recitation of Hallel. [Psalms 118:25]. On the seventh day, they would walk around the altar seven times.5The Yalkut Shimoni notes that this recalls the miracle of the conquest of Jericho.It has become universally accepted Jewish custom to place the ark in the center of the synagogue6From Hilchot Tefillah 11:3, it appears that in addition to the main ark of the synagogue, there was a small movable ark that was positioned in the center of the synagogue. The present custom is to hold the Torah scrolls on the reader's platform in the center of the synagogue. This is also mentioned in the Yalkut Shimoni: "The chazan stands as an angel of God, holding the Torah scroll in his arm." and walk around it each day,7once, and seven times on Hoshanah Rabbah. as they walked around the altar in remembrance of the Temple [service].
The following custom was observed in Jerusalem:1as an expression of the dearness with which the people regarded the mitzvah: A person would leave his house in the morning [carrying] his lulav in his hand.2The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 652:1) states that "the eager" fulfill the mitzvah of lulav early in the morning. Afterwards, the lulav would be carried - while open, without a carrying case - throughout the day. He would enter the synagogue with it in his hand; pray while it was in his hand;3Even though one should not ordinarily hold any objects in one's hands while praying, lest one's concentration be distracted, since holding the lulav is a mitzvah dear to a Jew's heart, it will not become a distraction. go to visit the sick and comfort the mourners with it in his hand.4for there is no difficulty in carrying the lulav while fulfilling those mitzvot. When he entered the House of Study, he would send it home with his son or servant.5We fear that a person's involvement in his studies will prevent him from showing proper attention to the lulav, and perhaps he will drop it (Rashi, Sukkah, ibid.).
During the time the lulav was taken on the Sabbath,1See Halachot 13 and 14. At present, it is forbidden to carry the lulav on the Sabbath (Ramah, Orach Chayim 558:2). a woman was allowed to receive the lulav from her son or her husband2Though she was not required to fulfill the mitzvah herself, no prohibition was instituted against her carrying the lulav. and return it to the water on the Sabbath.3This was not considered a violation of the Sabbath laws which prevent causing any agricultural growth. However, it was forbidden to add to the water or change it on the Sabbath because of the trouble involved. On the festival, a person might add to the water.4but not change it. On Chol Hamo'ed,5though there are certain restrictions against work one might change the water.6Indeed, it is proper to do so to keep the lulav fresh (Rabbenu Manoach).
It is forbidden to smell the myrtle in the lulav.1As explained in Chapter 6, Halachah 15, with regard to the s'chach of a sukkah: after it has been set aside for use as a mitzvah, it may not be used for mundane purposes throughout the holiday. Since it is useful only for smelling2in contrast to the etrog, mentioned in the second clause. and it has been set aside for the performance of the mitzvah, it is forbidden to smell it.3The prohibition applies even on the Sabbath, when the lulav is not taken (Mishnah Berurah 653:2). However, it is permitted to smell an etrog, because setting it aside for the mitzvah [prohibits it from being] eaten.4An etrog is primarily used for eating. Thus, its being set aside for use for the mitzvah causes that function to be prohibited. However, smelling it is a secondary function that is not included in that prohibition.Nevertheless, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 653:1) recommends refraining from smelling the etrog, because of the doubt regarding the proper blessing to recite. The Mishnah Berurah (653:3) states that with the exception of the time when the lulav is being taken, one may smell the etrog throughout the holiday.
It is forbidden to eat the etrog1even if it has become unacceptable for use in performing the mitzvah (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 665:1). throughout the seventh day [of the festival];2The Mishnah (Sukkah 4:6) relates that despite this prohibition, after the mitzvah was fulfilled on the seventh day of Sukkot the children would eat their etrogim. since it was set aside for a portion of the day, it is set aside for the entire day. However, on the eighth day it is permitted to be eaten.3In contrast, the s'chach of the sukkah might not be used for a mundane purpose on the eighth day either (Chapter 6, Halachah 15). Rabbenu Manoach explains the difference, relating that - should one desire to eat - the sukkah must also be used beyn hash'mashot - the period between sunset and the appearance of three stars - while the lulav would not be taken during that time.At present, when we celebrate [the festivals for] two days4because of the previously established custom, even though there is no question regarding the dates of the holidays because of the fixed calendar we use, as explained in the commentary on Halachah 18. - even though the etrog is not taken on the eighth day5The Maggid Mishneh notes the contrast between the mitzvot of lulav and of the sukkah, which, as mentioned in Chapter 6, Halachah 13, must be fulfilled on the eighth day of the festival. He differentiates between the two, noting that it is a mitzvah from the Torah to dwell in the sukkah for all seven days of the holiday. Therefore, because of the doubt, that mitzvah was also observed on the eighth day. In contrast, outside of Jerusalem there was never a mitzvah from the Torah to take the lulav for seven days. Hence, that mitzvah need not be observed on the eighth day.The Kessef Mishneh adds a further point. It is forbidden to carry the lulav for no purpose on the eighth day, the holiday of Shemini Atzeret. No such prohibition applies regarding the use of the sukkah. - the etrog is forbidden on the eighth day,6However, it is permitted on the ninth day, Simchat Torah (Shulchan Aruch, ibid.).In contrast, at present, the use of the s'chach is forbidden on the ninth day. since it was forbidden on the eighth day7The Kessef Mishneh advises amending the text to read "on the seventh day." In either case, the intent is the same - because it was forbidden by law on the seventh day, that prohibition was observed on the eighth day as well, because of the doubt involved. during the time [the festivals] were celebrated for two days because of the doubt whether [the eighth day] was, in fact, the seventh.8i.e., during the time when the calendar was established according to the testimony of witnesses, and word of the sanctification of the new moon could not reach the people in the outlying communities in time for the celebration of the holiday, as mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 16.When a person sets aside seven etrogim, [one for each] of the seven days [of the festival], each one of them can be used for the mitzvah on its day and eaten on the morrow.9more precisely, even on the night after it was used, for the etrog was set aside only for that day alone.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
[These are the rules governing] the four species: the lulav, the myrtle, the willow, and the etrog. If one of them was:a) dried out,b)1The etrog is described as פרי עץ הדר (the fruit of the beautiful tree). Sukkah 31a explains that an analogy is established among the various species, and all of them must be "beautiful." Fruit or branches that are dried out do not fit the latter description.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 645:5, 646:7) defines "drying out" as losing all its green and fading to a whitish color. The Ramah mentions an even more lenient opinion. taken by force2גזל - armed robbery or the like or stolen,3גנבה - petty theft and the like. Though in other areas there are differences between these two categories of theft, in this context the same laws apply.In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:1), the Rambam explains that any of the species which are stolen may not be used for the mitzvah, because a sin may not serve as the medium with which a mitzvah will be performed (מצוה הבאה בעבירה). (See also Hilchot Chametz U'matzah 6:7; Hilchot Issurei Mizbe'ach 5:7, 5:9.)Sukkah 29b-30a mentions this reason, but also a second explanation: because, as stated in Halachah 10, on the first day of the festival a person must own the four species he uses for the mitzvah. (See the commentary on Halachah 9 for a further discussion of this matter.) even after [the owner had] despaired of its recovery,c)4According to the first reason, the owner's despair over the recovery of his article has no effect on the thief's potential to use it for a mitzvah. Even according to the second opinion, the despair over recovering the article is not sufficient to allow the thief to use it, as is obvious from Hilchot Gezeilah 2:1, where the Rambam writes:A stolen article whose form has not changed...even though its owner has despaired of its recovery...must be returned to its owner.Thus, the article is not considered to belong to the thief, and he may not use it to fulfill the mitzvah. However, if the thief performed a deed which changed the appearance of the lulav or any of the other species, he is considered to have acquired it and may fulfill the mitzvah with it. Nevertheless, he should not recite a blessing before performing the mitzvah with such a lulav (Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 649:1). came from an ashera5a tree which is worshiped as a deity. It is also forbidden to be used for the mitzvah, on the basis of the principle that a sin may not serve as the medium with which a mitzvah will be performed (מצוה הבאה בעבירה) (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.). that has been worshiped, even though the worship of the ashera has already been nullified,d)6The commentaries on Sukkah 31b explain that this refers to an ashera that entered a Jew's possession before it was nullified, or an ashera that was worshiped by a Jew. In these instances, the nullification of the ashera will not cause it to be permitted for use; rather, it must be totally destroyed. Hence, it is considered to have no size at all, and, therefore, may not be used for the mitzvah (Maggid Mishneh). (See also the Commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 3.)Alternatively, since the ashera itself was worshiped, it may no longer be used for a mitzvah. A parallel can be found in Hilchot Tzitzit 1:11, which relates that the wool of a sheep that was worshiped may not be used for tzitzit, although that wool does not become prohibited. or it came from an apostate cityit7All the property of an apostate city must be destroyed. Therefore, any of the four species that come from such a city is considered to have no size at all, and, thus, is unacceptable for use in the mitzvah. (See also the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 3.) is not acceptable.8it is not acceptable. If one of them belonged to an idolater:9but was not worshiped itself (Rabbenu Manoach); i.e., it grew in a garden of the temple of an idol. However, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 649:3) explains that it applies even when the tree itself was worshiped. at the outset, it should not be taken.10Because of its connection with idol worship, such an article is considered to be disgusting, and it is improper to fulfill the mitzvah with it (Rabbenu Manoach). However... If it was taken, the person has fulfilled his obligation.11provided the tree had belonged to a gentile and the latter had nullified its connection with idol worship before it came into the Jew's possession. Alternatively, on any day of the festival but the first, one may take it even before its connection with idol worship was nullified. Since the possibility exists that it can be nullified, it is not considered to be a nonexistent entity. (See also the commentary on Chapter 1, Halachah 3.)If [one of the species] was wilting, but had not dried out entirely, it is kosher.12Sukkah 31a explains that as long as the species have some moisture left to them, they are not disqualified for use. In extreme situations or in a time of danger, a dried out lulav is kosher.13Sukkah 32b relates that the inhabitants of the large cities would bequeath their lulavim to their descendants as part of their estate. Obviously, the lulavim would have dried out during this time. However, [this does not apply] to the other species.14for only the lulav was mentioned in that passage.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that even a dried out lulav is not acceptable. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 645:5) follows the Ra'avad's view.
An etrog1These laws apply only to an etrog, because the agricultural prohibitions mentioned in this halachah apply only to fruit and not to mere branches (Rabbenu Manoach). of orlah,2For the first three years of a tree's growth, one is forbidden to benefit from its produce (Leviticus 19:23).The Torah's prohibition against orlah applies only in Eretz Yisrael. In the Diaspora, there is also a prohibition against orlah, which was received as a halachah from Moses from Mount Sinai. However, much greater leniency is involved, and if there is a doubt whether a fruit is orlah or not, it may be eaten (Hilchot Ma'achalot Asurot 10:10). The same rules apply regarding its use for this mitzvah. of impure terumah,3Terumah refers to the portion of produce which must be separated and given to a priest (Numbers 18:12). If the terumah becomes ritually impure, it is no longer permitted to be eaten and must be destroyed (Hilchot Terumah 12:1).In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:8), the Rambam writes that etrogim of orlah and impure terumah are not acceptable because "they must be destroyed by burning. Therefore, they are unacceptable, because God requires 'a fruit,' and these are not fit to be eaten at all.” and of tevel4produce from Eretz Yisrael from which the agricultural requirements - Terumah, Ma'aser Rishon (the first tithe), and Ma'aser Sheni (the second tithe) - have not been separated. Tevel is also unfit to be eaten, and thus, it may not be used for the mitzvah. is unacceptable. [An etrog] of d'mai5Produce concerning which there is doubt whether or not the tithes have been separated (Hilchot Ma'aser, Chapter 9). is permitted, for it is possible for a person to declare all of his property as ownerless.6In his Commentary on the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam states "he can consecrate all his property to the Temple." In practice, there is no difference between the two. Thus, he will be a poor man who is permitted to eat d'mai.7See Hilchot Ma'aser 10:11. Since there is a possibility of his being allowed to eat the etrog, he may use it for the mitzvah (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.).An etrog of pure terumah and of ma'aser sheni in Jerusalem8In the first, second, fourth, and fifth years of the seven-year agricultural cycle, the second tithe had to be taken to Jerusalem and eaten there in a state of ritual purity (Deuteronomy 14:22-27).The Rambam maintains that one can use an etrog of ma'aser sheni for the mitzvah only while in Jerusalem, since that is the only place that it is permitted to be eaten (Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.). However, Rabbenu Nissim and others differ and allow such an etrog to be used for the mitzvah in other places as well. They maintain that though we are not allowed to benefit from ma'aser sheni outside Jerusalem, the fulfillment of mitzvot is not an act of personal benefit. should not be taken, lest one cause it to become susceptible to contracting ritual impurity.9which was undesirable. From Leviticus 11:34, our Sages learned that produce does not become subject to contracting ritual impurity until it comes into contact with water. Since the lulav was generally placed in water (see Chapter 7, Halachah 25), when it was taken together with the etrog it would probably make the etrog wet, and thus cause it to become subject to contracting ritual impurity. However, if it was taken, it is kosher.10for there is no inherent difficulty with such an etrog.
A lulav whose tip1According to the Maggid Mishneh and Rabbenu Manoach, this refers to the center leaf that extends outward from the shidrah, and not the shidrah itself. Rabbenu Asher and the Ra'avad explain that this refers to the majority of the lulav's leaves, and the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 645:6) quotes their opinion. However, the Ramah quotes the Maggid Mishneh's statements. becomes cut off is unacceptable.2because such a lulav is not "beautiful" (הדר: Jerusalem Talmud, Sukkah 3:1). All the other factors mentioned in this halachah disqualify a lulav for the same reason. Should it become split to the extent that the two sides of the split become severed and appear to be two, it is unacceptable.3Sukkah 31b, 32a states: A lulav which is split is kosher; [but] if it is like a fork, it is not. The commentaries explain that the Talmud refers to a shape like a tuning fork, where the two ends are distant from each other. The commentaries explain that such a separation can disqualify a lulav even if the majority of leaves are not split in this manner, and hence, the principles mentioned in the following halachah would not apply.If it is bent forward4i.e., the shidrah would be bent toward a person facing it so that its shidrah appears like a hunchback, it is unacceptable.5Sukkah (ibid.) states: If it is bent like a scythe, it is unacceptable. The Kessef Mishneh emphasizes that the bend must be severe (as described by the examples given by the Talmud and the Rambam). However, a slight curve will not disqualify a lulav. If it is bent backwards,6the shidrah bending away from a person facing it it is kosher, since that is its natural pattern of growth.7and this can be considered as a "beautiful" lulav (Shulchan Aruch HaRav 645:19). The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 645:9) differentiates between when the shidrah bends gradually and when it is bent over to the extent that its tip points downward. In the latter case, even if it is bent backwards, the lulav is unacceptable. If it is bent toward either side, it is unacceptable.8Sukkah (ibid.) questions whether such a lulav is kosher or not and leaves the matter unresolved. Hence, we follow the more stringent view (Rav Yitzchak Alfasi).If its leaves have separated one from the other, but they have not begun to hang downward like the top of a date palm,9i.e., the leaves are still firm and pointed upward (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 3:1). it is kosher.10However, the most proper way of performing the mitzvah is to use a lulav whose leaves are not separated at all (Maggid Mishneh). However, if its leaves have burst open and they hang down from the shidrah as does the top of the date palm, it is unacceptable.11even if they are bound together against the lulav. This applies only if the majority of the lulav's leaves have opened up in this fashion (Ramah, Orach Chayim 645:2).
The natural pattern of growth of the leaves of the lulav is that two grow in pairs, connected at their back. The back of each pair of connected leaves is called the tiyomet. If the tiyomet is split, it unacceptable.1The Maggid Mishneh explains that the Rambam maintains that the lulav is not acceptable only if the majority of the leaves are split. However, others (Rashi, Tosafot) explain that this law refers to the middle leaf alone. If the majority of that leaf is split, the lulav is unacceptable. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 645:3) quotes the Rambam's opinion, while the Ramah favors that of Rashi and Tosafot. Should a lulav's leaves grow individually from the beginning of its formation without having a tiyomet, it is unacceptable.2i.e., there is no difference if the lulav's lack of a tiyomet is a natural phenomenon or is brought about through human activity; in all cases it is unacceptable.When a lulav's leaves do not grow on top of the other like all lulavim, but rather one below the other, [the following rules apply:] If the top [of the lower leaf] reaches the base of the one above it so that the entire shidrah of the lulav is covered with leaves, it is kosher.3This is the tzinei har habarzel mentioned in the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:1). Sukkah 32b relates that such lulavim grow at the entrance to Gehinnom. If the top [of the lower leaf] does not reach the base of the one above it, it is unacceptable.
A myrtle branch whose top is cut off is acceptable.1Since the myrtle branch is covered by its leaves, the fact that its top is cut off is not noticeable (Rabbenu Manoach).Though the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:2) states that such a myrtle is unacceptable, the Talmud (Sukkah 34b) states that the halachah follows Rabbi Tarfon, whose opinion is quoted by the Rambam in this halachah.In his commentary on this halachah, the Ra'avad states:For a number of years, the spirit of prophecy has been present in our chamber of study, and we have determined that [such a myrtle] is not acceptable.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 646:10) quotes the Rambam's opinion. However, the Ramah writes that it is proper to adhere to the Ra'avad's view if possible. However, he quotes Rabbenu Nissim, who maintains that the top of a myrtle is only considered to be "cut off" when the top of the branch is broken. The leaves' falling off is not considered of significance. Even though most of its leaves have fallen off, it is kosher, provided three leaves remain in one row.2The Maggid Mishneh explains that this refers to an Egyptian myrtle, which has seven leaves in each row. Rabbenu Manoach explains that this clause refers to the entire myrtle branch, stating that even though most of its leaves have fallen off, as long as it has one full row of leaves covering the branch (at its top, as in Chapter 7, Halachah 8), it is kosher.The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 646:4) quotes the Maggid Mishneh's statements as halachah. In contrast, Rabbenu Manoach's interpretation is not accepted. Halachah 5 (ibid.) states that the majority of the length of the myrtle branch must be covered with leaves. However, if that condition is met, the myrtle is kosher even if the leaves at its top have fallen off.When there are more berries than leaves, [the following rules apply:] If they are green, it is kosher.3for their color is the same as the leaves of the myrtle. If they are red or black,4since the berries are a different color from that of the leaves... it is not acceptable.5since this is not considered to be "beautiful" (Rashi, Sukkah 33b). If one reduced their number,6so that there would be more leaves than berries, it is acceptable.7it is acceptable. We may not reduce their number8i.e., the number of black or red berries on the holiday itself,9i.e., on the first day of the festival, when the restrictions against work apply because [by doing so, one] makes [the myrtle] fit for use.10and this may not be done on a holiday. (See Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 4:8.) However... If one transgressed and removed them or removed them one by one to eat them,11which is permitted. Sukkah 33b states that permission is granted, provided only that one has another myrtle to use for the mitzvah. Otherwise, it is forbidden to eat the berries, because through one's activity one will definitely make the myrtle fit for use. Hence, even though one's act was motivated by another intention as well, it is forbidden. (See Shulchan Aruch HaRav 646:13.)The Maggid Mishneh quotes a slightly different version of the text, substituting "or if they were removed by another person" for the phrase "removed them one by one." Authentic Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah follow the Maggid Mishneh's text. it is kosher.12despite the fact that it was made fit for use on the holiday.
A willow branch whose top is cut off is kosher.1The Rambam maintains that the laws pertaining to the willow parallel those governing a myrtle. However, even many of the Sages who accept the Rambam's opinion regarding the myrtle disagree with regard to the willow. They explain that such a myrtle is acceptable because its leaves cover the branch's severed top. This concept does not apply with regard to a willow. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 647:2) also states that such a willow is unacceptable. If its leaves have burst open,2i.e., they are hanging down limply from the branch (Maggid Mishneh) it is not acceptable.3for this is not beautiful. Rabbenu Aharon Halevi interprets the Hebrew נפרצו as "split." The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 647:6 quotes both of these opinions as halachah.
If an etrog is perforated1even though none of the etrog's substance is missing from side to side2This is the literal translation of the term מפולש. Nevertheless, Rabbenu Asher interprets that term differently, explaining that the etrog is unacceptable if the hole reaches the etrog's seed chamber. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 648:3) quotes both opinions. Regarding halachah l'ma'aseh, the authorities recommend heeding Rabbenu Asher's opinion. However, they state that when it is difficult to find a kosher etrog, the Rambam's opinion may be relied upon. - no matter how small the hole is3i.e., even if it was perforated with a thin needle - it is not acceptable.4This and the other factors mentioned in this halachah disqualify an etrog for use because it is not "beautiful."The Ra'avad objects to this statement and maintains that some of the etrog's substance must also be lacking for it to be deemed unacceptable. The difference between these two opinions depends on a difference in the text of the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:6). The Rambam's text reads:If [an etrog] was perforated, peeled, cracked, or lacking even the slightest amount of its substance, it is unacceptable.In contrast, the Ra'avad's text read:If [an etrog] was perforated, peeled, cracked: when it lacks even the slightest amount of its substance, it is unacceptable.The Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 2) follows the Rambam's view. The Ramah writes that when it is difficult to find another kosher etrog, one may rely on the Ra'avad's view. When [the hole] does not go from side to side, if it is the size of an isar5a silver coin from the Talmudic period, four barley corns in size (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 3:6). or more,6e.g., the hole was made by plunging an awl into the etrog (Rashi, Sukkah 36a). [the etrog] is not acceptable.7Here, too, the Ra'avad differs and maintains that as long as none of the etrog's substance is lacking, it is kosher. If [a hole was made in an etrog which caused] even the slightest amount [of the etrog] to be missing, [the etrog] is not acceptable.8The Ra'avad differs and maintains that an isar of the etrog's substance must be missing. In this and in the previous case, the same decisions of the Shulchan Aruch and the Ramah mentioned above apply.If its pitam9i.e., the small protrusion from which its flower grows - The Maggid Mishneh differentiates between the stem of the pitam and its tip from which its flower grew, maintaining that only the removal of the former disqualifies the etrog for use. The Ramah (ibid. 7) quotes this opinion as halachah. However, he suggests trying to use an etrog whose pitam is entirely complete. - i.e., the small protrusion from which its flower grows - was removed, it is not acceptable.10However, there is no difficulty in using an etrog that grows without a pitam, as many etrogim do (Rabbenu Manoach; Ramah, ibid.). [Similarly,] if the stem from which it hangs from the tree is removed from the etrog itself and a hole is left, it is not acceptable.11However, if only part of the stem is cut off and the portion attached to the etrog remains, it is kosher (Ramah, ibid. 8).If it becomes covered with bumps12The term חזזית is generally used to refer to human skin ailments - e.g., boils or warts. In this context, it refers to bumps which protrude above the etrog's surface. However, the commentaries disqualify an etrog only if the bumps grow naturally from the etrog itself. However, if they are caused by external factors - e.g., thorns - the etrog is not disqualified. in two or three places,13The Ra'avad asks why both the numbers two and three are mentioned. In response, the Mishneh Lamelech quotes many examples of the use of similar terminology throughout the Talmud. It must be noted that the Rambam, in his commentary on the Mishnah (ibid.), and the Shulchan Aruch HaRav (648:19) mention only two places. it is not acceptable.14because it looks spotty (Sukkah 35b). Even if it is covered with bumps in only one place,15i.e., as long as there is no place for an additional bump between the two, it is considered to be one place (Shulchan Aruch HaRav, ibid.). if that place covers the majority of the etrog's surface area,16The Magen Avraham 648:13 also disqualifies an etrog if there is a line of bumps that covers the majority of the etrog's circumference from any point on its surface.it is not acceptable. [Similarly,] if a bump grows on even the slightest portion of the pitam - See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.it is not acceptable - because a blemish on the pitam is very obvious and unattractive.Sukkah (ibid.) states: "if a bump grows on the etrog's nose, it is not acceptable." The Rambam interprets "nose" as referring to the pitam. However, Rabbenu Asher and others explain that it refers to the portion of the etrog which begins to narrow as it approaches the pitam. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 9) accepts the latter view.If its peel is removed without causing [the etrog] to lose any substance and it remains greenish yellow as in its natural state - i.e, only the outer coating of the peel was removed and the thick, white inner peel is not yet revealed. Should this peel be revealed, the etrog is considered as though it has lost some of its substance (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, ibid.).[the following rules apply:] If the peel was entirely removed, it is not acceptable. - for the attractiveness of the etrog will begin to decrease without any possibility of its returning to its original state (Levush 586:6)If even the slightest portion of the original peel remains - the peel could have regenerated itself if it had remained connected to the tree (Levush, ibid.). Therefore,...it is kosher. - Tosafot, Sukkah 36a maintains that at least a portion of the original peel equivalent to a sela (a large silver coin) must remain. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 6) follows the Rambam's opinion. it is not acceptable. [Similarly,] if a bump grows on even the slightest portion of the pitam, it is not acceptable.If its peel is removed without causing [the etrog] to lose any substance and it remains greenish yellow as in its natural state, [the following rules apply:] If the peel was entirely removed, it is not acceptable. If even the slightest portion of the original peel remains, it is kosher.
An etrog which is inflated,1i.e., water fell on it after being detached from the tree and it became inflated (Rabbenu Manoach, Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 648:15). decaying,2i.e., it produces a foul odor because it is infested with worms (Rabbenu Manoach).Based on Sukkah 36b, the Ba'al Halachot Gedolot writes that "inflated" and "decaying" etrogim are disqualified only when the blemish is externally visible. However, if the blemish is only internal, they are kosher. (See Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 4) and commentaries.) pickled,3The Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 15) defines "pickled" as "placed in vinegar." However, the Magen Avraham (648:22) maintains that "pickled" should be interpreted according to its definition in the Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah (105:1-2). Thus, if an etrog has been soaked in water or in any other liquid for more than 24 hours straight, it is considered to be "pickled" and disqualified for use. One should take care regarding this matter when soaking etrogim to preserve their freshness. cooked,4thoroughly on a fire or in boiling water (Rabbenu Manoach). black, white, spotted,5i.e., a mixture of any two or more colors. When the different color is concentrated in only one place, the etrog is not disqualified unless that color covers more than half the etrog's surface area. However, if there is more than one spot of different colors, it is disqualified regardless of their size (Shulchan Aruch, ibid. 16). or green like a leek is unacceptable.6The Hebrew word ירוק refers to two different colors: dark green and yellow. Initially, the etrog, like most citrus fruit, is dark green. As it matures, it turns yellowish.If it was grown in a mold and shaped into the form of another creation, it is unacceptable.7It is not considered "beautiful" because its natural form was changed (Rabbenu Manoach). If its natural form was preserved, even though it was shaped in different layers, it is kosher. Two etrogim that grow joined together,8This is kosher because the etrogim grew naturally in this way. In this instance, when performing the mitzvah, a person should hold both etrogim in his hands. Though the Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 20) accepts this decision, there are other authorities who differ. Hence, it is preferable to use another etrog (Mishnah Berurah 648:63). and an unripe etrog are kosher.9Sukkah 31b mentions etrogim which are small and green as being not fully ripe. However, since the Rambam mentioned those factors previously, it appears that here the intent is different and refers to a fruit that is not yet ready to be eaten, even though it is as large as an egg and has begun to turn yellow. (See also Sukkah 36a.)In places where the etrogim grow naturally with a slight black tinge, it is kosher.10Rashi (Sukkah 36a) states that if such an etrog is brought to a place where etrogim of a normal color grow, it may not be used. However, if [the etrogim] are very black11i.e., like a Kushite - they are unacceptable everywhere - even in Africa, where etrogim of this color grow naturally (Rashi, Sukkah 34b). - i.e., like a Kushite - they are unacceptable everywhere.
All the species which we categorized as unacceptable because of the blemishes we described1Sukkah 36b relates that Rabbi Chanina would eat from an etrog and then use it for the mitzvah. Though an etrog which is lacking even the slightest amount of its substance may not be used (Halachah 7), he still fulfilled his obligation with it. From this incident, our Sages concluded that, on the later days, even such an etrog is kosher.According to the Rambam's opinion, the same applies to all other physical blemishes on the species. Since there is no greater blemish than an etrog which is bitten into, none of the requirements for "beauty" must be observed on the later days.Nevertheless, Tosafot, Sukkah 29b and Rabbenu Asher maintain that this leniency applies only to etrogim which are lacking in substance. All the species which were disqualified because they are not "beautiful" may not be used on the later days as well. Though the Shulchan Aruch 649:5 quotes the Rambam, the Magen Avraham (649:17) and the Taz (649:9) quote the other view. or because they were stolen or taken by force2The Pri Megadim explains that even according to the Rambam, a blessing should not be recited when performing the mitzvah in this fashion. are [disqualified for use] only on the first day of the festival.3As mentioned in the commentary on Halachah 1, there are two explanations why a stolen lulav may not be used on the first day:a) a sin may not serve as the medium with which a mitzvah will be performed (מצוה הבאה בעבירה);b) as stated in Halachah 10, on the first day of the festival a person must own the four species he uses for the mitzvah.The commentaries explain that the Rambam follows the latter rationale. However, those who follow the first opinion (the Ra'avad, the Ramban, Rabbenu Asher) forbid the use of stolen species on the later days as well. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid.) quotes the Rambam, while the Ramah follows the other view.[Though the above explanation is frequently used, it is difficult to accept. First, in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Sukkah 3:1), the Rambam mentions the reason of מצוה הבאה בעבירה. Also, in Hilchot Chametz U'matzah 6:7 and in Hilchot Issurei Mizbe'ach 5:7 and 5:9, he forbids the use of stolen articles for the performance of a commandment. In addition, he has not yet mentioned the halachah requiring one to own the lulav used on the first day.The Taz (649:15) clarifies the matter slightly further by explaining that since taking the lulav on the second day is only a Rabbinic commandment, using a stolen lulav is allowed even though it is a מצוה הבאה בעבירה.] On the second day of the festival4The literal translation of the Rambam's words are "from the second holiday," implying that these leniencies are granted even in the Diaspora, where the second day is celebrated as a holiday. Though all the laws of the holiday apply on the second day as well as the first, this applies only to the laws of the holiday itself. In contrast, in other contexts, since we follow a fixed calendar and know that the holidays fall on their appropriate dates, the restrictions applying to the first day do not apply on the subsequent days (Maggid Mishneh).Rabbenu Asher differs and maintains that all the restrictions that apply to the lulav on the first day must also be observed on the second day as well. The Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 649:5) writes that all the species disqualified on the first day may be taken on the second day, but a blessing should not be recited. and on the other days,5Chol Hamo'ed, when all opinions agree that... they are all kosher.6they are all kosher. Those which are disqualified because of the association with idol worship7mentioned in Halachah 1 or because the etrog is forbidden to be eaten8as mentioned in Halachah 2 are unacceptable both on the first day and on the later days.
On the first day of the festival,1It appears from the Rambam's statements that even in Jerusalem, where Torah law requires that the mitzvah be fulfilled for all seven days of the festival, the obligation to own the lulav applies only on the first day. a person cannot fulfill his obligation by using a lulav that belongs to a colleague and was borrowed from him,2As explained in the commentary on the previous halachah, the Biblical source for the mitzvah of taking the four species, Leviticus 23:40, states: "On the first day, take for yourself the fruit of a beautiful tree..." The phrase "for yourself" implies that a person must own the species he uses for the mitzvah (Sukkah 41b).As mentioned in Chapter 5, Halachah 25, a borrowed sukkah may be used on the holiday. Though Deuteronomy 16:13 states "Celebrate the Sukkot holiday for yourself for seven days." In this context, only a stolen sukkah is disqualified and a borrowed sukkah is permitted (Sukkah 27b).Since in both cases, the source for the exclusion is the same phrase, one might ask why the laws pertaining to each are different. Many explain that since, as explained in the commentary to that halachah, the Torah includes a special verse to teach us that a borrowed sukkah is permitted, the scope of the exclusion implied by "for yourself" is limited.The Shulchan Aruch HaRav 637:3 explains that since the person owning the sukkah grants his colleague the use of it, the borrowed sukkah can be considered "as his own." Since a person has to treat a sukkah as his permanent dwelling for the seven days of the holiday, it follows that the sukkah was lent for that purpose. Thus, while a person is using it, he may consider it "as his own," i.e., just like his own dwelling. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 19. unless the latter gives it to him as a present.3Though there are certain restrictions against the transfer of property on a holiday, it is permitted to give a colleague a present (Rambam, Commentary on the Mishnah, Sukkah 3:11).If [the owner of the lulav] gives it to him as a present on the condition4The use of the Hebrew term על מנת frees one from certain obligations in phrasing the terms of the conditional agreement. (See Hilchot Zechiyah Umatanah 3:8.) that he return it, he may fulfill his obligation with it and return it,5There are authorities who require that the owner specifically state that he is giving the lulav to his colleague on the condition that the latter return it. However, the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 658:5) states that even if the owner gives a colleague a lulav without making such a statement, it is assumed that the lulav was given subject to this condition. because a present given on condition that it be returned is considered a present.6See Hilchot Zechiyah Umatanah 3:9. If he does not return it, he does not fulfill his obligation, because it is as though it were stolen.7i.e., by failing to fulfill the condition under which the present was given, the recipient nullifies the legal transfer of ownership. Thus, although he was in physical possession of the article, it did not belong to him. Hence, it is considered to be stolen and, thus, not eligible to be used for the mitzvah (Sukkah, ibid.).[On the first day,]8before all the adults who desire to use it have fulfilled the mitzvah (Shulchan Aruch, ibid. 6) a lulav should not be given to a minor,9The definition of the term "minor" in this context has been the subject of debate among the Rabbis. From the Rambam's phraseology, it appears that he includes all minors in this category. However, Rabbenu Nissim writes that a child of six or seven can transfer property and, hence, his return of the lulav is valid.Support for Rabbenu Nissim's position is brought from the Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 3:10), which relates that Rav Nachman bar Ya'akov gave his etrog as a present to his son and told him: "When you take possession of it and fulfill the mitzvah, return it to me." Nevertheless, the passage does not serve as conclusive proof, because the possibility exists that his son had already reached majority. The Shulchan Aruch (ibid. 6) follows the Rambam's view. since, according to Torah law, a minor can acquire articles10which are given to him by others who consciously desire that the minor acquire the property, in contrast to ownerless articles, which he cannot acquire according to Torah law (Maggid Mishneh, Hilchot Zechiyah Umatanah 4:7). but cannot transfer them to others.11The transfer of the ownership of an article requires a conscious decision. Torah law maintains that a child lacks intellectual maturity (דעת), and thus is incapable of making such a decision. Thus, [the minor's] return of the article is not considered to be a return [from a legal perspective].12i.e., although he has physically returned the article, the child still remains the legal owner.The Machaneh Ephraim (Hilchot Meshichah 2) notes that according to Rabbinic law, a child can transfer property that he owns to another. Thus, the Rambam's statements seem to imply that any of the four species that are acquired only according to Rabbinic law may not be used for this mitzvah.A very practical point can be derived from this concept. According to Torah law, property that is purchased changes ownership only after it has been paid for. The completion of a transaction when the property are taken by the purchaser (meshichah) is a Rabbinic institution. Accordingly, if a person purchased a lulav and etrog on the condition that he pay for it after the holiday - even though the seller willingly consented - the purchaser has only acquired the lulav and etrog according to Rabbinic law. Thus, based on this halachah, he would not be able to use it for the mitzvah.The above applies to the lulav and to each of the other species of the four taken with it.13The verse quoted above includes all the four species, and not only the lulav. Therefore... If one of them was borrowed, the person does not fulfill his obligation on the first day of the festival.
When partners purchase a lulav or etrog together, neither is1considered to be the owner of the species in its entirety. Therefore, neither is... able to fulfill his obligation with it on the first [day of the festival]2Bava Batra 137b relates that the requirement of owning a lulav includes not only having a share in it, but rather owning it entirely. unless his colleague gives him his portion as a present.3The principles mentioned in the previous halachah regarding giving a lulav as a present also apply to giving a share of it as a present.The Maggid Mishneh mentions a very frequent application of this concept: a lulav and etrog purchased by a synagogue for the use of all of its members. He quotes the Rashba, who explains that since the etrog was purchased with the intent that it be used by each member of that community, implicit in their agreement is that, on the first day, it will belong to each individual entirely at the time he uses it to fulfill the mitzvah.The Ramah (Orach Chayim 648:7) quotes this statement as halachah. However, the Magen Avraham 648:10 raises questions concerning it and suggests that each member of the community should grant his colleague his share as a present.Should brothers purchase etrogim from the funds [of their father's] estate, which they have not divided yet:4This is the case mentioned in Bava Batra (ibid.), from which the above principle is derived. In such an instance, the estate is considered to be the mutual property of all the brothers concerned. If one of them takes an etrog with the intent of fulfilling his obligation, [the following rules apply:] If he could eat it without the other brothers objecting,5it is considered to be his own. Hence,... he has fulfilled his obligation. If they would object,6and require that an equal division of the property be made before it was used, he cannot be considered to be the full owner of the etrog. Hence,... he does not fulfill his obligation until they give him their share [in the etrog] as a present.7The above principles apply only when the funds of the estate were used to purchase a number of etrogim. Since many fruits of the same species were purchased with the money from the estate, it is possible that the other brothers will not object to one brother's taking an etrog for his own use. However, if the money of the estate was used to buy a number of different species of fruit - e.g. ….If one brother bought an etrog and another a quince, or together they bought an etrog, a pomegranate, and a quince from the funds [of their father's] estate, which they have not divided yet,8we assume that the brothers would desire to have the property formally divided before using it. Hence, they are all considered to be mutual owners of the fruit. Thus,... one cannot fulfill one's obligation with the etrog until the others give him their share [in it] as a present, even though they would not object to his [use of it].
Even though it is a mitzvah to rejoice on all the festivals,1as Deuteronomy 16:14 teaches: "And you shall rejoice on your festivals." Though that verse is mentioned with regard to Sukkot, Deuteronomy 16:11 states with regard to Shavuot: "and you shall rejoice before God," and Rosh Hashanah 4b explains that an analogy is established to include Pesach as well. there was an additional celebration in the Temple on the festival of Sukkot,2The Rambam's words present a question: The Mishnah (Sukkah 5:1) refers to this celebration as Simchat Beit Hasho'evah, connecting it with the drawing of water for the water libation. (See Hilchot T'midim Umusafim 10:6-10.) Indeed, the Talmud (Sukkah 50b; see also the Rambam's commentary on the above-mentioned Mishnah) emphasizes that connection, quoting Isaiah 12:3: "And you shall draw water with happiness." However, here, the Rambam makes no mention of that water at all!We are forced to say that the Rambam views the verse from Isaiah as a mere asmachtah (an allusion from the Bible with which our Sages connected a verse to an independent concept) and that the celebration came about because of the unique nature of the Sukkot festival. Though this celebration was associated with the water libation, the latter is not the source for the practice. Indeed, the choice of the name Simchat Beit HaSho'evah (the celebration of the house of drawing the water), and not Simchat Hasho'evah (the celebration of the drawing of the water) allows for such an interpretation. (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XVII). as [Leviticus 23:40] commands: "And you shall rejoice before God, your Lord,3i.e., in the Temple for seven days."4Although this verse is used to derive the requirement of taking the lulav in Jerusalem for each of the seven days of the festival (Chapter 7, Halachah 13), its simple meaning remains.Nevertheless, this charge is not considered to be an independent commandment, but rather an extension (and an intensification) of the mitzvah of celebrating on the festivals. Thus, in Sefer Hamitzvot (Positive Commandment 54), the Rambam describes that mitzvah and explains that it includes "to celebrate with musical instruments and to dance in the Temple....This is Simchat Beit Hasho'evah."This explanation resolves another question: Mo'ed Kattan 8b teaches that one celebration should not be interposed upon another. For this reason, weddings are not held during the festivals so that the wedding celebrations should not clash with those of the festival.Thus, were one to consider the celebration of Simchat Beit Hasho'evah as associated with the water offering, one might ask why the Sages instituted such a celebration which might appear to overshadow the celebration of the festival itself. However, the above explanation resolves this difficulty as well, for as stated above, the Simchat Beit Hasho'evah celebration is an extension of the festival celebrations and not an independent matter. (See Likkutei Sichot, ibid.)What was done? On the eve of the first day of the festival,5Two reasons are given why the courtyard was not set up during the festival itself:a) It involved construction, which is forbidden on Chol Hamo'ed (Knesset Hagedolah)b) Preparing the courtyard before the festival would allow the celebrations to begin immediately after the departure of the festival (Kinat Eliyahu). they would set up a place in the Temple6in the open courtyard before the entrance to the Temple courtyard proper. This was called Ezrat Nashim - the women's courtyard - because in contrast to the Temple courtyard, women were allowed to enter the Ezrat Nashim even when they were not offering sacrifices. The Rambam describes the Ezrat Nashim in Hilchot Beit Habechirah 5:7. where women [could watch] from above, and men from below, so they would not intermingle with each other.7Originally, the men and the women would stand in separate sections on the same level. However, the Sages feared that, particularly during a time of celebration, such closeness might lead to frivolous interaction between the sexes, and decided to have a balcony constructed for the women (Sukkah 51b).The celebration would begin on the night after the first day of the festival.8Since, as explained in the following halachah, the celebration was not held on the first night of the festival. Similarly, on each day of Chol Hamo'ed, after offering the daily afternoon sacrifice, they would begin to celebrate for the rest of the day and throughout the night.9Sukkah 53a quotes Rabbi Yehoshua ben Chananyah as saying: "While we were celebrating at Simchat Beit Hasho'evah, our eyes saw no sleep."
What was the nature of this celebration?1The Mishnah (Sukkah 5:1-2) states:Whoever has not seen Simchat Beit Hasho'evah has never seen rejoicing in his life!...There were golden candelabras....There was not a courtyard in Jerusalem that was not illuminated with the light of Beit Hasho'evah.The pious and men of stature would dance before them with torches of fire in their hands and recite songs of praise. The Levites would play the harps, lutes, cymbals, and all other types of instruments on the steps...leading down from the Israelites' courtyard. The flute would be sounded2Indeed, from the Mishnah (Sukkah 5:1), which states: "The flute, for five or six days; this was the flute of Beit Hasho'evah," it appears that this was the major element of the celebration. and songs played on the harp, lute, and cymbals. [In addition,] each person would play on the instrument which he knew. Those who could sing, would sing.3See the quote from the Mishnah above. They would dance and clap their hands, letting loose and whistling, each individual in the manner which he knew. Words of song and praise were recited.4Note the following halachah and commentary.This celebration does not supersede either the Sabbath or the festival [prohibitions].5Since, as explained above, the celebration involved musical instruments, it would not be held on the first night of the festival (or on the Sabbath), when playing such instruments is forbidden (Hilchot Shabbat 23:4).The celebration is an extension of a Torah commandment, while the above prohibition is only Rabbinic in nature. Furthermore, it was held in the Temple, where Rabbinic prohibitions of this nature were usually suspended (אין שבות במקדש, Pesachim 65a). Nevertheless, since there is no specific Torah obligation to celebrate in this manner, the celebrations were suspended because of the Rabbinic prohibition (Likkutei Sichot, ibid.).
It is a great mitzvah to maximize this celebration.1for the experience of genuine Torah happiness is a fundamental and necessary element of our service of God, as explained in the following halachah. The common people and anyone who desired would not perform [in these celebrations];2Though they would attend, as mentioned in the final clause of the halachah only the greatest of Israel's wise men: the Rashei Yeshivot, the members of the high court, the pious, the elders, and the men of stature.3for it was only their celebration that could inspire the people with spiritual feeling. They were those who would dance, clap their hands, sing, and rejoice in the Temple on the days of the festival of Sukkot.4Sukkah 53a relates how Hillel the Elder would rejoice at Simchat Beit Hasho'evah. Other Sages would also participate. For example, Rabban Shimon ben Gamliel would juggle eight torches of fire and bow down so low he could kiss the ground. The Jerusalem Talmud (Sukkah 5:3) relates how Rabbi Shimon ben Yehotzedek would perform unique feats of jumping. However, the entire people5the men and the women - would come to see and hear - deriving joy from this passive participation. - the men and the women - would come to see and hear.
The happiness with which a person should rejoice in the fulfillment of the mitzvot and the love of God who commanded them is a great service.1By mentioning this concept at the conclusion - but as part - of the these halachot, the Rambam emphasizes how the celebration of the festivals is not just an isolated experience, but rather is intended to influence the totality of our service of God. The rejoicing of the festival of Sukkot enables us to appreciate true happiness in all aspects of our Torah service. Whoever holds himself back from this rejoicing is worthy of retribution, as [Deuteronomy 28:47] states: "...because you did not serve God, your Lord, with happiness and a glad2This verse comes after the full description of the curses and retribution which God will visit upon the Jewish people for their sins. From the Rambam's statements, it appears that it is the lack of happiness in the service of God, and not the sins themselves, which brought about this punishment.The Ari, Rabbi Yitzchak Luria, explains that even though the punishment comes for the sins, had the Jewish people served God with true joy and happiness, that happiness would have caused Him to overlook those transgressions, regardless of how serious they were. In contrast, a lack of happiness in the performance of the mitzvot demonstrates a deficiency in the person's awareness of the connection to God established thereby. heart."Whoever holds himself proud, giving himself honor, and acts haughtily in such situations is a sinner and a fool.3for he is concerned with himself, rather than with God. Concerning this, Solomon warned [Proverbs 28:10]: "Do not seek glory before the King."[In4i.e., God, in whose presence we are at every moment. contrast,] anyone who lowers himself and thinks lightly of his person in these situations5transcending his self-consciousness and committing himself to God totally, without any restrictions is [truly] a great person, worthy of honor,6his ability to open himself up to God allows him to serve as a medium for the expression of His greatness, and thus, his own personal prestige rises, because, as our Sages commented: "A king's servant is like a king." who serves God out of love.7See Hilchot Teshuvah, Chapter 10. Thus, David, King of Israel,8The mention of David's position further emphasizes the concept explained. Alternatively, a king has a connection to each of his subjects. Thus, mentioning the example of the king of Israel emphasizes how each Jew has a potential to achieve this rung of service. declared [II Samuel 6:22]: "I will hold myself even more lightly esteemed than this and be humble in my eyes," because there is no greatness or honor other than celebrating before God, as [II Samuel 6:16] states: "King David was dancing wildly and whistling before God."9When Michal, Saul's daughter, witnessed David's recklessness and total lack of inhibitions, she reproved him for conduct unbefitting a king. David answered her sharply, explaining that it is precisely this ability to give oneself totally over to Godliness which characterizes a Jewish monarch and makes him fit to lead the people in the service of God.Though the Rambam stresses how an approach of humility and happiness befits people of honor - as is obvious from the nature of the Sages' celebration of Simchat Beit Hasho'evah - these ideas also apply to every Jew. When an individual is conscious of God's constant presence, he will naturally be infused with these two emotions. He will feel his own smallness in God's presence, yet he will also feel real joy at the knowledge that God is with him at every moment, and that through his service of Torah and mitzvot, he can develop a greater connection with Him.May our service of God with joy hasten the time when "crowned with eternal joy" (Isaiah 35:10 , we will be able to "rejoice before God, your Lord, for seven days," in the Messianic Temple. May we merit it, speedily, in our days.
