=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
In the Gemara (Tractate Nedarim 2b), we maintain that our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: all intimations/ידות (i.e., a term for words uttered by a person conveying a certain intention that can be understood from the context or from the general subject of the statement, although it is not clearly and explicitly expressed – are intimations regarded as explicit statements) of vows are like vows; all substitutes/כנויי for the language of vows (i.e., and it is obvious that he intended his statement to be a vow, his words assume that status) are like vows. Which are intimations of vows? A person who says to his fellow: “I am forbidden by vow from you,” “I am separated from you,” etc. Which are substitutions of vows? “A person who states (see Mishnah 2 of this chapter): קונם/Konam, קונח/Konakh, קונס/Konas, etc., (i.e., a specific type of vow whereby one prohibits himself from eating something or deriving benefit from something or someone by saying: “That person or object is to a KONAM;” the word KONAM is a substitute for the Hebrew word for offering/קרבן – and is used in order to avoid uttering that word). The intimations of vows/ידות נדרים are like the handle of a utensil that one holds it by, so are intimations of vows by which vows are held. Substitutes for vows, like [Tractate Bava Metzia 58b] when one calls his neighbor by a nickname which is not the essence of the name [of that person].
מודר אני ממך – if he said one of these linguistic formulations: “I am forbidden by vow from you that I don’t eat your [food], or/and I taste your [food],” or “I am separated from you that I don’t eat your [food], or/and if I taste your [food],” or “I am distanced from you that I don’t eat your [food] or/and I don’t taste your [food],” this is an intimation of vows and it is forbidden to eat or to taste with him. But if he said to him: “I am forbidden by vow” alone, there is no implication in his words other than he doesn’t speak with him. And “I am separated from you” alone, implies that he will not engage in business with him, and “I am distanced from you” alone, implies that he will not sit within his four cubits, and does not prohibit eating with him unless he specified and stated with one of these linguistic formulations, “that I don’t eat [food] with you,” or “I don’t taste anything with you.”
רבי עקיבא היה חוכך וכו' (had some hesitation about deciding in favor of greater stringency) – meaning to say, rubbed/scratched his lips on against the other, but did not want to forbid explicitly, but it had appeared from his temperament/mind that it was forbidden.
כנדרי רשעים נדר בנזיר ובקרבן ובשבועה – if he said: “May this be upon me like the vows of wicked people whose vows in the case of a Nazir or in bringing a sacrifice or in taking of an oath if I eat this loaf, and he transgressed and ate it, he is liable to become a Nazir for thity days and to bring a sacrifice of a burnt offering and would liable for flogging/stripes like one who transgresses an oath on a statement (i.e., an oath taken by a person to reinforce a promise or an obligation or o confirm he veracity of a story –he brings a sacrifice based upon his financial situation/קרבן עולה ויורד ) because he mentioned in his oath the Nazir, and/or a sacrifice and/or an oath. But when he stated, “like the vows of the wicked,” since he wicked are those who make vows and take oaths, not the suitable people, for he suitable ones fear not to transgress (Deuteronomy 23:22): “[When you make a vow to the LORD your God,] do not put off fulfilling it, [for the LORD your God will require it of you, and you will have incurred guilt],” and they (i.e., the suitable/appropriate people) are warned not to bring forth an oath from their lips, and therefore “like the vows of the suitable/appropriate [people],” he has said nothing whatsoever.
וכנדבותם נדר נזיר ובקרבן (as their free-will offerings – he has made a binding vow in the case of a Nazir or in the case of bringing an offering) – if he said, “like the free-will offerings of the suitable/appropriate [people], I will be a Nazir or this is an offering if I eat this loaf,” and he consumed it, he is liable regarding becoming a Nazir, or in bringing a sacrifice, for the suitable/appropriate people sometimes make vows of becoming a Nazir in order to separate from prohibition. But when they make a free-will donation of a sacrifice that they bring their offering to the entrance of the Temple courtyard and sanctify it there in order that they will now come through it as a hindrance/stumbling-block. And the free-will offering is when he says, “May this be,” or “A vow be upon me.” Therefore, the worthy people make a free-will offering but do not make a vow, in order that one may not be led to commit an offernse through it.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
ואלו מותרין. חולין שאוכל לך (and these [vows] are not binding: may what I eat of yours be unconsecrated food) – he (i.e., the teacher of the Mishnah) took these merely as a sign, ust as unconsecrated food that I may eat of yours – there is no need for a request made to a Sage (i.e., if a person makes a vow or takes an oath, or consecrates property, and afterwards regrets having done so, he may go to a Sage and request that he release him from his vow). So also, all of these that we mention in our Mishnah in the first clause there is no need for a request made to a Sage.
כעורות לבובין (like hides pierced at the heart) – they wud make incisions in the animal while it is living opposite the heart and remove the heart and sacrifice it to idolatry, and this sacrifice to idolatry is prohibited to derive any benefit.
כחלת אהרן – who was first for the Kohanim (see Numbers 15:20 – “You shall make a gift to the LORD from the first yield of your baking, throughout the ages). And it cannot be something that is vowed, for Hallah and heave-offering/Terumah come as a vow or a free-will offering.
הרי זה מותר – as it states in Scripture (Numbers 30:3): “If a man makes a vow [to the LORD],” until he should make a vow with a thing that is vowed. But a sin-offering that I won’t eat with you , as we stated in the first chapter [of Tractate Nedarim, Mishnah 4], even though it is not something that is vowed, there is reason, for it is possible that he will bring a sin-offering through a vow, as for example, that he took a vow to be a Nazir, and is liable to bring a sin-offering [upon the conclusion of the thirty-day length of serving as a Nazir].
הרי את עלי כאמא (Lo, you are like mother to me) – even though this this is not a matter that is vowed, it is more severe from all of the others that are above, he requires a release from the Rabbis if he is an illiterate individual (i.e., “Am HaAretz) 
and we make an opening for retracting a vow from another place (i.e., reason) meaning to say, we request for him and opening and reason for his remorse. But it is not sufficient [to ask him]: Do you now regret [that you had vowed]? Or that your heart is upon you – that you bear a grudge (see Tractate Nedarim 21b), and all of this in order that he may not behave lightly in such a matter and that he should not become accustomed to forbid his wife upon him.
קונם שאיני ישן כו' – Lo, this is (Numbers 30:3): “he shall not break his pledge” according to the Rabbis, but from the Torah, there is no vow taking effect, for vows do not take effect other than on something that has substance (see Talmud Nedarim 15a).
קונם שאיני משמשך (that I will not have sexual relations with you) – In the Gemara (Tractate Nedarim 15b) a difficulty is raised if he is subservient to her, how is he able to release her subservience through his vow, for it is like prohibiting the produce of his fellow on his fellow? But it [i.e., the Gemara] responds, as, for example, when he stated that he takes a vow against enjoying the benefit of her sexual relations with me,” that he forbade this benefit upon himself, and we don’t feed a person something that is forbidden to him.
שבועה שאיני ישן וכו' – this is forbidden form the Torah, for oaths take effect whether there is something in it of substance, or whether it is on something that has no substance. But if he took an oath to not sleep for three consecutive days, night and day, he is flogged/whipped and he sleeps immediately, because he took an oath on something that is impossible to fulfill.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
ארבעה נדרים (vows intended for urging to buy/sell or while bargaining; vows made dependent upon an impossibility/an exaggeration; vows made in error; vows made on conditions unavoidably fulfilled/under compulsion) – all of them will be explained further on.
קונם שאני פוחת לך מן מסלע – KONAM this loaf of bread if I [pay] less to you than a Sela. And a SELA is four Denarim.
על השקל – it is one-half of a SELA.
שניהם רוצים בשלשה דינרים – but it was not in their hearts for the sake of a vow, but rather, the seller vowed to urge/encourage the purchaser that he should increase they money, and similarly, the purchaser, in order that the seller should lessen the cost of the purchase, therefore, it was not a vow. But even though that matters that are in the heart are not matters, where a matter can be proven like here, for such is the manner of all sellers and purchasers to do this, we follow after the things that are in the heart.
ר"א בן יעקב אומר אף כל הרוצה להדיר את חבירו כו' – The Gemara (Tractate Nedarim 23b) that our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: A person who wants that his fellow should eat with him but refuses him and forces him to take a vow, it is the vow intended for urging to buy/sell. And the person that wants that he will not vows will not be fulfilled all year will stand up on Rosh Hashanah and state, “every vow that I will someday make is nullified.” And that he will stand up on Rosh Hashanah is not exact, but rather, the same law applies at every time that he wishes and for every time that he establishes.
ובלבד שיהיה זכור – from the condition at the time of the vow, and his mind/intention is upon the condition that it will be fulfilled, then the vow is nullified. But if he is not reminded of the condition at the time of the vow and not at an interval equivalent to the time of speaking (i.e., the amount of time it takes to say in Hebrew, “Greetings to you, my teacher and rabbi”), from the time that he made the vow, the vow exists/endures. But it is not necessary to state that if he is reminded from the condition at the time of the vow and it is his intention that the condition will be nullified and vow existent, for it is clear that the vow exists. But the laws of oaths and vows are equivalent in this law. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
אין בין מודר. אלא דריסת הרגל – to pass through his land, or to lend out utensils that they don’t make in them food necessary for the Sabbath day, which are permissible for someone who took a vow of deriving food from him, but is forbidden if he took a vow to enjoying any benefit from him.
נפה וכברה רחים ותנור (winnow, basket used as a sieve, millstone, an oven) – that they prepare in them food necessary for the [Sabbath] day. And all the more so, a pot or a spit where the food stands within it. One who takes a vow against food that is taught in our Mishnah, is he who says to him: “KONAM: benefitting from your food is upon me.”
מקום שמשכירין כיוצא בהם (a place where these things are rented out) – for since it is the practice to rent out such things and he foregoes the rental payment, with those monies he can purchase food necessary for the [Sabbath] day and he made him take a vow from deriving benefit is brought through the food.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
השותפין – that each one of them a house in the courtyard, and the courtyard that is in front of the houses, both of them are partners in it But at the time when the courtyard has the law of division/partition, and as such there will be four cubits in the courtyard to each and every house in front of the house, and there will remain from the courtyard another four cubits to this one (i.e., person) and four cubits to that one (i.e., person), in this everyone admits that both of them are forbidden to enter into the courtyard until they divide it, for since the law of division/partition is there. But Rabbi Eliezer and the Rabbis do not disagree other than regarding a courtyard that does not have the law of division, as the Rabbis state that each of them enters through his fellow’s [property], but Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov holds that there is a retrospective designation (i.e., the legal effect resulting from an action selection or designation or disposal of things previously undefined for their purpose/ברירה) and this one goes to his and that one goes to his.
ושניהם אסורים להעמיד שם רחים וכו' – But Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov admits in all of these that the partners prevent each other, for it does not belong to permit for the reason of the retrospective designation, for since it is within his hand/power to prevent him, and if he doesn’t prevent him,it is found that he provides him benefit.
ופופין את הנודר למכור את חלקו – for we are concerned that after he sees his fellow entering, he will forget and will also enter. But when both are prohibited [from entering] we don’t concern ourselves, and specifically when he took a vow on his own not to enjoy benefit from his fellow is when we force him to sell his portion but if his fellow made him take a vow that he will not benefit from him, he is the victim of an unavoidable accident, and we don’t force him to see for what can he possibly do? But if you stated such, each partner should make his friend take a vow that he will not benefit from him in order that we can force him to sell his portion.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
הנודר מן המבושל – that he said: “KONAM: that which is cooked upon me [that I will not eat it].”
מותר בצלי ובשלוק – all that is cooked more than the appropriate amount of cooking is called שלוק (i.e., seethed, boiled to a pulp).
מעשה קדירה רך – that is eaten with bread/pita.
עבה – that is eaten without bread/pita.
ביצה טרמיטא (an egg boiled down to the size of a pill) – cooked in hot water and protecting it that it should not coagulate/curdle.
ובדלעת הרמוצה (a gourd made edible by baking in hot ashes) – a gourd that they preserve in hot ashes/embers , which is hot ashes and it becomes sweet in this

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
הנודר מן הירק. לא מצאתי אלא דלועין – and if it is a species of vegetable, why doesn’t he purchase it for him?
כן הדבר – and from there I bring a proof. Lest he say I did not find [anything] but pulse. And since I come to consult on the gourd, I can see that it is a kind of vegetable. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
קונם יין עד שתחשך – for such is the manner of language of human beings, for when they say, “today,” they want to say until the completion of the day.
שבת זו – he would stand in the middle of the week, and say, “this week is forbidden” – for the entire week.
והשבת לשעבר – and he is also prohibited on the sabbath day, for it is in the category of the week that past.
חודש זה אסור בכל החודש – if he is standing in the middle of the month and said, “this month,” he forbidden until the completion of the month, and the day of Rosh Hodesh of the month ahead, but it is permitted on the day of Rosh Hodesh because it is counted with the next month, and even if Rosh Hodesh is on the thirtieth [day] of the previous month. And similarly, this year, if he stood in the middle of the year and stated, “this year,” it is forbidden until the completion of the year, but it is permitted on Rosh Hashanah which is counted with the year that will come in the future.
שבוע זה – he was standing in the middle of the Shmittah year and stated, “this seven-year cycle,” he is forbidden until the completion of the Shmittah, and the seventh year is included within the Shmittah year that had passed.
אם אמר יום אחד, שבת אחת, חודש אחד, שנה אחת, שבוע אחד אסור מיום ליום – if he is standing in the middle of the day and states “one day” he is forbidden until the morrow at this time. And similarly, if he is standing in the eighth [day] of the month and stated, “[KONAM] this month is upon me,” he is forbidden until the eighth [day] of the next month. And similarly, for a year. And similarly, in the Shmittah year. And similarly, if he said, “KONAM that wine is forbidden upon me for an unspecified day, or week, or month, or unspecified year, even though he did not say “one day,” “one week,” “one month,” the law is the time of twenty-four astronomical hours. But one who says “KONAM that wine [will be forbidden] upon me today,” even though he is permitted when it it gets dark, he requires a request made to a Sage [to be released from his vow], as a decree that when he stated “today,” lest he (i.e., the Sage) come [to release him from his vow], when he stated, an unspecified day, that he switched/exchanged between “the day” to “today,” or between this week to an unspecified week. And similarly, for all of them.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
רבי אליעזר אומר פותחין לאדם בכבוד אביו ואמו – as, for example, that they would say to him: “if you would know that the world would say to your father and your mother, ‘see the rearing of your children that you raised, how much your children are lax in the taking of vows’ and it would be found that they despise their honor (i.e., that of their parents), you would not ever take a vow.”
וחכמים אוסרין – for we suspect that perhaps he would lie, for he is embarrassed to state that he would not allow him from taking a vow because of their honor, and it is found that the Sage pardons this vow without regret and there is no need to find for him an opening [to release him from his vow] at the time that he feels sorry on his own from the beginning.
יפחתו לו בכבוד המקום – he (Rabbi Tzadok) is raising an objection on the matter of Rabbi Eliezer, for just as that you open [to elicit regret] with the honor of his father and mother, and we don’t suspect that perhaps he will lie, let him open [to elicit regret] with the honor of “the Place” (i.e., God) and they will inform him, that if you had known that you would be called wicket before “the Place” (i.e., God), you would never take a vow? But the Sages said to him according Rabbi Eliezer, that from here, you will not find you will not support them, for even Rabbi Eliezer admits to this, specifically that he may lie, for a person a person is not so impudent that he would not set aside something for the honor of “the Place” (i.e., God), and it is not similar to that of Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel (see Talmud Nedarim 22a) who opened [to elicit regret] for that person (Proverbs 12:18): “There is blunt talk like sword thrusts [But the speech of the wise is healing].” That there he says to him from the Biblical verses like that which is taught in our Mishnah (see Tractate Nedarim, Chapter 9, Mishnah 4) that he is transgressing on (Leviticus 19:17): “You shall not hate your kinfolk in your heart,” (Leviticus 19:18): “You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against your countrymen.” But when we mention to him the honor of God (i.e., המקום ), then he certainly is lying. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
שבינו לבין אביו ואמו – as, for example when he made his father take a vow from his possessions,

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
נערה המאורסה – a girl who is twelve years and one-day old, and who brought forth two [pubic] hairs, is called a נערה/a young woman/lass, until six months. But a woman who is eleven years and one-day old, her vows are examined, if she knew for whom she made the vow, and in the name of whom she sanctified, her vow is vow, and even regarding her, her father and her husband annul her vows.
הפר האב ולא הפר הבעל – because it was possible to err and to explain [the phrase]: “her father and her husband annul her vows,”/"אביה ובעלה מפירין נדריה" as or her father or her husband, it teaches in he Mishnah:"הפר האב ולא הפר הבעל"/”if her father annulled her vows, but not her husband, etc.,” to inform us that both need to nullify [her vows].
ואין צריך לומר שקיים אחד מהם – if one of them confirmed [her vows] the second is not able to nullify them. But this tells us that even though the even though that one of them (i.e., the father or the husband was consulted that he established his confirmation, as we hold, we consult on the confirmation (i.e, the privilege of confirming a vow – see also Tractate Nedarim 10:7), , this one who was asked for confirmation cannot nullify any further, since both of them are not able to nullify [a vow] at the same time.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
ואלו נדרים – In the Gemara (Tractate Nedarim 80b) it explains that vows and oaths are taught, that in the language of the Sages, oaths are within the category of vows.
אם ארחץ ואם לא ארחץ – this is what it said: “the benefit of washing is forbidden upon me forever if I shall wash today,” behold this is a vow. “If I shall not wash, an oath that I shall not wash,” behold this is an oath. And similarly, “if I shall adorn myself, the benefit of adorning/dressing is forbidden upon me forever if I adorn myself today,” “if I don’t adorn myself,” is an oath that I will not adorn myself.
אמר ר"י אין אלו נדרי עינוי נפש (vows referring to privation of the necessities of life) – regarding the vow alone Rabbi Yossi disputes the first Tanna/teacher, and [when he] states that the benefit of washing is forbidden upon me if I shall wash today,” this is not a vow of privation of the necessities of life, for behold, it is possible for her that she will not wash today and that the benefit of washing won’t be forbidden upon her forever. But the prevention/refraining from washing for one day is not a privation of the necessities of life, for a neglected appearance for one day (by not bathing) is not considered self-neglect (see Tractate Nedarim 80a). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi. But whether the father or the husband, vows of privation of the necessities of life are ones that are absolved, as it is written (Numbers 30:17): “[These are the laws that the LORD enjoined upon Moses] between a man and his wife, and between a father and his daughter [while in her father’s household by reason of her youth],” there is an analogy between two laws that rest on a biblical intimation of the father to the husband. Just as the husband does not absolve anything other than vows of privation of the necessities of life, so also the father does not absolve anything other than vows of privation of the necessities of life. But Maimonides made the legal determination that the father absolves all vows and oaths, even those that are not referring to privation of the necessities of life, as it states (Numbers 30:6): “none of her vows or self-imposed obligations [shall stand].”
