=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Circumcision is a positive mitzvah1Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 215) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 2) consider this one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. [whose lack of fulfillment] is punishable by2Circumcision and the Paschal sacrifices are the only positive commandments for which the Torah prescribes punishment if they are not fulfilled. In both instances, the punishment is the same (karet). karet,3Premature death at the hand of God (Mo'ed Katan 28a) and a severe spiritual punishment, the "soul's being cut off," and not being granted a share in the world to come (Hilchot Teshuvah 8:1,5). as [Genesis 17:14] states: "And an uncircumcised male who does not circumcise his foreskin - this soul will be cut off from his people."4The citation of the verse from Genesis is significant. In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Chulin 7:6), the Rambam writes that our fulfillment of this mitzvah is not based on God's commandment to Abraham, but rather on the commandment issued to Moses (Leviticus 12:3), "On the eighth day, the child's foreskin will be circumcised." Nevertheless, the commandment to Abraham is still significant, and many particulars concerning circumcision are derived from it.A father5and not a mother (Kiddushin 29a) is commanded to circumcise his son,6Although when the son reaches the age of bar mitzvah, he is obligated by the mitzvah. Until that time, the father is responsible for the fulfillment of the mitzvah.The Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 2) questions the extent of the father's responsibility. If the father does not circumcise his son before the latter reaches majority, is the father still charged with the mitzvah (together with the son) or is the son solely responsible for the mitzvah?Likkutei Sichot (Vol. 11) explains that the question is dependent on a difference of opinion between the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds. The Babylonian Talmud (Kiddushin 29a) derives the mitzvah from the verse (Genesis 21:4), "And Avraham circumcised his son, Isaac." This indicates that the mitzvah is primarily the father's (although after the son reaches adulthood, he also becomes responsible). In contrast, the Jerusalem Talmud (Kiddushin 1:7) quotes as a proof-text for the mitzvah (Leviticus 12:3), "On the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised." The Korban Eidah explains that this implies the mitzvah is the son's. Since he is not able to perform it himself as a youth, however, his father is given the responsibility while the child is a minor.Likkutei Sichot continues, explaining that the Rambam's position is obvious from his discussion of the blessings recited for the mitzvot in Hilchot Berachot, Chapter 11. In Halachah 11 of that chapter, the Rambam explains that if one performs a mitzvah on one's own behalf, one should use the form, "who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to...." In contrast, if one performs a mitzvah on behalf of another person, one uses the form, "... and commanded us concerning...."Rav Yitzchak ben Sheshet (Responsum 131) notes that the Rambam (Hilchot Bikkurim 11:5) rules that one should recite the blessing "...concerning the redemption of a son," implying that the mitzvah is not the father's, but the son's (merely that as an infant, the son cannot fulfill it). In contrast, in Chapter 3, Halachah 1, the Rambam states that a father should recite the blessing "... to circumcise...," implying that the mitzvah is his. and a master, his slaves.7Here, the responsibility for the mitzvah is surely the master's. This circumcision is one of the stages in the process by which the slave attains the status of eved C'na'ani, an intermediate rung between a gentile and a Jew. He is obligated to fulfill all the negative commandments and all those positive commandments that are not associated with a specific time. (See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 12:11.) This applies both to those who are born in his home8i.e., a non-Jewish maidservant gave birth to a male child and to those purchased by him.9See Genesis 17:27, which relates that Abraham circumcised both these categories of servants. If the father or the master transgressed and did not circumcise them, he negated the fulfillment of a positive commandment.10Note the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Shabbat 19:6):If a person transgressed and did not circumcise his son or his servants born in his home... on the eighth day, he transgresses a very great and severe mitzvah, to which there is no comparison among the other mitzvot. He can never compensate for [the lack of fulfillment of] this mitzvah. His sin is much more severe than a person who did not build a sukkah on Sukkot, or one who did not eat matzah on Pesach. He is not, however, punished by karet, for karet is incurred only by the uncircumcised person himself.11This is obvious from the proof-text quoted above. The court is obligated to circumcise that son12Although when the son reaches the age of bar mitzvah, he is obligated by the mitzvah. Until that time, the father is responsible for the fulfillment of the mitzvah.The Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 2) questions the extent of the father's responsibility. If the father does not circumcise his son before the latter reaches majority, is the father still charged with the mitzvah (together with the son) or is the son solely responsible for the mitzvah?Likkutei Sichot (Vol. 11) explains that the question is dependent on a difference of opinion between the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds. The Babylonian Talmud (Kiddushin 29a) derives the mitzvah from the verse (Genesis 21:4 , "And Avraham circumcised his son, Isaac." This indicates that the mitzvah is primarily the father's (although after the son reaches adulthood, he also becomes responsible). In contrast, the Jerusalem Talmud (Kiddushin 1:7) quotes as a proof-text for the mitzvah (Leviticus 12:3 , "On the eighth day, the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised." The Korban Eidah explains that this implies the mitzvah is the son's. Since he is not able to perform it himself as a youth, however, his father is given the responsibility while the child is a minor.Likkutei Sichot continues, explaining that the Rambam's position is obvious from his discussion of the blessings recited for the mitzvot in Hilchot Berachot, Chapter 11. In Halachah 11 of that chapter, the Rambam explains that if one performs a mitzvah on one's own behalf, one should use the form, "who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us or slave at the proper time and should not leave an uncircumcised male among the Jewish people or their slaves.13Kiddushin, loc. cit., interprets Genesis 17:10, "You must circumcise every male," as a charge to the Jewish court, making them responsible for circumcising every member of the people.
We may not circumcise a person's son without his knowledge,1See Hilchot Chovel UMazik 7:13-14, where the Rambam describes the prohibition against "stealing" the performance of a mitzvah from a colleague, and the fine of ten gold pieces for doing so. The Ramah (Choshen Mishpat 382:1) explicitly associates this concept with circumcising a person's son without his knowledge. unless he has transgressed and did not circumcise him.2The Rambam's phraseology has raised questions among the halachic authorities. Is his intent that once the father has allowed the eighth day to pass, the obligation falls on the court, or is his intent that only after the father makes it obvious that he does not want to circumcise his son that they become responsible? Similarly, the question has been raised what should be done if the father is unaware that a son has been born to him, or is prevented from carrying out the circumcision by factors beyond his control. Should the circumcision be carried out on the eighth day, or should the family wait until the father returns? See Avnei Nezer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 318) and Rav Kapach's commentary. [In such an instance,] the court must circumcise3the obligation mentioned in the previous halachah falls upon them [the child] against [the father's] will.4Even if he protests, the mitzvah should be performed.If the matter does not become known to the court and they do not circumcise him, when [the child] reaches bar mitzvah, he is obligated to circumcise himself.5Tzafenat Paneach explains that there are three aspects to the mitzvah of circumcision:a) to remove the foreskin;b) to be circumcised;c) not to be uncircumcised. (See Chapter 2, Halachah 1.)< /p>The first aspect involves a single deed. The second and third dimensions, however, are ongoing qualities that a person continues to possess even after the deed of circumcision is completed. Thus, the Or Zarua quotes Menachot 43b, which relates that when King David entered the bathhouse, he was upset for he was "naked," without mitzvot. When he remembered that he was circumcised, he relaxed, realizing that he was still involved with the performance of a mitzvah.This indicates that, even years after his circumcision, he was considered to be fulfilling the mitzvah. In contrast, with regard to the mitzvot of tefillin and tzitzit, although he had just removed them, he was no longer considered to be involved in the performance of these mitzvot. With each and every day that passes after he has reached bar mitzvah, he negates a positive commandment.6Some of the manuscript editions of the Mishneh Torah state, "It is as if he negates a commandment." The mitzvah of circumcision is not negated until the person dies without fulfilling it. Unlike tefillin or tzitzit, where each day a person performs a different mitzvah, there is only one mitzvah of circumcision (Rav Kapach). He is not, however, liable for karet until he dies uncircumcised,7As mentioned above, there are two dimensions to the punishment of karet: premature death and the cutting off of the soul. According to the Rambam, a person who does not circumcise himself is liable only for the second aspect of this punishment, since until he dies, it is not known whether he will perform the mitzvah or not (Kessef Mishneh).The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statements, stating that each day he does not perform the mitzvah, he is liable for karet and is worthy of premature death. (Even according to the Ra'avad, were the person to circumcise himself, he would no longer be liable for karet). having intentionally8but not if he was unaware of the mitzvah or was prevented from fulfilling it by forces beyond his control [failed to perform the mitzvah].9The Rambam's phraseology raises the question whether a person is liable for karet if he initially failed to perform the mitzvah intentionally, and then was prevented from fulfilling it by forces beyond his control.
A master is obligated to circumcise both a slave who was born as the property of a Jewish owner1i.e., the "home-born slave" mentioned in Genesis 17:12 and a slave purchased from the gentiles.2Such servants are also mentioned in the above verse. [There is, however, a difference between the two.] A home-born slave should be circumcised on the eighth day [of his life].3as is a Jewish child. The above verse states that "all those born in your house" - i.e., also slaves - should be circumcised on the eighth day (Rashi, Shabbat 135b). In contrast, a slave who is purchased should be circumcised on the day he was purchased.4Since Genesis 17:13 repeats the commandment, "Circumcise all home-born [slaves] and those purchased with your money," we can assume that there are slaves who are to be circumcised immediately (Rashi, loc. cit.). If he was purchased on the day he was born, he should be circumcised on that day.5provided, of course, that the surgery will not affect the infant's health. (Note the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 49, which explains that both physically and spiritually, a child is not prepared for circumcision until the eighth day.)
There are, however,1certain exceptions to the rules mentioned in the previous halachah that are also mentioned in Shabbat 135b. There are some slaves that are purchased who should be circumcised on the eighth day [of their lives],2as explained in this halachah and3some home-born slaves who should be circumcised on the day they are born.4as explained in the following halachah.What is implied? Should one purchase a maidservant and purchase [the rights to] her fetus [separately],5This is possible when the maidservant herself belonged to one master and the fetus to another (Rambam in his responsa). when she gives birth, the baby should be circumcised on the eighth day. Although the fetus itself was purchased separately, since [the master] purchased his mother before the child was born,6the child is considered "home-born" and he should be circumcised on his eighth day.7The Kessef Mishneh relates that, according to the Rambam, even if the master at first purchased only the rights to the fetus, and then purchased the mother, since she gave birth while in his domain, the slave is considered "home-born," and is circumcised on the eighth day.
If a person purchased a maidservant for her offspring,1In his responsum cited above, the Rambam compares this to a person who buys a tree for its fruit - i.e., he is not the actual owner of the tree, but is entitled to all the fruit it produces. Similarly, in this instance, the master is not the owner of the maidservant; what he has purchased is the right to her offspring. Therefore, none of the offspring are considered "home-born," and must be circumcised immediately. or purchased a maidservant with the intent of not immersing her as a slave,2Through immersion in a mikveh, a female maidservant becomes a shifchah C'na'anit and attains the intermediate status mentioned in the Commentary on Halachah 1.As the Rambam mentions in the following halachah, it is possible to purchase a gentile slave and maintain possession of him or her without changing his or her status in the above manner. even though her offspring is born in his domain, the child should be circumcised on the day he was born.3The first instance mentioned does not require explanation. With regard to the second category, the Rambam elaborates:[This ruling was granted, because] this child is considered as if he alone has been purchased [by his master], and it is as if he purchased him this day. His mother is not included among the maidservants of the Jewish people, so that the child could be considered "home-born."4In the responsum cited above, the Rambam explains that the concept of a "home-born" slave is derived from God's commandment to Abraham. All the members of Abraham's household had accepted his beliefs and way of life. In contrast, a slave who is unwilling to accept the mitzvot cannot be considered part of a Jewish household, and her children are not "home-born." If his mother immersed herself after she gave birth,5This shows that the stipulation that she need not be immersed (see the following halachah) is nullified and considered of no consequence. Therefore, she is considered to be part of the household, and the child should be circumcised on the eighth day.6The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's decision and maintains that unless the mother immerses herself before giving birth, the child should be circumcised immediately. Rabbenu Nissim, in his notes to Shabbat 135b, supports the Rambam's decision, explaining that the Sages did not reach a final ruling on the matter, and hence the more stringent approach should be taken.
When a person purchases a slave from the gentiles and the slave does not consent1Note the difference of opinion in Yevamot 48b, whether this leniency is granted if the slave refuses outright to be circumcised. to be circumcised, we may be patient with him for twelve months.2lest he change his mind and accept his status within the Jewish people. It is forbidden to maintain him for any longer period while he remains uncircumcised, and one must sell him to gentiles.3He must, however, agree to accept the seven universal laws mentioned below. Otherwise, he should be slain (Kessef Mishneh).If, at the outset, while the slave was still in the possession of his gentile master, he made a stipulation that he would not be circumcised,4Rav Kapach maintains that the stipulation was made by the slave's master. Since the slave is considered to be chattel, his own say is of no concern. it is permissible to maintain him although he is not circumcised, provided he accepts the seven universal laws commanded to the descendants of Noah5The prohibitions against idol worship, cursing God, murder, theft, adultery, eating flesh taken from a living animal, and the obligation to establish a court system. (See Hilchot Melachim 9:1-2.) and becomes a resident alien.6In Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 10:6, the Rambam writes that it is forbidden to allow gentiles who do not accept these seven laws to dwell in Eretz Yisrael. Therefore, a gentile who does is called a resident alien - i.e., a non-Jew who may dwell among us.If he refuses to accept these seven laws,7The slave must formally accept the performance of these mitzvot in the presence of a Rabbinic court. he should be killed immediately.8The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam's decision depends on his statement (Hilchot Melachim 8:9) that we must do everything in our power to influence the gentiles to observe these seven laws.The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's statement, explaining that in the present era, we may not kill any gentiles for refusing to observe these seven laws. The commentaries differ whether the Rambam would accept the Ra'avad's decision (and his statement here is, like many of the other laws he states, reflective of the Messianic era), or whether permission is granted to kill a slave for refusing to follow these laws in the present age as well. A resident alien may be accepted only in the era when the laws of yovel9The Jubilee year are in effect.10The Jubilee must be observed only when the entire Jewish people are dwelling in Eretz Yisrael. Therefore, when the tribes of Reuven and Gad and half the tribe of Menasheh were exiled by the kingdom of Assyria (see II Kings, Chapter 16), the observance of the Jubilee was nullified (Hilchot Shemitah V'Yovel 10:8).
When a convert enters the congregation of Israel, he is obligated to undergo circumcision first.1Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 13:1-4 states:With three acts, Israel entered into a covenant [with God]: circumcision, immersion [in the mikveh], and [the offering of] sacrifices.... Similarly, with regard to future generations, when a gentile wants to enter into the covenant, take refuge under the wings of the Divine Presence, and accept the yoke of the Torah, he must undergo circumcision, immersion, and the offering of a sacrifice.The phrase "accept the yoke of the Torah" indicates that before performing these deeds, the prospective convert must resolve to fulfill the mitzvot. If he had been circumcised while he was a gentile,2and not by a Jew for the purpose of conversion. Note Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 13:7 which relates that even if a gentile circumcises himself for the purpose of conversion, it is insufficient. it is necessary to extract the blood of the covenant3a superficial cut is made on the shaft of the penis, and a small amount of blood extracted.The expression "blood of the covenant" is derived from the interpretation of Exodus 24:8, "This is the blood of the covenant which God established with you," in certain texts of Nedarim 31b and the Mechilta's interpretation of Zechariah 9:11, "Because of the blood of your covenant, I have sent forth your prisoners from the pit." on the day that he converts.4The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 268:2) states that one should wait until the wound of the circumcision is completely healed before immersing in the mikveh and completing the process of conversion.Similarly, a child who was born without a foreskin5Our Sages mention this as a sign of a high spiritual level, citing Moses and Shem (Noah's son) as examples of children born without a foreskin. must have blood extracted for circumcision6Were we to be sure the child did not have a foreskin, there would be no need for the extraction of blood. The blood is extracted lest the child have a thin foreskin that is not readily noticeable (Shabbat 135a). Note the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 263:4), which requires the extraction of blood and states that we must inspect such a child carefully - but gently - to see whether he possesses a thin foreskin or not. (Perhaps the expression "thin foreskin" refers to the membrane removed by pri'ah.)It must be noted that there are Rishonim (see Rashi,Shabbat 134a) who maintain that the extraction of the "blood of the covenant" is not a by-product of a search for a thin membrane, but rather serves an independent purpose: The Jews' covenant with God is established through their blood. on the eighth day.7Note Chapter 3, Halachah 6, which states that a blessing is not recited for this activity.The Ramah mentions several other instances when blood must be extracted: a child who was circumcised before the eighth day (Yoreh De'ah 262:1), circumcised at night ( loc. cit.), or circumcised by a gentile ( loc. cit., 264:1) should have blood extracted for the sake of fulfilling the mitzvah. (Note also the commentary on Chapter 2, Halachah 1.) An androgynous, a child with both male and female sexual organs,8Androgynous is a combination of the Greek words meaning "man" and "woman." (See Hilchot Ishut 2:24.) Note also Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 12:4, which states:The status of a tumtum and an androgynous is doubtful. Therefore, the stringencies of both a man and a woman are applied to them, and they are obligated by all [the mitzvot]. If, however, they transgress, they are not [punished by] lashing.Because of this unique status, an androgynous must be circumcised on the eighth day.9lest he be obligated to undergo circumcision.See Tiferet Yisrael (Shabbat 19:3), who writes:There are those who say there is no such thing as an androgynous. Their statements are false.... I beheld such a phenomenon with my own eyes. Twelve years ago, I myself circumcised a child with this condition. Similarly, a child born by Caesarian section10Shabbat 135a explains as follows: The commandment for circumcision on the eighth day (Leviticus 12:3  is stated directly after the verse that relates that a woman who gives birth becomes ritually impure. Since a woman does not contract ritual impurity when she gives birth by Caesarian section, one might think that the child need not be circumcised on the eighth day. Therefore, the Rambam clarified the matter. (See also Halachah 11.) and a child who has two foreskins11This refers to a birth abnormality. Rashi (Shabbat 135b) mentions two interpretations: a person with a single penis that is covered by two foreskins; alternatively, a person with two penises. should both be circumcised on the eighth day.12Nevertheless, as explained in Halachah 11, none of the individuals mentioned in this halachah are circumcised on the eighth day if it falls on the Sabbath.
Circumcision is performed only during the day,1This applies to all circumcisions - those of children, servants, and converts after the rising of the sun,2This refers to הנץ החמה, the rising of the sun on the horizon. as [Leviticus 12:3] states, "On the eighth day...," i.e., during the day,3only, and not at night.4In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Megillah 2:4), the Rambam writes that the day extends from dawn to the appearance of the stars. It is preferable, however, to perform all acts that must be carried out during the day after the rising of the sun.Although according to the Rambam, the day extends until the appearance of the stars, circumcision should be carried out before sunset (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 266:9).The proof-text quoted mentions the eighth day. Nevertheless, Yevamot 72b uses the rules of Biblical exegesis to demonstrate that [This applies to a circumcision performed] at the appropriate time, the eighth day [after birth], and [to a circumcision performed] after the appropriate time, from the ninth day and onward.If one performed the circumcision5alot hashachar, the appearance of the first rays of the sun, approximately an hour before the sun itself actually appears on the horizon. after dawn, it is acceptable. It is acceptable [at any time] throughout the entire day. Nevertheless, it is a mitzvah to [perform the circumcision] early, in the beginning of the day, since "the eager perform mitzvot early."6Pesachim 4a derives this concept from the description in Genesis 22:3 of Abraham's rising early in the morning to perform the akedah.
When a circumcision [is performed] at its appropriate time,1on the eighth day. [its performance] supersedes [the prohibition against labor]2Cutting off the foreskin is otherwise forbidden because it causes bleeding (Hilchot Shabbat 8:7-8). on the Sabbath. When it [is] not [performed] at its appropriate time, [its performance] does not supersede [the prohibition against labor] on the Sabbath3Shabbat 132a relates that the verse, "On the eighth day, the child's foreskin will be circumcised," is a Torah decree, requiring circumcision on the eighth day regardless of the day on which it falls. or the festivals.4The observance of the Sabbath and festivals involves both a positive and negative commandment. Therefore, circumcision, which is merely a positive commandment, does not supersede their observance. Whether or not it is performed at its appropriate time,5Note Rav Kapach, who asks how is it possible for a sign of tzara'at to be already definitely determined as such by the eighth day of a child's life. [its performance] supersedes [the prohibition against removing signs of] tzara'at.6Tzara'at is a skin condition resembling leprosy. Deuteronomy 24:8 forbids removing such a mark, and Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 308) considers this to be one of the 365 prohibitions of the Torah. (See also Hilchot Tum'at Tzara'at, Chapter 10.)What is implied? If there was a sign of tzara'at on the foreskin, it may be cut off with the foreskin. Although there is a prohibition against cutting off the signs of tzara'at, the performance of a positive commandment supersedes the observance of a negative commandment.7In contrast to the permission granted to circumcise on the Sabbath, this is not an exception made with regard to circumcision, but rather a general rule that applies throughout Torah law (see Hilchot Tzitzit 3:6).
Just as the circumcision of sons supersedes [the prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath, so too, the circumcision of those slaves who are circumcised on the eighth day [of their lives]1The "home-born" slaves mentioned in Halachot 3-4. In contrast, slaves who were purchased, and therefore should be circumcised on the day they were purchased (or born), should not be circumcised on the Sabbath. supersedes [the prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath when the eighth day [of their life] falls on the Sabbath.2Kiryat Melech cites Pirkei D'Rabbi Eliezer, Chapter 29, which relates that Abraham circumcised all his servants on Yom Kippur.Significantly, Rabbenu Yerucham differs, and writes that only the circumcisions of Jews, and not of their servants, supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 267:2) quotes the Rambam's view. There is [one] exception3a slave whose mother did not immerse herself until after she gave birth. - See Halachah 5 and commentary. - a slave whose mother did not immerse herself until after she gave birth. Although such a slave is circumcised on the eighth day, his circumcision does not supersede [the prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath.4When the eighth day of such a person's life falls on the Sabbath, he is circumcised on Sunday, the ninth day of his life.
[The circumcision of the following individuals] does not supersede [the prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath:a child who was born without a foreskin;a1Since, as stated in Halachah 7, the blood is extracted from him only because of a suspicion that he has a hidden foreskin, this activity does not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions. child who was born in the eighth month of pregnancy before his development was completed; he is considered to be a stillborn, for he will not live;a2As explained in Halachah 13, the circumcision is not carried out on the eighth day because of the probability that the child will not live. child born by Caesarian section;an3See Halachah 7. androgynous; anda person with two foreskins.4because we are unsure of the nature of the obligation of circumcision in these instances.These individuals are circumcised on [the following] Sunday, the ninth day of their lives.5They should not be circumcised before the eighth day.
When a child is born beyn hash'mashot,1the period between sunset and the appearance of three stars. (See Hilchot Shabbat 5:4.) which is a period when it is undetermined whether it is considered day or night, we count from the night,2Were we to count from the day, it is possible that the circumcision would be carried out before the proper time. and he is circumcised on the ninth day [following the day he was born], which could be the eighth day.3The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 262:7) states that night depends on the appearance of three stars, and not on when the evening service is recited.When a child is born beyn hash'mashot on Friday,4he should not be circumcised on the following Friday, as explained above. Nor should he be circumcised on the following Sabbath (although it is the ninth day of his life), since his circumcision does not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions, because the Sabbath prohibitions are never superseded because of a doubtful situation. Rather, he should be circumcised on [the following] Sunday.5Thus, he is circumcised on the 10th day of his life. (See Shabbat 19:5.)
[The following principles apply when] a child is born in the eighth month [of pregnancy]:1The comprehension of this and the following halachah are dependent on the following two Talmudic passages:[The prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath are superseded for [the circumcision of a child] born in the seventh month, but not for a child born in the eighth month (Shabbat 135a).A child born in the eighth month is like a stone and may not be carried [on the Sabbath]. His mother may, however, lean over him and nurse him.... Rabbi states: [This is when] his physical features reflect his [lack of development]; i.e., when his hair and nails are not completely formed.[Rabbi's statements imply that] if [his hair and nails] are completely formed, he is a baby that should have been born in the seventh month, but whose birth was delayed (Yevamot 80b).From these passages, it appears that the Sages considered that there were two periods of gestation that could produce healthy babies, a seven-month period and a nine-month period. Therefore, a baby who was born in the seventh month was considered to be healthy, and circumcision could be performed on the Sabbath.In contrast, a baby born in the eighth month was generally considered to be unhealthy. Not only was the baby not to be circumcised on the Sabbath, but moving it at all was forbidden. Since it was likely to die, it was considered to be muktzeh. If, however, a baby born in the eighth month looks healthy, we assume that it should have been born in the seventh month, but its birth was delayed. Therefore, it is considered a healthy baby and it may be circumcised on the Sabbath.We have used the past tense in the above explanation, because these laws are no longer practiced, and all babies are allowed to be moved on the Sabbath. Tosafot, Shabbat, loc. cit., state that at present, it is no longer possible to determine exactly when a child was conceived, and we therefore do not know the month of pregnancy the mother was in. Furthermore, the advances in medical technology have enabled the lives of many premature babies to be saved despite the fact that, without these new developments, these babies would surely not have survived. At present, it is considered a mitzvah to try to save the lives of any premature babies, even if doing so involves carrying out forbidden labors on the Sabbath.Also, it must be emphasized that, as stated in Halachot 16-18, a child is circumcised only when it is healthy and there is no danger involved. This is surely relevant with regard to premature infants. Rarely, if ever, would a doctor grant permission for such a baby to be circumcised on the eighth day of his life. If the child's nails and hair are completely formed, we assume that this is a completely formed infant that should have been born in the seventh month, but whose birth was delayed. Hence, the baby may be carried on the Sabbath, is not considered to be a stone, and may be circumcised on the Sabbath.If, however, when the baby was born, its hair and nails were incompletely formed, we can be certain that this child is in its eighth month of development and should not have been born until the ninth month, but was born prematurely. Therefore, he is considered as a stone and may not be moved on the Sabbath.Nevertheless, if such an infant remains alive for thirty days, he is considered to be a child who will live and is governed by all the same rules as other infants.2Among the ramifications of this decision are that the child's mother is free of the obligations of yibbum and chalitzah. (See Hilchot Yibbum 1:5.) Whenever a human child lives longer than thirty days, it is no longer considered to be a stillborn.
[The following rules apply when] a child is born in the seventh month of gestation: If a child is born with his limbs completely formed,3Our translation is based on the commentary of the Maggid Mishneh, Hilchot Yibbum 1:5. According to this interpretation, the child's hair and nails need not be completely formed. The Kessef Mishneh offers a different interpretation. Significantly, however, in his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 266:11), Rav Yosef Karo accepts the Maggid Mishneh's interpretation. we assume that he will live and he should be circumcised on the eighth day [even if it falls on the Sabbath].If there is a question whether a child4According to the Maggid Mishneh's interpretation mentioned above, this refers to an instance when the child's limbs are completely formed, but his hair and nails are not. The date of his birth, however, creates a problem, because he appears to have been born in the eighth month.[With regard to this law, the Shulchan Aruch ( loc. cit.) does not accept the Maggid Mishneh's interpretation. It is, however, quoted by the Ramah.] was born in the seventh month or in the eighth month, he can be circumcised on the Sabbath. The rationale is: If he was born in the seventh month and his limbs are completely formed, it is appropriate that [his circumcision] supersede [the prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath. If he was born in the eighth month, circumcising him [does not constitute a violation of the Sabbath prohibitions].5This rationale is not used to allow the circumcision of a child who was definitely born in the eighth month, because the Rabbinic prohibition of muktzeh is in effect. Although the Sages did not enforce that prohibition in a case of doubt (the present halachah), they did apply it when no doubt about the period of gestation exists (the previous halachah). It is like cutting meat, because he is like a stillborn if he is, in fact, born in the eighth month.
When a child's head emerges from his mother's birth canal beyn hash'mashot on Friday, but his entire body does not emerge until after the Sabbath night [has commenced], the child should not be circumcised on the Sabbath.6Niddah 42b relates that the time when a child's head emerges is considered the hour of birth.Whenever a child's circumcision does not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions, [such circumcision] also does not supersede the prohibitions of the first day of a festival.7See Halachah 9, which equates circumcision on festivals to circumcision on the Sabbath. In this halachah, the Rambam is adding that the prohibition against circumcision on the eighth day when it falls on the Sabbath in the various instances mentioned in Halachot 11-13 also applies on festivals. It does, however, supersede the prohibitions of the second day of a festival.8Since the celebration of the second day of a festival is only Rabbinic in origin, the fulfillment of the mitzvah of circumcision takes priority.This represents the Rambam's view. Rabbenu Asher differs and maintains that only a circumcision that would be performed on the eighth day, were it to fall on the Sabbath, should be performed on the second day of a festival. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 266:8) quotes Rabbenu Asher's view, while the Siftei Cohen 266:8 follows the Rambam's position. [Significantly, the Noda biYhudah (Orach Chayim, Responsum 30) and the Chatam Sofer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 250) interpret the difference of opinion between the Rambam and Rabbenu Asher as applying only when the circumcision is definitely not being performed on the eighth day. (See notes 10 and 11.) According to their view, even Rabbenu Asher agrees that when a child is born during beyn hash'mashot eight days before the second day of a festival, he may be circumcised on that second day of the festival. On Rosh HaShanah, however, it does not supersede [the prohibitions] of either the first or the second day.9As explained in Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 1:21-24, the rules governing the celebration of the second day of Rosh HaShanah differ from those governing the celebration of the second days of other festivals. The two days of Rosh HaShanah share the same level of holiness, and all the prohibitions that apply on the first day apply on the second, with the exception of the laws of burial. (See also Hilchot Kiddush HaChodesh 5:7-8.)Thus, if a child was born during beyn hash'mashot a week before Rosh HaShanah in a year when the two days of Rosh HaShanah are followed by the Sabbath, the child is not circumcised until the twelfth day of his life (Shabbat 19:5). Similarly, a circumcision that is not carried out at the appropriate time10This refers to instances when a child was sick and the circumcision was delayed, and the like. does not supersede [the prohibitions of either of] the two days of Rosh HaShanah.11From the Rambam's phraseology, it appears that he allows such circumcisions to be carried out on the second day of other festivals. See note 8.
A sick person1This applies not only to children who are circumcised on the eighth day of their lives, but also to those (e.g., converts or slaves) who are circumcised when they are older. should not be circumcised until he regains his health.2lest the child's life be endangered. (See Halachah 18.) Seven full days should be counted from the time he regains his health until he is circumcised.3In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shabbat 19:5), the Rambam writes:Until he fully recovers from his illness and the weakness from his sickness passes. He should wait seven days from the time the weakness passes.... Only afterwards, should he be circumcised.Thus, we see that the Rambam intends that the person to be circumcised fully regain his health, and then wait an additional seven days.When does the above apply? When he recovers from high fever4Our translation is based on the Kessef Mishneh. or from a similar illness.5i.e., an illness that affects a person's entire body (Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 262:2) If, however, a person's eyes hurt, as soon as his eyes heal he may be circumcised immediately.6i.e., on the same day of his recovery. Note the Turei Zahav 262:3, which explains that since the circumcision has been postponed, it may be further delayed and should not be carried out on Thursday or Friday, so that the child will not have pain on the Sabbath. The same applies in all similar circumstances.7i.e., sicknesses in which the person's entire body is not affected.
A child whose complexion is very yellowish12The Rambam is referring to infantile jaundice, which is common in many newborns. on the eighth day of his life13The Bayit Chadash (Yoreh De'ah 263) and the Binyan Shlomo interpret the Rambam's phraseology as indicating that, in contrast to the sicknesses mentioned in the previous halachah, it is not necessary to wait seven days after the child's recovery in these instances. This is the common practice today. should not be circumcised until his blood recovers and his complexion returns to that of an ordinary healthy child.Similarly, if his complexion is overly red,14At present, if the child's skin color is not normal (regardless of the tinge), it is customary to delay the circumcision. as if he had been painted, he should not be circumcised until his blood recovers and his complexion returns to that of an ordinary healthy child.15Shabbat 134a relates that once, a woman approached Rabbi Natan HaBavli while he was visiting a distant community. She explained that her first two children had died after being circumcised, and was concerned whether she should circumcise her third son or not. Rabbi Natan inspected the baby and saw that he was extremely red. He advised that the circumcision be delayed until the child's complexion returned to the norm. His advice was followed and the child survived. In appreciation, the family named him Natan. This is an example of sickness, and great care must be taken regarding this matter.
When a woman circumcised her first son and he died because the circumcision sapped his strength, and similarly, circumcised her second son and he also died because of the circumcision, she should not circumcise her third son at the appropriate time. Rather, she should wait until he becomes older and his strength increases. [This applies regardless of whether] the first two children were sired by the same father or not.We should not circumcise a child who is afflicted with any sickness at all, since the danger to life takes precedence over everything. Circumcision can be performed at a later date, while it is impossible to bring a single Jewish soul back to life.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
Circumcision may be performed by anyone.1Although a father is commanded to circumcise his son, if he is not present or cannot perform the mitzvah, it may be performed by another person. Even a person who is himself not circumcised,2This refers to a Jew who is not circumcised. The Kessef Mishneh explains that it refers to a person who was not circumcised because his brothers died because of circumcision. A Jew who intentionally fails to circumcise himself, however, should not be allowed to circumcise others. Rav Yosef Karo also quotes this ruling in the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 264:1).Note also the Ramah (ibid.), who states that an apostate should not be allowed to circumcise others. a slave,3Although a slave is not a full-fledged member of the Jewish community, he is obligated to perform certain mitzvot and is himself circumcised. a woman,4Avodah Zarah 27a allows a woman to perform a circumcision, because "a woman is considered as if she is circumcised." The matter is, however, one of debate, and other Sages do not allow a woman to perform a circumcision. Tosafot follow this view and their opinion is quoted by the Ramah (ibid.). or a minor5This is allowed because a minor will ultimately be obligated to perform all the mitzvot and is circumcised himself. may perform the circumcision, if an adult male is not present.6i.e., if possible, an adult male should be charged with the fulfillment of this mitzvah. A gentile, however, should not be allowed to perform the circumcision at all.7The Chatam Sofer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 132) explains that when a gentile performs a circumcision, the mitzvah is not performed at all... Nevertheless, if he does so, there is no need for a second circumcision.8because the deed has already been completed. (See also Sha'agat Aryeh, Responsum 54.)This ruling revolves around the conception that there are two dimensions to circumcision:a) the mitzvah of actually cutting off the foreskin;b) the effect of that cutting, that the person is circumcised.There are, however, other explanations of the Rambam's ruling. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the decision revolves upon whether or not circumcision must be carried out lishmah, for the sake of the fulfillment of the mitzvah.The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 264:1) rules that although a second circumcision is not required, blood should be extracted. This is the accepted practice today. Some authorities maintain that even the Rambam requires such a step.Any utensil may be used for circumcision, even a flint,9See Exodus 4:25, which relates that Tziporah (Moses' wife) performed a circumcision with such a utensil. glass, or any article that cuts. One should not circumcise with the sharpened side of a reed, because of the danger involved.10Chulin16b explains that we are afraid that a splinter from the reed may damage the penis. The optimum manner of performing the mitzvah is to use an iron utensil11The Targum Yonatan interprets Joshua 5:2 as an indication that iron was used for circumcision even at that early age. The Prishah (Yoreh De'ah 284:7) relates that this custom was instituted after Goliath's iron helmet split open before David's stone. God promised iron that, in recognition of its act on behalf of the Jews, they would use it for a positive purpose in future generations. The Mishnah (Shabbat 19:1) refers to the use of iron utensils for circumcision as an accepted custom. - either scissors or a knife. Throughout the Jewish community, it has become customary to use a knife.12See the Jerusalem Talmud, Shabbat 19:6.
How is the circumcision performed? The foreskin that covers the crown of the penis is cut off until the entire crown is revealed.1i.e., all the tissue of the foreskin until its ridge must be removed. [This step is referred to as milah.]Afterwards,2The pri'ah should be carried out after the circumcision itself. Today, there are some mohalim who insert a utensil and lift up the membrane before the circumcision, and then cut off the foreskin and the membrane together. Many contemporary authorities have criticized this approach. the soft membrane that is beneath the skin should be split along the mid-line with one's nails3The Yalkut Shimoni, Vol. II, Note 723, states that nails were created for this purpose. and peeled back to either side until the flesh of the crown is revealed.4Preferably, no portion of the foreskin or the membrane should remain. See Chatam Sofer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum13 248). [This step is referred to as pri'ah.]Afterwards, one should suck5Traditionally, the mohel sucks out the blood with his mouth. Nevertheless, in previous generations, the Rabbis did grant license to use a pipette because of the possibility that germs in the mohel's mouth might infect the child. Today, there are authorities who suggest the use of a pipette because of the danger that the mohel could contract AIDS. the place of the circumcision until all the blood in the further reaches is extracted, lest a dangerous situation arise.6The Tiferet Yisrael (Shabbat 19:2) relates that internal bleeding caused by the circumcision could cause the penis to swell, and applying suction to remove the blood averts that danger. The Tiferet Yisrael also writes that a danger exists that applying too strong a suction will rupture the blood vessels and cause excessive bleeding. Therefore, he recommends that one should apply gentle suction. [This step is referred to as metzitzah.] Any [mohel] who does not perform metzitzah should be removed from his position.7because of the danger to which he exposes the children. After one has performed metzitzah, one should apply a bandage, a compress, or the like.8to stop the bleeding and assist the healing of the wound.
There are strands of flesh that disqualify a circumcision [if they are not removed], and strands of flesh that do not disqualify a circumcision.What is implied? If, [after circumcision,] a portion of the foreskin is left that covers the majority of the crown of the penis' height,1Rashi, Shabbat 137b, states that surely if the foreskin is left on the majority of the circumference of the penis' crown, it is unacceptable. When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 264:5) states that if the majority of the height of the crown is left covered in any one place, the circumcision is not acceptable. Thus, even a thin strand of skin that covers either the majority of the height or the majority of the circumference of the crown can disqualify the circumcision. the child is considered to be uncircumcised, and this flesh is considered a tzitz that disqualifies the circumcision.2A second circumcision is required in such an instance, and a blessing is recited when performing it.If only a small portion of flesh remains which does not cover the majority of the crown of the penis' height, it is considered to be a tzitz that does not disqualify the circumcision.3See the following halachah.
While the person performing the circumcision is involved in the operation, he should go back and remove both the tzitzim that disqualify the circumcision and the tzitzim that do not disqualify the circumcision.4As mentioned in Halachah 6, this ruling applies even when the circumcision is being carried out on the Sabbath. Once he has interrupted his activity, he must return and remove any tzitzim that disqualify the circumcision,5Since, as explained in the previous halachah, unless this flesh is removed, a second circumcision is necessary. but he does not return to remove anytzitzim that do not disqualify the circumcision.6The Rambam's phraseology is somewhat problematic. The Beit Yosef (Yoreh De'ah 264) explains that the Rambam's intent is that we are not required to remove this flesh. In contrast, the Sha'agat Aryeh (Responsum 50) interprets the Rambam as stating that, once the mohel has interrupted his activity, he is forbidden to return and cut off the remaining flesh. (The Sha'agat Aryeh himself questions the Rambam's decision. The Merkevet HaMishneh explains that since the circumcision is acceptable, it is forbidden to expose the child to further pain.)The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 264:5) rules that if the circumcision is performed during the week, one should remove this flesh. This ruling is followed throughout the Jewish community today.When one performs a circumcision without performing pri'ah, it is considered as if the circumcision was not performed.7The Babylonian Talmud relates that although pri'ah is not mentioned in the Torah, nor was Abraham commanded to carry out this activity, it is part of the oral tradition (halachah leMoshe miSinai), which may not be ignored (Shabbat 137b, Yevamot 71b). The Jerusalem Talmud (Yevamot 8:1) differs, and uses the principles of Biblical exegesis to derive the obligation of removing the membrane.
[The following ruling is given when]1a circumcision was performed properly, but a child's flesh is soft and hangs loosely, or if he is very fat and,2there is flesh protruding over the crown of the penis and therefore, it appears that he is not circumcised.3Were this condition to result from an improper circumcision, a second circumcision would be required. Since the circumcision was performed correctly, such measures are not necessary. Nevertheless, We should observe him when he has an erection:4when the penis is extended and its flesh taut if he appears circumcised at that time,5There is no need for the entire crown to be revealed; as long as one third of it is not covered by the flesh, it is acceptable (Terumat HaDeshen 264). it is unnecessary to do anything more. One must, however, correct the flesh on the sides, because of the appearance it creates.6The flesh should be held back with bandages to prevent it from covering the crown. There is, however, no necessity for an additional operation even if these measures are not successful (Terumat HaDeshen, ibid.).If, however, he does not appear to be circumcised when he has an erection,7if more than two-thirds of the crown is covered the loose hanging flesh on the sides should be cut off until the crown of the penis is revealed while it is erect.8The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 264:6) explains that, in this instance - in contrast to the original circumcision - it is not necessary to reveal the entire crown; it is necessary only to reveal a minimal portion.This9second operation was ordained by the Rabbis. According to the Torah itself, even though he [appears] uncircumcised, since he was circumcised once,10properly and all the flesh removed from the crown of the penis there is no obligation to circumcise him again.
Anything that is necessary for the circumcision [itself] may be performed on the Sabbath.1As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 9, when a circumcision is carried out on the eighth day of a child's life, it may be performed on the Sabbath, with the exception of several unique instances. We may perform milah, pri'ah, and metzitzah,2the three phases of the circumcision mentioned in Halachah 2. return and remove the tzitzim that disqualify the circumcision even though one has interrupted one's activity,3This is permitted because, until these strands of flesh are removed, the obligation to circumcise the child on the eighth day has not been fulfilled. (See Halachah 3 and commentary.) Hence, just as we are allowed to carry out the operation on the Sabbath at the outset, we are allowed to complete its performance by removing these strands of flesh. return and remove the tzitzim that do not disqualify the circumcision if one has not interrupted one's activity,4Even according to the opinion that allows one to return and remove these strands of flesh during the week, it is forbidden to do so on the Sabbath because the circumcision is acceptable. Hence, no further cutting is permitted because of the Sabbath laws. and bandage the circumcision afterwards.5In general, medication may be applied on the Sabbath only when a danger to life is involved. The Sages considered circumcision to be in this category. The preparation of articles that are necessary for the circumcision does not supersede the prohibitions against labor on the Sabbath.6The license the Torah grants for circumcision to be performed on the Sabbath applies only to the deed of circumcision, which is itself a mitzvah. All the preparatory stages that make circumcision possible must be performed beforehand, for they are not elements of the actual performance of the mitzvah (Kiryat Sefer).What is implied? If we are unable to find a knife, a knife may not be made on the Sabbath, nor may we bring it from place to place.7i.e., from a public domain to a private domain It is even forbidden to bring it from one courtyard to another courtyard in an alleyway if there is no eruv.8Here, there is no Torah prohibition involved. Nevertheless, Although the [mitzvah of] eruv is only Rabbinic in origin, it is not superseded by [the necessity] to bring a knife,9Pesachim 92a cites this as an example of the power of Rabbinic law. Although karet (the punishment for not fulfilling the mitzvah of circumcision) is involved, the Sages enforced their decree against carrying in such places and forbade bringing the knife. since it was possible to bring the knife on Friday.
Herbs may not be ground to [use for the compress], nor may water be heated [to wash the child],  nor may a compress be prepared,8A compress that is prepared before the Sabbath may be applied on the Sabbath. It is, however, forbidden to prepare the compress on the Sabbath (see Hilchot Shabbat 23:11). nor may wine and oil be mixed [on the Sabbath itself].9The mixture of wine and oil was applied to the wound to heal it.If cumin was not ground on Friday, one may chew it on the Sabbath10According to Torah law, a labor is forbidden on the Sabbath only when it is performed in its usual fashion. In most cases, however, such activities are forbidden by the Rabbis. Nevertheless, in this instance, since the herbs are being prepared for a remedy and they are not being prepared in the normal manner, the Sages did not forbid their preparation (see Hilchot Shabbat 21:26). and apply it [to the wound]. If one did not mix wine and oil together, they may each be applied individually. This is the general rule: Whatever can be performed on Friday does not supersede [the prohibitions against labor on] the Sabbath. Should one forget and not prepare the accessories necessary for the circumcision, the circumcision should be performed on the ninth day.
If a child was circumcised on the Sabbath and, afterwards, the hot water was spilled or the herbs [for the compress] were scattered, one may do anything that is necessary for him on the Sabbath, because of the danger involved.In a place where it is customary to wash a child, he may be washed on the Sabbath on the day of his circumcision, both before the circumcision and after the circumcision, and on the third day of his circumcision. The child's entire body may be washed as well as the place of the circumcision itself. [On the third day,] he may be washed with water that was heated on Friday or with water that was heated on the Sabbath itself, because the situation involves danger.
If a knife was forgotten and not brought [to the place of the circumcision] on Friday, one may instruct a gentile to bring it on the Sabbath, provided he does not bring it through the public domain.The general principle governing this matter is: It is permissible to tell a gentile to perform any activity that we are forbidden to perform as a sh'vut,11In Hilchot Shabbat 21:1, the Rambam defines a sh'vut as follows:[With regard to the Sabbath,] the Torah has told us, "You shall rest." This implies that we are obligated to rest from the performance of [certain] activities even though they are not included among the forbidden labors.In Chapters 21 and 22 of those halachot, the Rambam explains the concept of sh'vut in detail. so that we may perform a mitzvah at its appropriate time.12In Hilchot Shabbat 6:9, the Rambam mentions this leniency with regard to bringing a shofar on Rosh HaShanah [i.e., in Jerusalem to be sounded in the Temple]. Although Tosafot (Gittin 8b) maintain that the leniency should not be extended beyond the scope of the mitzvah of circumcision, the Rambam's ruling is accepted by the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 307:5). When, however, an activity is prohibited because a forbidden labor is involved, we may not instruct a gentile to do it [for us] on the Sabbath.13For this reason, a gentile may not be instructed to make a knife or boil water for the circumcision. (See Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim 331:6.)
[The preparation of] the accessories for circumcision - even when the circumcision is being performed at the appropriate time14I.e., on the eighth day of a child's life. - does not supersede [the prohibitions against labor on] the holidays, because it is possible to complete them before the commencement of the holiday.15Thus, making a knife is forbidden on a festival. Nevertheless, carrying a knife through the public domain and heating water are permitted on a festival.[This ruling can be derived through the following] process of inference: If [the preparation of] the accessories for circumcision is not significant enough to supersede the Rabbinic prohibitions of sh'vut, why should they supersede a negative commandment of the Torah?16There are certain leniencies regarding the performance of labor on festivals when compared to the performance of labor on the Sabbath. Nevertheless, the performance of labor on festivals is also considered a Torah prohibition. (See Hilchot Sh'vitat Yom Tov 1:1.) [Nevertheless, there are certain greater leniencies on festivals:] One may grind herbs for [the compress], since these herbs are fit to be used in food.17On festivals, we are allowed to perform any labor that is connected with the preparation of food. Since these herbs could be used for food, we are allowed to prepare them for the circumcision as well. Similarly, oil and wine may be mixed together.18In this instance, only a Rabbinic prohibition is involved, and it is waived because of the importance of circumcision (Ma'aseh Rokeach).

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
Before the circumcision, the person who performs the circumcision recites the blessing, "[Blessed are You...] who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the circumcision." [This applies] when circumcising the son of another person.1The Rambam's ruling depends on his statement (Hilchot Berachot 11:13) that if someone performs a blessing on behalf of another person, he should use the form "who has sanctified us with Your commandments and commanded us concerning...." When circumcising one's own son, one should recite the blessing "... to circumcise a son."2In Hilchot Berachot 11:12, the Rambam states that when one fulfills a mitzvah on one's own behalf, one should use the form "who has sanctified us with Your commandments and commanded us to..."Although the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 365:2) mentions the Rambam's opinion, the Ramah states that it is customary to recite the blessing "... concerning the circumcision," at all times.It is possible to explain that the Ramah does not accept the Rambam's general principle and prefers a universal form for a blessing to be recited every time a particular mitzvah is fulfilled. It is, however, also possible to interpret their difference of opinion as relating to the definition of the mitzvah of circumcision itself. The Rambam's text of the blessing, which uses the form "... to...," indicates that the nature of the mitzvah of circumcision focuses on the act of circumcision. In contrast, the Ramah's text for the blessing can be interpreted to imply that the nature of the mitzvah is to bring a person to the state that he is no longer uncircumcised. Therefore, the form "... concerning..." is more appropriate (Kinat Eliyahu).[At the circumcision,]3The time when this blessing is recited is a matter of question. In two of his responsa, the Rambam writes that it makes no difference whether this blessing is recited before the circumcision or afterwards. Nevertheless, Rav Avraham, his son, and Rav Yitzchak, his grandson, state that it was the Rambam's custom to recite this blessing before the mitzvah.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 265:1) quotes the opinion of Rabbenu Asher, who states that this blessing should be recited between the milah and the pri'ah. the father of the child recites another blessing:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to have our children enter the covenant of Abraham, our Patriarch.4Tosafot, Pesachim 7a, explain that this blessing is not one of the blessings connected with the performance of a mitzvah, but a blessing that expresses our thanks and appreciation to God for granting us this mitzvah.[This blessing was instituted because] it is a greater mitzvah for a father to circumcise his son than for the Jewish people as a whole to circumcise the uncircumcised among them. Therefore, if a child's father is not present, this blessing should not be recited. There are those who have ruled that the court or one of the people [in attendance should recite this blessing in the father's absence]. [Nevertheless, this ruling] should not be followed.5The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's decision and rules that, in the absence of the father, the sandak (the person who holds the baby during the circumcision) should recite this blessing. The Ramah (Yoreh De'ah 265:1) quotes this decision.
If others are present,6The literal translation of the Rambam's phraseology is "If others are standing there." The commentaries explain that his intent is also to emphasize that it is necessary to stand while attending a brit. (See the Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 265:6, which states that, if possible, it is preferable to perform a circumcision with at least ten adult males in attendance.) they say: "Just as you have brought him into the covenant,7The Rambam's version of this statement is found also in the Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 9:3) and is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 265:1). At present, however, it is customary to follow Rabbenu Asher's opinion and say, "Just as he has entered the covenant, so may he enter..." without mentioning the father's role. Significantly, this version is found in our texts of Shabbat 137b where this custom is mentioned. so, too, may you bring him to Torah, marriage, and good deeds."8We wish that the merit of the circumcision will lead to a life full of genuine Jewish conduct.
Afterwards, the father of the child, the person who performed the circumcision, or one of the people in attendance should recite the [following] blessing:Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified the cherished from the womb, affixed his covenant in his flesh, and sealed his descendants with the sign of the holy covenant. Therefore, as a reward for this [circumcision], living God, our Portion, our Rock, has ordained that the beloved of our flesh be saved from the abyss for the sake of His covenant that He has set in our flesh. Blessed are You, God, who establishes the covenant.The father of the son recites the blessing shehecheyanu.
When circumcising converts, one should recite the blessing:9It appears that the Rambam considers this the only blessing recited in connection with the circumcision of converts, and would have this blessing recited before the circumcision. In contrast, the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 268:5) explain that two blessings should be recited in connection with the circumcision of a convert: a) one blessing before the circumcision, "... who has sanctified us... and commanded us to circumcise converts,"b) one blessing after the circumcision, the blessing quoted by the Rambam with the conclusion, "Blessed are You, God, who establishes a covenant."According to the Shulchan Aruch's perspective, like the blessing mentioned in the previous halachah, this blessing is not a blessing connected with the performance of the mitzvah, but an expression of praise for God for granting us the opportunity to perform such a unique mitzvah.According to the Rambam's view, it is somewhat difficult to understand: Why is this blessing so lengthy? In this context, theSefer HaMaor explains that this blessing was instituted to reassure converts and strengthen their resolve before they fulfill a mitzvah that is associated with pain and suffering.Blessed are You, God, our Lord, King of the universe, who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to circumcise converts and to extract from them the blood of the covenant,10The Kessef Mishneh explains that this is a reference to the extraction of blood from converts who were circumcised previously. Other commentaries object to this interpretation, noting that in Halachah 6, the Rambam does not require a blessing in such an instance. for were it not for the blood of the covenant the existence of the heavens and the earth could not be maintained, as [Jeremiah 33:25] states: "Were it not for My covenant, day and night, I would not have established the laws of heaven and earth."
One who circumcises his slave11I.e., when the master performs the circumcision himself. recites the blessing:12In this instance as well, the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 267:12) rule that two blessings should be recited. See Note 9.[Blessed are You...] who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us to circumcise slaves and to extract from them the blood of the covenant, for were it not for the blood of the covenant the existence of the heavens and the earth could not be maintained...."If one circumcises a slave belonging to someone else, one should [alter the text of] the blessing and say, "[and commanded us] concerning the circumcision of slaves [and...]13The reason for the change of text depends on the Rambam's statements (Hilchot Berachot 11:11) that a person who performs a blessing on his own behalf should use the form, "who has sanctified us... and commanded us to..." In contrast, one who performs a blessing on behalf of others should use the form, "...and commanded us concerning...."When circumcising an adult male, one must cover his sexual organ until after the blessing is recited.14This is because, as explained in Hilchot Kri'at Shema 3:16, it is forbidden to recite holy words in the presence of an exposed sexual organ.There is somewhat of a problem, however, with the Rambam's statements. Here, it appears that one need not cover the penis of a baby before reciting the blessing, yet in Hilchot Kri'at Shema (ibid.), the Rambam writes that the Shema may not be recited in the presence of a minor whose sexual organ is exposed.In one of his responsa, the Rambam resolves this difficulty, explaining that the prohibition begins when the child - either male or female - possesses some sexual potency. (See also Siftei Cohen 265:18.) Afterwards, one reveals it and performs the circumcision.
When the blood of circumcision is extracted from a convert who had been circumcised before conversion, or from a child who was born without a foreskin, there is no necessity to recite a blessing.15In both cases, there is a doubt whether or not it is necessary to perform this circumcision. (See Chapter 1, Halachah 7.) Therefore, the circumcision is performed, but a blessing is not recited, lest there be no obligation to perform this activity, and thus, the blessing would be recited in vain. (See Hilchot Berachot 11:16.) Similarly, a blessing is not recited over the circumcision of an androgynous, because he is not definitely categorized as a male.16The Ra'avad contests this point, noting that when there is a doubt whether a certain activity fulfills a mitzvah or not, one should recite a blessing, and cites the recitation of blessings on the second day of festivals in the diaspora as an example of this principle.Rav Kapach explains that the difference between the Rambam and the Ra'avad depends on their conception of the status of an androgynous. The Ra'avad maintains that an androgynous is considered a male whose status is in doubt. Therefore, since a mitzvah from the Torah is involved, a blessing should be recited. The Rambam maintains that an androgynous is in a category of his own, and the question is whether the obligation to circumcise falls on people in this category. Hence, no blessing is recited. See also their difference of opinion in Hilchot Shofar 2:2.
It is forbidden for a Jew to circumcise a idolator who is forced to remove his foreskin because of a wound or because of a tumor, since we are instructed neither to save the idolator from death, nor to cause them to die.17In Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 10:1-2, the Rambam writes:If we see an idolater being swept away or drowning in the river, we should not help him. If we see that his life is in danger, we should not save him. It is, however, forbidden to cause one of them to sink or to push him into a pit or the like, since he is not waging war against us....From the above, we can infer that it is forbidden to offer medical treatment to an idolater even when offered a wage. If, however, one is afraid of the consequences or fears that ill feeling will be aroused, one may treat them for a wage, but to treat them for free is forbidden.[Regarding] a ger toshav, since we are commanded to secure his well-being, he may be given medical treatment at no cost.Many authorities maintain that the laws applying to a ger toshav can be applied to all gentiles who are not idolaters. Furthermore, since at present, a doctor would have much difficulty if he refused to treat gentiles, leniency should be shown in this regard.From the above, it would appear that a doctor who operates a medical practice today is allowed to treat gentile patients. Indeed, throughout the ages, many great Rabbinic authorities, including the Rambam himself, served as doctors to gentiles. Although a mitzvah is accomplished in the process of administering this medical treatment, the idolator did not intend to fulfill the mitzvah. If, however, the idolator intends to fulfill the mitzvah of circumcision, it is a mitzvah to circumcise him.18In Hilchot Melachim 10:10, the Rambam writes that a gentile who desires to fulfill any mitzvah should be given the opportunity.There are other authorities who differ with the Rambam on this matter. They explain that circumcision is a sign given to the Jewish people that establishes their uniqueness and it is improper that gentiles should be given the opportunity of possessing this property.
How disgusting is the foreskin that is used as a term of deprecation with regard to the gentiles, as [Jeremiah 9:25] states: "For all the gentiles are uncircumcised!" How great is the circumcision! Behold, our Patriarch Abraham was not called "perfect" until he was circumcised, as [Genesis 17:1-2] states: "Proceed before Me and become perfect. And I will place My covenant between Me and you."19See the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 49, where the Rambam criticizes a hedonistic approach to life and explains that circumcision comes "to complete the perfection of our emotions... to reduce a person's lust and wild cravings."Anyone who breaks the covenant of Abraham our Patriarch and leaves his foreskin uncircumcised, or [although he was circumcised,]20In the Hellenistic era, there were some Greek sympathizers among the Jewish people who would cause their foreskin to appear extended, so that they would not be distinguished from gentile athletes. The Sages were extremely critical of these individuals. causes it to appear extended, does not have a portion in the world to come,21See Avot 3:11 and Hilchot Teshuvah 3:6. despite the fact that he has studied Torah and performed good deeds.
Come and see how severe a matter circumcision is. Moses, our teacher, was not granted even a temporary respite from [fulfilling this mitzvah].22As Exodus 4:24-26 relates, when Moses returned to Egypt, he took his newborn son, Eliezer, with him. He did not circumcise him immediately and, therefore, an angel came in the form of a snake and swallowed him. Tziporah his wife realized the source of the problem and circumcised her son. After this, the angel retracted. (See Nedarim 32a.)The Torah mentions only three covenants regarding all its mitzvot, as [Deuteronomy 28:69] states: "These are the words of the covenant that God commanded... in addition to the covenant that He established with you in Chorev." And [Deuteronomy 29:9-11] states: "You are all standing today... to enter into a covenant with God, your Lord." Thus, there are three covenants.In contrast, thirteen covenants were established with Abraham, our Patriarch, with regard to circumcision:23In the Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III, Chapter 49, the Rambam writes that the brit is a sign of the covenant of the oneness of God. "When a person is circumcised he enters into the covenant of Abraham which obligates him to know [God's] unity." This covenant of unity defines the nature of the Jewish people. It is natural that when people share a common sign, love and mutual assistance among them grow."I will place My covenant between Me and you" [Genesis 17:2],"And I, behold, My covenant is with you" [ibid.:4],"I will establish My covenant between Me and you" [ibid.:7],"For an eternal covenant" [ibid.],"And you shall observe My covenant" [ibid.:9],"This is My covenant which you shall observe" [ibid.:10],"It will be a sign of the covenant" [ibid.:11],"My covenant will be in your flesh" [ibid.:13],"For an eternal covenant" [ibid.],"He will have nullified My covenant" [ibid.:14],"And I will establish My covenant with Him" [ibid.:19],"For an eternal covenant" [ibid.],"And I will establish My covenant with Isaac" [ibid.:21].
