=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
1The Rambam introduces each book of the Mishneh Torah by quoting a verse from the Bible. In this case, the verse chosen does more than introduce the text to follow. It also emphasizes that we are commanded to "seek out the welfare of Jerusalem" and study the laws of the Temple's construction. It is a positive commandment2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 20) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 95) include this as one of 613 mitzvot. The mitzvah is incumbent on the Jewish community as a whole and must be undertaken by the nation as a collective entity. See Hilchot Melachim 1:1 which speaks of "Israel being commanded to fulfill three mitzvot upon entering [the Promised] Land." to construct a House for God,3There are two ways to understand this mitzvah:a) to build the Temple,b) to ensure that the Temple be built; the mitzvah is not fulfilled until that objective is accomplished.The question is whether the command is to perform an activity or to see that an objective is completed. In his commentary on the Torah (Exodus 35:10 , the Rogachover Gaon favors the latter explanation and explains a number of possible practical differences between these abstract concepts. Among them:a) Must a blessing be recited before taking part in the construction of the Temple? If the mitzvah is the actual building, a blessing would be required. However, if the mitzvah is to ensure that the Temple be completed, no blessing is necessary.b) Can a gentile participate in the building of the Temple? If the actual construction is the mitzvah, it would be improper for a gentile to participate. However, if the mitzvah is dependent on the completion of the objective, the construction of the Temple, there is no difference if a gentile's efforts also aided in the fulfillment of this goal.c) If the Temple descends from heaven - as some maintain the Third Temple will - will it be considered as if the mitzvah has been fulfilled (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 18, p. 418).From the Rambam' wording (Halachah 12 and elsewhere), it appears that he views the mitzvah as the activity of building. prepared for sacrifices to be offered within.4This phrase is the subject of much commentary. In Sefer HaMitzvot(loc. cit.) the Rambam describes the mitzvah to build a Sanctuary as : "the command... to make a house for service where sacrifices will be offered."In contrast, the Ramban (Nachmanides) views the construction of the Temple as a command with a self-contained objective. Thus, he writes in his commentary to the Torah (Exodus 25:2 : "[God's] essential desire in the Sanctuary was the [construction of] a resting place for the Shechinah."Some commentaries explain the disagreement between these giants simply: According to the Rambam, the Temple was built to allow for sacrifices to be offered, while the Ramban views the revelation of the Shechinah as the Temple's purpose.However, this interpretation can not be accepted because:a) the Torah itself specifically refers to the Temple as (Deuteronomy 12:5 : "The place which God has chosen to cause His Name to dwell there," emphasizing the revelation of Godliness.b) when describing the mitzvah to build a Sanctuary, the Rambam himself writes that we are commanded "to construct a house for God," stressing that the main element of the Temple was the revelation of Godliness. It is after that statement, that he declares that the House must be "prepared for sacrifices to be offered within."Therefore, it must be assumed that both sages recognized the two differing elements, and the debate between them involves the question of determining which aspect is more important. The Ramban considered the fundamental goal the revelation of Godliness and viewed man's service as a means toward that end. On the other hand, the Rambam saw man's service as the ultimate objective. However, that service could only be complete when carried out in a place where Godliness is revealed (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 4, p. 1346, Vol. 11, p. 116, Vol. 24, p. 84). We [must] celebrate there three times a year,5The pilgrimage festivals; Passover, Shavuot, and Sukkot. On these festivals, each Jew was obligated to come to the Temple and present himself before God. In particular, the term "celebrate" refers to bringing the festive peace-offerings (see Hilchot Chagigah 1:1). as [Exodus 25:8] states: "And you shall make Me a sanctuary.6Even though this verse specifically refers to the construction of the sanctuary in the desert, the construction of the later sanctuaries and the building of the Temple were also implicit in that command (Kessef Mishneh).In Hilchot Melachim (1:1), the Rambam writes "Israel was commanded to fulfill three mitzvot upon its entry into Eretz [Yisrael]: to appoint a king..., to annihilate the seed of Amalek.., and to build [God's] Chosen House as it is said: "You shall seek out His dwelling and come there." The commentaries offer different explanations why the Rambam quotes a different verse in either place."The sanctuary constructed by Moses is already described in the Torah.7In the Book of Exodus, Chapters 25-40. It was only temporary,8And was replaced by other structures, as described in the following Halachah. as [Deuteronomy 12:9] states: "For at present, you have not come unto [the resting place and the inheritance]."9Commenting on this verse, Zevachim 119a declares: "'the resting place' - this is Shiloh, [for Shiloh was also merely a temporary resting place for the Divine Presence]; 'the inheritance' - this is Jerusalem." (Just as an inheritance reflects an everlasting chain, so too, the Divine Presence will always remain in Jerusalem.)
After [the Jews] entered The Land [of Israel],10In the year 2488 after creation. they erected the Sanctuary in Gilgal during the fourteen years in which they conquered and divided [the land].11The conquest of the Land took seven years, and the division took another seven years (Zevachim 118b). From there, they came to Shiloh,12In the year 2502, built a house of stone and spread the curtains of the Sanctuary over it. It did not have a roof. The Talmud (ibid.) explains:I Samuel 1:24 declares: "And she brought him to the House of God, Shiloh" implying that the Ark was enclosed with a permanent structure. Another verse (Psalms 78:60  states: "He has forsaken the tabernacle of Shiloh" from which it can be inferred that it was a tent-like structure resembling the Sanctuary in the desert. How can the two verses be reconciled?There was no roof. Though there was a structure of stone, the curtains [of the Sanctuary] were spread over it. built a house of stone, and spread the curtains of the Sanctuary over it. It did not have a roof. The sanctuary of Shiloh stood for 369 years. When Eli died, it was destroyed.13In the year 2871, when the Philistines captured the Holy Ark and slew Eli's two sons.The Sanctuary of Shiloh had a greater degree of holiness than the structure which preceded it and those that followed immediately thereafter. The Sifri states that the verse (Deuteronomy 12:5 : "The place which God has chosen to cause His name to dwell there" refers to "Shiloh and the Temple."The uniqueness of Shiloh is further emphasized by the fact that while it stood, the Jews were forbidden to offer sacrifices in any other place. While the Ark was in Gilgal, and similarly, in Nov and Givon, the Jews were allowed to bring their individual sacrifices wherever they desired. However, during all the years the Sanctuary was in Shiloh, no sacrifices could be offered in any other location.[Afterwards,] they came to Nov14When the Philistines returned the ark after the seven months of its captivity, they brought it to Kiryat Yearim (I Samuel, Chapters 6-7). During this time, a Sanctuary was constructed in Nov and afterwards, in Givon, to provide the Jews with a place for centralized worship. However, the ark was not kept there out of fear that it might again be captured by the Philistines (Meiri, Megillah, 9b). and built a sanctuary.15Of stone. Though the Rambam in his commentary on the Mishnah (Zevachim, ibid.) states that the Jews erected the Sanctuary that had stood in the desert in Nov, here he appears to follow the view mentioned by Rashi (Pesachim 38 a,b) which states that a stone structure was erected there. Similarly, Sotah 9a states that the sanctuary's structure was entombed when the Jews entered Eretz Yisrael. The Sanctuary of Nov stood for 44 years (Seder HaDorot). When Samuel died, it was destroyed.16By King Saul. And they came to Givon17On the outskirts of Jerusalem (see II Samuel, ch. 6). The Sanctuary stood there for approximately 13 years. and built a sanctuary. From Givon, they came to the eternal structure [in Jerusalem].18In the year 2928, as described in the beginning of I Kings. The days [the sanctuary stood] in Nov and Givon were 57 years.
Once the Temple was built in Jerusalem, it became forbidden to build a sanctuary for God or to offer sacrifices in any other place.19See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 18:3 which describes this prohibition. Zevachim 112b states: "When they came to Jerusalem [and erected the Temple], it became forbidden [to sacrifice in] the High Places and permission [to sacrifice] there was never granted [again]."That prohibition was derived from the following verses (Deuteronomy 12:5-6):Only at the place where the Lord, your God, shall choose to cause His Name to dwell, may you seek Him at his dwelling...There, you shall bring your burnt offerings and your sacrifices.The preceding verses described how the pagans had sacrificed "upon the high mountains, upon the hills, under every lofty tree." In contrast, the service of God had to be centralized in one place alone, "the place which the Lord, your God shall choose to cause His Name to dwell." Nevertheless, until an abode for the Shechinah was constructed, there was no prohibition against sacrificing anywhere in Eretz Yisrael.As mentioned above, this prohibition was in effect during the time of the Sanctuary of Shiloh. After Shiloh was destroyed, there were no restrictions until the Temple was built. However, once the Shechinah was revealed on Mount Moriah, the Jews were never allowed to offer their sacrifices at any other place.Although Shiloh and the Temple were both considered "the place God chose...," there is a difference between the two. God's choice of Shiloh was for the benefit of the Jewish people. He wanted to offer them a centralized place of worship. However, the physical place of the Sanctuary did not itself become holy for all time.In contrast, God chose Jerusalem as an eternal resting place for the Shechinah. The Divine Presence united with the place itself. After Shiloh was destroyed, no vestige of its former holiness remained. However, Mount Moriah remains "the gate to heaven" even after the Temple has been destroyed. Hence, permission was never granted to sacrifice in other places. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 24, p. 80-85.There is no Sanctuary for all generations20The above prohibition extends beyond the offering of sacrifices and includes the actual construction of a sanctuary. Megillah 10a records the construction of such a sanctuary in Alexandria by Ono, the son of Shimon HaTzaddik. except in Jerusalem and [specifically,] on Mt. Moriah,21The root of the name Moriah is the word hora'ah, meaning instruction. The Temple was the seat of the Sanhedrin, Israel's highest court and the source of instruction for the entire Jewish nation. Others associate it with the word yirah, meaning "fear," for from this mountain, the fear of God radiated forth. as [I Chronicles 22:1] states: "And David declared: 'This is the House of the Lord, God, and this is the altar for the burnt offerings of Israel.'22As the Rambam explains in Chapter 2, in addition to God's choice of the site for the Temple at large, He also specifically chose the site of the Altar.To emphasize this concept, the verse quoted by the Rambam contains two clauses. The first clause describes the choice of the Temple's site and the second, the choice of the site of the Altar. and [Psalms 132:14] states: "This is My resting place forever."23The Rambam views these verses as more than a statement of Jerusalem's uniqueness. They also exclude the possibility of constructing other sanctuaries.
The [design of the] structure built by [King] Solomon is described explicitly in [the Book of] Kings.24I Kings, chapter 6. [In contrast, the design of] the Messianic Temple, though mentioned in [the Book of] Ezekiel, is not explicit or explained. Thus, the people [in the time] of Ezra built the Second Temple according to the structure of Solomon, [including] certain aspects which are explicitly stated in Ezekiel.25The commentaries on the tractate of Middot contrast Ezekiel's vision and the structure of the Second Temple in mishnayot 2:5, 3:1, 4:2.
The followings elements are essential when constructing this House:26i.e. if they are lacking, we have not fulfilled the mitzvah of constructing a Sanctuary.a) the Sanctuary,27The holy chamber containing the Golden Altar, the Menorah, and the table for the Showbread.b) the Holy of Holies,28The inner chamber containing the Holy Ark.c) preceding the Sanctuary, there should be a place called the Entrance Hall.29This refers to a structure positioned before the Sanctuary.The commentaries note that, in general, an equivalent to each of the structures of the Temple existed in the Sanctuary of the desert. Based on this principle, they question which structure in the Sanctuary corresponded to the Entrance Hall.The three [together] are called the Temple.30Though the three represent various levels of holiness, they are on one rung of sanctity when compared to other areas (Zevachim 2a).The commentaries note that Jeremiah  7:4  states: "Trust not in lying words which say: 'The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord... ' The threefold repetition alludes to the fact that the three chambers mentioned above share an equal measure of holiness.[In addition,] we must make another partition around the Temple, set off from it [slightly], resembling the curtains surrounding the courtyard of the [sanctuary in the] desert.31As described in Exodus, chapter 27. Everything encompassed by this partition is similar to the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting and is called the Courtyard.32The commentaries explain that the root of the Hebrew term azarah is the word ezra meaning "help." In the Temple Courtyard, the Jewish people call to God and He responds, granting them assistance.The entire area is referred to as the Mikdash.
The following utensils are required for the Sanctuary:33As mentioned in the explanation to Halachah 1, the Rambam considers the purpose of the construction of the Temple the erection of "a house ...to offer sacrifices within." In this context, he views the fashioning of the Temple's utensils as an integral part of the mitzvah of building a sanctuary - for without them the sacrifices could not be offered. Thus, when enumerating the mitzvot, he considers the fashioning of the Sanctuary's utensils as part of the mitzvah to construct the Sanctuary and not as separate mitzvot in their own right.As mentioned above, the Ramban, Nachmanides, disputes the Rambam's view and considers the revelation of Godliness as the primary intent of the Sanctuary's construction. He also disagrees with the Rambam in regard to the fashioning of the utensils and considers them as separate independent commands. See Hasagot Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive command 33.There is a practicable application of the above concept. The Sanctuary could only be constructed during the daytime, (see Halachah 17). If the fashioning of the Sanctuary's utensils is to be considered as part of the mitzvah of constructing the Temple, that ruling may apply to them as well (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 21, p. 255).a) an altar for the burnt offering and other sacrifices;34The Torah also refers to the outer altar as "the altar of the burnt offering" (Exodus 30:28, 35:16) for that was the most frequent sacrifice, offered twice daily.b) a ramp to ascend to the altar. It was positioned before the Entrance Hall to the south.35See Halachah 17.c) a wash basin36A large basin, with 12 taps. (Yoma 37a) with a pedestal where the priests would sanctify their hands and feet for the (Temple) service.37Before taking part in any aspect of the Temple service, the priests had to wash their hands and feet. See Hilchot Biat HaMikdash 5:1. It was positioned between the Entrance Hall and the altar, to the left when entering the Sanctuary.38The entrance to the Sanctuary was from the east, facing the Holy of Holies which was in the west.d) the altar for the incense offering,e) the Menorah, andf) the table [for the showbread].39These sacred objects are discussed in detail in Chapter Two.The [latter] three were placed within the Sanctuary, before the Holy of Holies.40See Exodus 26:35.The commentaries have asked why the Rambam does not consider the ark as one of the essential vessels of the Sanctuary. The commentary to Chapter 4, Halachah 1, addresses that issue.
The Menorah was in the south, to the left as one entered. The Table was to the right.41The Menorah was the source of spiritual inspiration, the Table of material wealth. Because of the position of these objects, our Sages declared (Bava Batra 25b): He who desires to become wise should face south (while praying). He who desires to become wealthy should face north. The Showbread was placed upon it. Both of them were close to the Holy of Holies on the outside. The incense altar was positioned between these two, towards the outside.Divisions are to be made within the Temple Courtyard to [indicate] the point to which the Israelites may proceed;42See Middot 2:6. There were steps dividing between the area set aside for Israelites and the area set aside for priests. An Israelite was not permitted to proceed beyond these steps, except:a) to perform semichah, the placing of hands on an animal brought as a sacrifice. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, ch. 3.b) to recite confessional prayers, Vidui.c) to slaughter an animal brought as a sacrifice,d) to perform Tenufah, the waving of the peace offerings (Kellim 1:8. See also Chapter 7, Halachah 19, Tifferet Yisrael, Middot 2:6.) the point to which the priests, [who were not able to participate in the Temple service,] may proceed.43See Chapter 7, Halachah 20.[Also,] within it, we must build structures for the various necessities of the Sanctuary. These structures were called chambers.44Chapter 5, Halachah 17.
When we build the Temple and the courtyard, we must use large stones. If stones cannot be found, we may build with bricks.45On the verse (Exodus 20:22 : "If you shall build an altar of stone...," the Mechilta comments: "If you desire [to build it from] stone, you may. If you desire from bricks, you may."We may not split the stones used for the building on the Temple Mount.46Regarding the altar, the Torah declares (ibid.): "Do not build it out of hewn stone. By lifting your sword against it, you will have profaned it." The Sages (Middot 3:4) explained that iron shortens man's life, and the altar prolongs it. Therefore, iron should not be used to build the Temple. As above, the Rambam draws a parallel between the altar and the entire sanctuary.Sotah 48b quotes the two abovementioned verses and records a debate among the Sages how to resolve the apparent contradiction between them. The Rambam quotes the opinion of Rabbi Nechemiah who resolves the discrepancy by explaining that the stones were hewn outside the Temple premises and then, brought in.In contrast, Rabbi Yehudah explained that King Solomon employed a unique wormlike creature, the Shamir, which had the power to eat through stone. The Temple's builders drew lines on the stone and then placed the Shamir upon them. The tiny creature ate through the rock, leaving the stones finely hewn without using iron.According to most opinions, when the First Temple was destroyed, this unique species was lost, and it was impossible to build the Second Temple in this miraculous manner. Nevertheless, the stones were not hewn on the Temple Mount itself. Rather, we must split and chisel them outside, and [afterwards,] bring them in,47Thus, at least, "in the House," on the Temple premises, no iron tool was used. as it is said (I Kings 5:31 : "And they brought great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the House with hewn stone." Furthermore, it is said (ibid. 6:7): "Neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron was heard in the House while it was being built."
We must not build with any wood protruding at all,48Tamid 28b relates that this prohibition was enacted as a safeguard for the Scriptural commandment (Deuteronomy 16:21 : "Do not plant an Asherah or any other tree near the altar that you shall make for the Lord." Though that prohibition only refers to a tree that grows in the ground and not to wood used for building purposes, the Sages instituted this measure as a "fence around the Torah."Wood could be used for the substructure of the building. Indeed, I Kings 6:10 relates how Solomon used cedar trees for that purpose. However, they could not be used for the exterior surface of the building. only stone, bricks, or cement.[Similarly,] we must not make wooden chambers in the courtyard. Rather, [they were made] of stone or of brick. 49The Ra'avad objects to this Halachah, noting that there were wooden structures on the Temple Mount. The High Priest's chamber was lined with wood. In addition, wooden balconies were built in the Women Courtyard on Sukkot to allow the women to observe the Simchat Beit Hashoevah celebrations. Thus, he concludes that the prohibition against building with any protruding wood applies only within within the Temple courtyard, from the area set off for the priests and beyond, and not elsewhere on the Temple Mount. Only that region could be described as "near the altar [of God]." Rav Yosef Corcus explains that the wooden balconies were not permanent structures. Hence, they were permitted.
Costly stones were laid on the floor of the entire courtyard.50See the verse from I Kings quoted in Halachah 8.The Torah (Leviticus 26:1 , commands, "Do not make a stone pavement in your land to bow down upon it." The commentaries explain that this prohibition was ordained so that the Jews would refrain from making a copy of the Temple services outside of Jerusalem.Nevertheless, according to strict Torah law, it was not necessary to lay a stone floor for the Temple courtyard. Zevachim 24a relates that in preparation for the construction of the Temple, King David sanctified the very ground of the Temple Courtyard.Stones which were uprooted [from their fixture] are invalidated, even though they remained in place, since they were impaired. [Thus,] a priest is forbidden to stand upon them during the [Temple] service until they become fixed in the ground [again.]51The Sages explained that it was not respectful to take part in the Temple services while standing on such a stone. Nevertheless, if a priest disobeyed this prohibition and did stand on such a stone, his service was not invalidated.The logic of that decision can be explained as follows: There is a principle in Jewish law that a particular substance is not considered as interposing between one object and another if it and the object beneath it are of the same type. Thus, since the stone and the earth below it are considered to be of the same substance, the stone is not considered an interruption. Since, as mentioned above, the ground itself was sanctified by King David, the priest's service is not invalidated.
The most preferable way to fulfill the mitzvah is by strengthening the building and raising it [to the utmost degree] within the potential of the community, as [implied by Ezra 9:9]: "to exalt the House of our Lord."52Shabbat 11a interprets this verse in a very literal sense, explaining that a synagogue must be the tallest building in a city.They must make it beautiful and attractive according to their potential.53Herod slaughtered many Sages. Bava Batra 4a explains that the Sages advised him to expiate a certain measure of his sin by rebuilding the Temple and making it attractive. The Talmud declares: "Whoever has not seen Herod's building has not seen an attractive building in his life." If possible, it is a mitzvah to plate it with gold and to magnify all of its aspects.54Thus, Pesachim 57a relates that the Temple was covered with gold plates the thickness of a golden coin.
We must not build the Temple at night, as [Numbers 9:15] states: "on the day in which the Sanctuary was raised up." [Our Sages55Sh'vuot 15b. interpret this phrase as implying:] We may raise it up by day and not by night.We must be involved with its building from dawn until the appearance of the stars.56Generally, employees are not obligated to begin their work until the sun appears. However, in this case, due to the importance of their task, the workers were obligated to begin earlier. See Nechemiah 4:15; Berachot 2b.Everyone is obligated to build and to assist both personally and financially;57Thus there are two obligations: a) the actual building of the Temple, b) assisting in the work and supporting it financially. [both] men and women,58In particular, there is a difference in the obligations incumbent on men and women. Women are not obligated to fulfill most mitzvot which have a specific time limitation. The construction of the Temple also possesses a specific time restriction. As mentioned above, it may only by built by day and not by night. Therefore, women are not obligated to carry out the actual construction. However, in regard to the second aspect mentioned above, rendering personal and financial assistance, women are obligated as well as men. as in the [construction of the] Sanctuary in the desert.59Note Exodus 35:22 and 25, which relate the role played by women in constructing the Sanctuary. Commenting on the first of those verses, Rashi states that the women displayed greater generosity than the men. [Nevertheless,] children are not to be interrupted from their [Torah] studies.60Commenting on this law, Shabbat 119b declares: "The world is only maintained [through the merit] of the voice of school children [studying Torah]."The construction of the Temple does not supersede the [observance of the] festivals.61Yevamot 6a states: "The construction of the Sanctuary does not supersede the observance of the Sabbath, as it is written (Leviticus 19:30 : Observe My Sabbaths and revere My Sanctuaries, i.e., the Sabbath is of primary importance, even in regard to the Sanctuary. The festivals are also called Sabbaths by the Torah, cf. Leviticus 23:24 and 39. Hence, the same ruling applies to them.Though the construction of the Temple is forbidden on the Sabbaths and festivals, sacrifices may be offered on these days even though prohibited labors are involved in this service.This apparent discrepancy can be explained as follows: Once the Temple is constructed and complete, the holiness of its service supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions. Nevertheless, while the Temple is being constructed, those prohibitions must be observed in order to establish the sacred nature of the place.
The Altar should only be made as a structure of stone.62Our text is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text states "hewn stone." That is obviously an error. Note Halachah 8 which describes the manner of cutting the stones used for the Temple. Even such measures were insufficient for the stones used for the Altar, as explained in the following halachot. Though the Torah states, [Exodus 20:24]: "You shall make Me an altar of earth," [that verse is interpreted63By the Mechilta, commenting on that verse. to mean that] the altar must be in contact with the earth and not built on an arch or on a cave.64In his commentary on this Halachah, the Mishneh LiMelech notes that it appears that this directive was violated in the construction of the Temple.In Hilchot Parah Adumah 2:7 (see also Chapter 5, Halachah 1), the Rambam explains that the entire area beneath the Temple and its courtyard had been hollowed out to protect against the possibility of ritual impurity being contracted because of a grave which was buried there without anyone's knowledge.To resolve this difficulty, the Mishneh LiMelech explains that the ground had indeed been hollowed out. However, there was a certain measure of earth that was left for support. The Altar was, therefore, considered to be in contact with the earth.Though [ibid.:22] states: "If you shall make an Altar of stone...," the Oral Tradition explains that the matter is not left to [our] decision, but is an obligation [incumbent upon us].65Commenting on this verse, the Mechilta states that on three occasions the Torah expresses a command using terminology which appears conditional: our verse, the verse (Exodus 22:24 , "If you will lend money...," and the verse (Leviticus 2:14 , "If you shall offer a meal offering of the first fruits."
Any stone which is damaged66I.e., cracked, split, or broken in any way. Even if the breach in the stone was not made by iron, the stone is disqualified. See Middot 3:4 and Halachah 16. to the extent that a nail will become caught in it [when passing over it], as is the case regarding a slaughtering knife,67See Hilchot Shechitah 1:23. is disqualified for [use in the] Altar or the ramp, as [Deuteronomy 27:6] states: "You shall build the Altar of the Lord with whole stones."68Even though this verse describes the altar to be built by the Jews when they cross the Jordan, it teaches us fundamental principles regarding the Temple's altar.From where would they bring the stones of the Altar? From virgin earth. They would dig until they reach a point which was obviously never used for tilling or for building, and they would take the stones from there.69These lines are also taken from Middot, loc. cit. The Rambam quotes the mishnah here, rather than in the following halachah, to emphasize that even a breach which was not caused by contact with iron could disqualify a stone for use. To find stones of this nature, it was necessary to dig in the manner described. Alternatively, [they would take them] from the Mediterranean Sea70Zevachim 54a notes that whole stones could be found on the seashore. See also Tosefot, Sukkah 49a. and build with them.Similarly, the stones of the Temple and the Courtyard were whole.71As I Kings 6:7 states, "And the House...was built with whole stones as they were brought in." However, as explained in Halachah 8, the laws governing the stones of the Temple and the Courtyard were more lenient. They could be smoothed with iron tools outside the Temple Mount.
Damaged or split stones from the Temple and the Courtyard are invalid.72The Rambam stated a measure: "to the extent that a nail passing over it will become caught in it" for disqualifying stones to be used in the Altar. However, in the present Halachah, he does not mention a measure for the cracks or splits which may disqualify a stone after it has been used for the Temple. Thus, a question arises: Does the previous measure apply in this case as well, or was no measure mentioned, because even the slightest crack would disqualify the stone?This question can be resolved as follows: In Halachah 17, the Rambam states that a person "who destroys a single stone from the Altar, any part of the Temple building, or [the floor of the Temple Courtyard]," violates a negative command, "as it is said (Deuteronomy 12:3-4): 'And you shall destroy their altars...Do not do so to the Lord, your God. 'By mentioning the prohibition against the destruction or damage to the Altar's stones in the context of "their altars," the prohibition against idol worship, the Torah creates an association between the two. Even the slightest measure of property consecrated unto a false god is prohibited. So, too, even the smallest crack may disqualify one of the Temple's stones. They can not be redeemed [and used for mundane purposes].73Since they were used for the building of the Temple, it is not fitting for them to be used for mundane matters afterwards (Mishneh Limelech).The Tosefta (Megillah, Chapter 2) discusses whether this principle applies to other sacred structures, such as a synagogue. Rather, they must be entombed.74Middot 1:6 describes that a special chamber just outside the Temple courtyard was set aside for entombing the stones of the Courtyard which were defiled by the Greeks before the Hasmoneans reconquered the Temple.Every stone which was touched by iron,75As mentioned above, iron is often used for death and destruction. This stands in direct contradiction to the purpose of the Altar. Therefore, the Torah insisted that stones which had been prepared for building the Altar were forbidden to have any contact with that metal. even though it was not damaged, is disqualified [for use] in building the Altar or the ramp, as it is said (Exodus 20:22 : "By lifting your sword against it, you will have profaned it."76The source for the Rambam's statements is Middot, Chapter 3, Mishnah 4.However, the terminology used by the Mishnah and quoted by the Rambam is subject to debate. The Rosh interprets the Mishnah strictly and maintains that contact with iron disqualifies a stone even though no blemish was made in the stone.Anyone who builds the altar or the ramp with a stone that has been touched by iron [violates a negative command and] is [given] lashes,77Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 79) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 40) include this as one of 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as it is said (ibid.): "Do not build them with hewn stone."One who builds with a damaged stone violates a positive command.78As it is written (Deuteronomy 27:6 : "You shall build the Altar of the Lord with whole stones." It is interesting to note that though the Rambam uses this expression, he does not consider this command as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.
[If] a stone was damaged or touched by iron once it had been built into the Altar or the ramp, that stone [alone] is invalidated, but the others are still fit for use.They coated the altar [with cement] twice a year, [before] Pesach and [before] Sukkot.79To clean it from the blood of the sacrifices. When they coated it, they used a cloth, rather than an iron lathe,80To apply and smooth the cement. The Ra'avad suggests that a wooden tool was employed for this purpose. lest it touch a stone and invalidate [it.]
We must not make steps for the Altar, as [Exodus 20:23] states: "Do not ascend on My Altar with steps."81The verse continues, explaining the reason for the command: "so that your nakedness not be revealed upon it."The commentaries explain that spreading one's legs as when walking up steps does not show fitting deference to God's altar.This command raises an obvious question: If walking up steps is not considered respectful, why were any steps allowed on the Temple Mount? It was necessary to ascend steps to enter the Temple building itself!Among the answers given to this question is: The ramp possessed a degree of holiness comparable to that of the Altar itself (as obvious from Halachot 15 and 16). Thus, one's manner of ascent could be considered a sign of respect or disrespect to the Altar. In contrast, the steps leading to the Temple building have a lower level of sanctity (as obvious from Halachah 5). Thus, the way in which one approached is not as significant. (See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 21, p. 119). Rather, we must build an incline on the southern side of the Altar,82To the left when facing the Temple.Zevachim 62b expounds this concept as follows: Leviticus 1:11 declares that "He shall slaughter it at the foot of the Altar, on its north side." If the north side was to be the Altar's foot, its head, i.e. the side from which we approach, would be at the south. diminishing [in height] as it declines from the top of the Altar until the earth.83The ramp began at a height of 8.83 cubits and was inclined over 32 cubits. It was called the ramp.Anyone who ascends the Altar with steps [violates a negative command and] is [given] lashes.Similarly, anyone who demolishes84One is only liable if his intent was to destroy. If he had intended to improve upon the building, there is no prohibition. Therefore, when King Herod desired to beautify the Temple, as mentioned in (Halachah 11), he was allowed to tear down the previous structure. See also Bava Batra 3b. a single stone from the Altar, any part of the Temple building, or [the floor of the Temple Courtyard] between the Entrance Hall and the Altar85The Rambam also mentions this prohibition in Hilchot Yesodai HaTorah (6:7). There, he does not restrict the scope of the prohibition, and states that it applies throughout the Temple Courtyard including the area outside the region specified here. Most commentaries view that opinion as more precise. with a destructive intent is worthy of lashes, as [Deuteronomy 12:3-4] states: "And you shall destroy their altars.... Do not do so to God, your Lord."86Even though the command is stated in the positive, it is considered one of the 365 negative commands of the Torah. See Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 65) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 437).
The Menorah and its utensils,87I.e., the tongs and scoops used to clean out its wicks and ashes. See Exodus 25:38. the Table and its utensils,88I.e., the bread molds, incense bowls, frames, and dividers (ibid.:29). the Incense Altar, and all the sacred utensils may be made only from metal. If they are made from wood, bone, stone, or glass, they are unacceptable.89Menachot 28b derives this Halachah as follows: One of the thirteen principles of Biblical analysis expounded by Rabbi Yishmael (in the introduction to the Sifra, and included in our morning prayers) is as follows: "When a generalization is followed by a specific example and then, by a second generalization, the law is applicable to other cases similar to the specific example mentioned."The command to fashion the Menorah was expressed as follows (Exodus 25:31 : "You shall make a Menorah out of pure gold. You shall fashion it by hammering it out." The Sages commented, "You shall make a Menorah" is a generalization, "out of pure gold" is a specific example, and "You shall fashion it," a second generalization. Thus, the Menorah may be made from other substances similar to gold, i.e., any metal. The same principle is then expanded to include other utensils.
If the nation is poor, it is permissible to make them of tin.90Menachot 28b relates that when the Greeks controlled the Temple, they defiled all its utensils. When the Hasmoneans reconquered Jerusalem, they were very poor and constructed the Menorah of iron staves coated with tin. Afterwards, they acquired more means and made a Menorah of silver. Ultimately, they were able to make one of gold. If they [later] become wealthy, they should be made of gold.If the nation possesses the means, they should even make the basins, the spits, and the rakes of the altar of the burnt offering and, [similarly,] the [Temple's] measuring vessels, out of gold.91Bereishit Rabbah declares: "Gold was created only for the sake of the Temple."This metal is really too precious for our world, and was only given to us to be used for these sacred purposes. Therefore, fashioning even the Temple's most insignificant utensils from this metal is not an unnecessary extravagance, but rather the fulfillment of God's intent when He created gold. They should even coat the gates of the Courtyard with gold, if it is within their potential.92Middot 2:3 relates that the Second Temple's gates were originally built of other metals. Generations later, the people prospered, and plated them with gold.
All the [Temple's] utensils must initially be made for sacred purposes.93Before fashioning the utensil, the craftsman must have the intention that they be used for the Temple. If they were initially made for mundane uses,94Even if they were never used for those reasons they may not be used for [the Temple's] sake.95The term translated as "the Temple," gavohah, literally means "the Most High." Because of the departure from the literal meaning, it is set off with brackets.A vessel [intended to be used for the Temple], but which was never used for [the Temple] may be used for mundane purposes. Once it has been used for [the Temple], it may not be used for mundane purposes.96The sanctity of the Temple's utensils has two dimensions:a) that conveyed by one's intention when fashioning the utensil,b) that brought about by its use in the Temple services.Without the proper intention, an object may never be used in Temple services. However, the intention alone is not sufficient to distinguish that object as holy and prevent its use for mundane purposes.Stones or boards which were originally hewn for use in a synagogue should not be used in the Temple Mount construction.97Since the sanctity of a synagogue is not as great as that of the Temple, the building materials are not considered as prepared for that holy purpose.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The Altar is [to be constructed] in a very precise location,1As emphasized by the various events mentioned in this and the following halachot.The location of the Altar within the Temple Courtyard is discussed in Chapter 5, Halachot 12-16. which may never be changed,2In this context, we can understand the Rambam's choice of words, when describing the achievements of the Mashiach (Hilchot Melachim 11:1): "He will build the Sanctuary in its place." There, he does not state "its precise location," for although the Messianic Temple in its entirety will also be built on Mt. Moriah, certain aspects of it will not correspond exactly to the Temples. Nevertheless, even then, the Altar in particular will be positioned in precisely the same location as before. as it is said (II Chronicles 22:1 : "This is the Altar for the burnt offerings of Israel."Isaac was prepared as a sacrifice on the Temple's [future] site, as it is said (Genesis 22:2 : "Go to the land of Moriah,"3Pirkei D'Rabbi Eliezer relates that the altar which Abraham constructed on Mt. Moriah had twelve stones. Later, when Jacob journeyed to Charan (Genesis, ch. 28), he slept on Mt. Moriah and "took from the stones of the place and put them at his head." The stones he collected were the twelve used by Abraham. God fused them all into a single stone and the unified rock was embedded in the very foundation of the earth. That stone was referred to as Even HaShtiah, (see also Chapter 4, Halachah 1) "the foundation stone." It was located in the Holy of Holies.Thus, Abraham's altar was apparently not built on the site of the altar to be built by his descendants, but rather, at the ultimate location of the Holy of Holies. However, this difficulty can be resolved. Jacob "took from the stones," and moved them from their original place, the Altar's future site, to a different location, that of the Holy of Holies. and in Chronicles (II 3:1), it is said: "Then, Solomon began to build the House of the Lord in Jerusalem, on Mt. Moriah, where [the Lord] appeared to David, his father, in the place that David had prepared,4Though David was not allowed to build the Temple, he purchased the site, constructed an altar, and offered sacrifices there.Zevachim 62a relates that David used prophetic vision in choosing the site of the altar. According to one opinion, he saw the Heavenly Altar on which the angel Michael offers sacrifices. According to a second view, he saw the ashes of Isaac. in the threshing floor of Ornan, the Jebusite."
It is universally accepted5The commentaries explain that this phrase refers to the Gentiles. Even they recognized the holiness of the Altar's site.The fact that the Gentiles were aware that the site of the Altar is holy is Halachically relevant. The pagans living in Eretz Yisrael before its conquest by the Jewish people were so idolatrous that our Sages declared: "Wherever you see a lofty mountain ...or a leafy tree, know that idols were worshipped there." Since the Temple Mount was also a high mountain, surely it would have been considered an appropriate place for pagan rites.However, since the holiness of the Altar's site was universally accepted, even the Gentiles did not profane its sanctity with idol worship. that the place on which David and Solomon built the Altar,6David and Solomon did not build the same Altar. Rather, David chose the site as the future location of the Temple, and constructed an Altar and offered sacrifices. Later, when Solomon built the Temple, he erected a new Altar at the same site. the threshing floor of Ornan, is the location where Abraham built the Altar on which he prepared Isaac for sacrifice.Noah built [an altar] on that location when he left the ark.7See Genesis 8:20. It was also [the place] of the Altar on which Cain and Abel brought sacrifices.8See ibid. 4:3-5. [Similarly,] Adam, the first man, offered a sacrifice there and was created at that very spot,9The Rambam entitled this collection of Halachot, Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, the Laws of God's Chosen House, implying that God did not select Mount Moriah as the Temple site because of its inherent holiness, but because of His own choice and desire. That choice was clearly expressed in the previous Halachah which states: "the place of the Altar is extremely exact... as it is said: 'This is the altar for the burnt offerings of Israel.'As such, it can be explained that the Rambam does not recount the various historical events mentioned in this Halachah just to bring further proof of the holiness of the Altar's site. That is unnecessary. Rather, he wanted to demonstrate that many righteous men were aware of the uniqueness of the Altar's site through prophetic vision, and for this reason, they made efforts to offer their sacrifices there.Why does the Rambam relate all these historical events? As he clearly states in his introduction to the Mishneh Torah, his goal is not to summarize the Talmud's teachings regarding a particular subject, but to describe how to carry out the various mitzvot. These historical facts do not seem to facilitate his objective.The need for these additions may be explained by comparison to the Rambam's decisions regarding the right to the monarchy. In that context, the Rambam writes that although God chose David and his descendants as kings and endowed them with the monarchy forever, there was a Halachic legitimacy to the establishment of the Kingdom of Israel (the ten tribes). Since the first king, Jereboam, was appointed by a prophet, his regal power must be recognized. (Hilchot Melachim 1:7,8).It could be inferred that a similar ruling might apply in regard to the altar: i.e. the Altar on Mount Moriah would remain holy forever, however, another altar of similar status could also be established. In order to eliminate that presumption, the Rambam presents a number of examples, illustrating that throughout the generations, from the time of Adam, the prophets had tried to bring sacrifices on this site alone. These efforts clearly imply that there is not, nor will there be, another place with a similar degree of holiness (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 19, p.140-7). as our Sages said: "Man was created from the place where he [would find] atonement."10This statement is somewhat problematic. Though the Rambam's statements have a basis in the Midrash (Bereishit Rabbah 14:8), according to Sanhedrin 38b, Adam appears to have been created in the Garden of Eden, a considerable distance from this location. Generally, when a conflict arises between sources, the decision is based upon the Babylonian Talmud. Hence, one might ask why the Rambam favored the other sources in this case.
The dimensions of the Altar must be very precise. Its design has been passed down from one to another [over the course of the generations].The altar built by the exiles [returning from Babylon] was constructed according to the design of the Altar to be built in the Messianic age.11Its dimensions differed from the altar built by King Solomon in the First Temple. As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 4, the fundamental design of the Second Temple resembled that of Solomon's Temple. However, certain aspects were altered to conform with Ezekiel's vision of the Messianic Temple. The dimensions and design of the altar are mentioned in Ezekiel 43:13-17 and were followed by the exiles when they returned to Jerusalem. We may not increase or reduce its dimensions.12As explained in Halachah 17, the Altar is acceptable even if its dimensions are not exact. Nevertheless, as an initial preference, an attempt must be made to conform exactly to the plan mentioned below.
Three prophets returned to [Eretz Yisrael] with the people:13Chaggai, Zechariah, and Malachi. one attested to the site of the Altar;14For, as mentioned in Halachah 1, the Altar's site must be precise. the second, to its dimensions;15Note the previous halachah. and the third attested to [the Halachah permitting] all sacrifices to be offered on that Altar, even though the Temple itself was not [built] there [yet].16The Rambam's statements are taken from Zevachim 62a. However, the terminology in that source regarding Malachi's testimony is different. According to the Talmud, the prophet stated that "all the sacrifices may be offered, even though the Temple was not [built];" and the Rambam adds the phrase "on that Altar."Later commentaries have explained the significance of that addition, based on the following episode. In the Middle Ages, the Sage, Rabbi Chayim (according to other sources, Rabbi Yechiel) of Paris made Aliyah and settled in Jerusalem. He wanted to offer sacrifices on the Temple Mount. In analyzing this account, the Chatam Sofer (Yoreh De'ah, Responsum 336) explained that this must have referred to the Pascal sacrifice, which could be offered in a state of ritual impurity and yet, did not have to be purchased with communal funds.Among the reasons the commentaries have given why such a sacrifice could not be offered is that we are lacking an Altar with its proper size and dimensions. In contrast, the exiles who returned from Babylon were allowed to offer sacrifices on the altar built according to the prophets' directives.
The Altar constructed by Moses, and, [similarly,] that built by Solomon, and that erected by the [returning] exiles, and that to be built [in the Messianic age] are all ten cubits high.17See Ezekiel 43:13 and commentaries. Though the Torah states [Exodus 27:1]: "Its height will be three cubits," [that refers to] the surface on which the wood for the sacrifices was arranged.18See Zevachim 59b, which records a dispute among the Sages concerning the height of Moses' (and hence, all subsequent) Altar(s).Among the proofs brought for the opinion accepted by the Rambam are the following:a) an analogy drawn between the sacrificial altar and the incense altar. Just as the latter's height was twice its length, so, too, the height of the sacrificial altar (10 cubits) was twice its length (5 cubits).b) The height of Moses' Altar had to equal that of the Sanctuary that accompanied the Jews in the desert, which was 10 cubits high.The length and breadth of the Altar built by the [returning] exiles and, similarly, the one to be built in the Messianic Age, is 32 cubits by 32 cubits.19This measurement refers to the dimensions of the Altar's base and not to its upper surface, as explained in the following Halachah.
The 10 cubits of the Altar's height [were not measured in a consistent manner.]20Kellim 17:10 relates that a cubit used in building was generally six handbreadths long. In contrast, the cubit used to measure utensils was five handbreadths long. An exception to this principle was made in regard to the Altar. Sometimes the measure of a "cubit" was six handbreadths, while in other cases, the cubit's measure was five handbreadths.21A handbreadth is the width of the four fingers of the hand when they are closed loosely. There is a debate among the Rabbis regarding the equivalent of this amount in modern measurements. Some authorities consider a handbreadth as 8 centimeters and others, as large as 9.6 centimeters. In all other cases, the cubits mentioned in the dimensions of the Temple are six handbreadths.The height of the entire Altar22Including its horns. was 58 handbreadths.23I.e., two cubits were five handbreadths long, while the remaining eight were six handbreadths long, as explained in the following halachot.
The [Altar's] dimensions and design were as follows:24The Rambam actually included a diagram in his text of the Mishneh Torah. The accompanying diagram is based on the Rambam's original.This entire Halachah is based on the Rambam's interpretation of Ezekiel's vision. Rashi interprets that prophecy differently, and many Rabbinic opinions follow his view. See the Kessef Mishneh and other commentaries. Five handbreadths up and five handbreadths in25In this instance, five handbreadths were considered as a cubit. [form a step called] the base. Thus, the [remaining area of the Altar] was 30 cubits and two handbreadths by 30 cubits and two handbreadths.26As mentioned above, the Altar was 32 cubits long and 32 cubits wide. Each cubit was six handbreadths long. When the five handbreadths of the base were subtracted from each side, the following equation determines the remaining length and width: 32 cubits minus 10 (i.e., 5 on either side) handbreadths, equals 30 cubits and two handbreadths.Thirty handbreadths [further] up and 5 handbreadths [further] in is [called] the surrounding ledge.27This name was chosen because, in contrast to the base, the ledge surrounded the altar on all four sides (Tifferet Yisrael).The height of thirty handbreadths is considered as five cubits, for this cubit is measured by six handbreadths.Thus, its area was 28 cubits and four handbreadths by 28 cubits and four handbreadths.28This figure is reached when 10 handbreadths (5 on either side) are subtracted from 30 cubits and 2 handbreadths.Go up eighteen handbreadths, place a hollow, rectangular structure in each corner of this surface [thus, creating the Altar's] four horns.The area encompassed by the horns was one cubit by one cubit on all sides.29In this case, the cubits contained six handbreadths. Each of the horns was a cubit long and a cubit wide. The space in between them was left hollow, thus, reducing both the length and the width of the upper surface of the altar by two cubits. Similarly, the space for the priests to walk was a cubit on all sides.30Here too, the cubit had six handbreadths, thus reducing both the length and the width of the upper surface of the altar by two cubits.[Thus,] the surface on which [the wood for the sacrifices] was arranged31I.e., the upper surface of the altar. was 24 cubits and four handbreadths by 24 cubits and four handbreadths.32The Ra'avad explains that the Altar's horns were slanted inward, thus, consuming an additional four handbreadths of space and reducing the surface to exactly 24 cubits. It must be noted that both Rashi and Tosefot (Sukkah 45a) concur with the Rambam's opinion that the horns stood directly perpendicular to the Altar.
Each horn was five handbreadths high.33The horns were a cubit high when using the measure of five handbreadths to the cubit. The area of each horn was a cubit by a cubit. [All] four horns were hollow.34Zevachim 54b derives this concept as follows: The prophet Zechariah declared: "And they shall be filled like bowls, like the corners of the Altar." Thus, that vision implies that the horns located on the Altar's corners can serve as receptacles.Thus, the surface on which [the wood for the sacrifices] was arranged was 18 handbreadths above [the surrounding ledge.]Half of the Altar's height [began] 6 handbreadths below the end of the surrounding ledge.35The height of the altar can be summarized as follows:a) the base - 1 cubit - 5 handbreadthsb) the surrounding ledge - 5 cubits - 30 handbreadthsc) the Altar's surface - 3 cubits - 18 handbreadthsd) the horns - 1 cubit - 5 handbreadths, a total of 58 handbreadths. Thus half of its height was 29 handbreadths. The surrounding ledge was 30 cubits high and the base, five. Thirty plus five minus six equals 29.
A scarlet band36The altar in the Sanctuary in the desert had a copper net screen which served this function. See Exodus 27:4-5 and Zevachim 53a. is girded around the middle of the Altar six handbreadths below the surrounding ledge to separate between the blood [to be cast on] the upper [portion of the Altar]37The blood of a fowl brought as a burnt offering had to be cast on the upper portion of the Altar (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 6:20). and the blood [to be sprinkled on] the lower [portion of the Altar].38The blood of a bird brought as a sin offering was sprinkled on the lower portion of the Altar (ibid. 7:6). Similarly, the blood of animals brought as burnt, guilt, or peace offerings was sprinkled in the same place (ibid. 5:6).Thus, the distance from the earth to the surface on which [the wood for the sacrifices] was arranged was a handbreadth less than nine cubits.39As mentioned above, the Altar's horns were 1 cubit high. Thus, one cubit may be subtracted from the ten cubit height mentioned previously. Since the Altar's base measured five handbreadths and not six, an additional handbreadth is subtracted, leaving the figure mentioned in this Halachah.
The ledge encircled the Altar on all four sides. The base did not.40Zevachim 53b explains that although a major portion of the Temple Mount was in Judah's inheritance, the Altar was to be positioned in the tribal inheritance of Benjamin. (Note the Targum on Genesis 49:27.)A small stretch of land extended out of the inheritance of Judah into that of Benjamin, and occupied a portion of the space that should have been taken by the Altar's base. That space was left empty to insure that the entire structure of the Altar was in the inheritance of Benjamin. Note the commentary to Chapter 7, Halachah 14. The base encompassed the entire northern41The side to one's right as one faced the Holy of Holies. and western42The side of the Altar closest to the Temple building. sides [of the Altar], and consumed one cubit on the South side and one cubit on the east side.43Thus the Altar's base only extended one cubit on each of its southern and eastern sides.This interpretation of the Rambam's text is based on the diagrams accompanying his commentary on the Mishnah published by Rav Kapach. Rashi's commentary (Zevachim, ibid. ) expresses the same concept. See the accompanying diagram.[Thus,] the southeast corner [of the Altar] did not have a base.
There were two holes in the southwest corner [of the Altar's base],44The blood from the sacrifices was either poured on the south or the west side of the Altar, depending on the nature of the offering. These holes were positioned in the southwest corner to facilitate drainage. (See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Middot 3:2.) resembling two thin nostrils. They were called Shittin.45That name was derived from the word shotet meaning "flow." The blood from the Altar flowed away through these holes. The blood46And also the wine and water libations (see Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 10:7). [which was poured onto the Altar] would run off through them and be mixed together in the drainage canal in that corner.47The drainage canal passed through the entire Temple courtyard and was used when the priests wanted to clean the courtyard floor. They would plug the drain, flooding the entire courtyard with water, and then unplug the drain and let the water flow out through the canal. From there, it would flow out to the Kidron River.48Because of the large amount of blood that would flow into that river, its water was sold as fertilizer (Commentary of the Rosh to Middot, ibid.).
Below, in the floor of that corner of the Altar, was a place, a cubit by a cubit, [covered by] a block of marble, with a ring affixed to it.49The ring facilitated the lifting of the marble block. They would descend there to the Shittin and clean them.50Lest the blood coagulate and cause them to become clogged.
The ramp51See Chapter 1, Halachah 17. was constructed to the south of the Altar.52I.e., on one's left when facing the Holy of Holies. Its length was 32 cubits, and its width, sixteen cubits. It consumed 30 cubits on the ground adjacent to the Altar, and extended [further, covering] one cubit of the base and one cubit of the surrounding ledge.53The ramp was not built as a right triangle. Rather, the wall on the right side was slanted slightly, so that the ramp would cover the base and the surrounding ledge, which together protruded two cubits beyond the edge of the Altar itself.The phrase "its length" does not refer to the length of the ramp's surface, (the hypotenuse of the triangle), but the space it occupied on the ground, as well as the two additional cubits with which it overlapped the base and the surrounding ledge. The actual length of the ramp's surface was slightly longer.There was a small space54Larger than the hair's breadth mentioned in the following halachah. between the ramp and the Altar so that the limbs [of the sacrifices] would have to be tossed to reach the Altar.55The wood piles upon which the Altar's fire were to be kindled were arranged on the south side of the Altar, so that the priests would be able to ascend the ramp and place the sacrificial limbs directly on those pyres. However, the ramp did not reach the edge of the Altar. The priests were thus prevented from placing the limbs directly on the fire and were required to toss them.Zevachim 62b explains the necessity to toss the limbs, as follows: The Torah draws an analogy between the flesh of an offering and its blood, as it is written (Deuteronomy 12:27 : "You shall sacrifice your burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood." The blood must be tossed on the Altar, as it is written (Leviticus 1:5 : "And they shall toss the blood on the Altar." Hence, the limbs must also reach the pyre in that fashion.See also Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 6:4.The height of the ramp was nine cubits minus a sixth of a cubit. It equaled that of [the surface on which the wood for the sacrifices] was arranged.56As mentioned in Halachah 7, the cubit measurement for the base had only five handbreadths. Thus, the Altar's - and consequently, the ramp's - height was eight and five-sixths cubits, when calculated in cubits of six handbreadths.The Rambam's phrasing at the beginning of the Halachah, "[covering] one cubit of the base and one cubit of the surrounding ledge" requires clarification, because the base itself did not run under the ramp. However, the space for it was left vacant.See the accompanying diagram for a depiction of the concepts mentioned in this Halachah.
Two small ramps extended from it. One led to the base,57This small ramp was placed on the west side of the altar, the side closest to the Temple building. After the blood of the sin offerings were sprinkled as required, the rest of the blood was poured on the west side of the Altar's base. This ramp allowed the priests to reach that position. and the other to the surrounding ledge.58The ramp leading to the surrounding ledge was on the east side of the Altar. When the priests circled the Altar to sprinkle the blood of the sin offering on the Altar's horns, they ascended using this ramp.The above follows the opinion expressed by Rashi (Zevachim, loc. cit.). Some other authorities maintain that both smaller ramps were situated on the west side of the Altar. Though the Rambam does not state his opinion explicitly, from his description of the sacrificial proceedings (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot: 6:20, 7:10), it appears that he accepts the first opinion. They were set off from the Altar by a hair's breadth.There was an aperture on the west side59The aperture was placed there because sin-offerings were offered on the southwest corner of the Altar (Rashi, Pesachim 34a).It appears that this aperture was located on the wall of the ramp, and not on its upper surface (Tifferet Yisrael). of the ramp, a cubit by a cubit. It was called the Rivuvah.6013Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura explains that this word means "hollow place."The Ra'avad explains that there were two openings: one called the aperture, and the second, the Rivuvah. His opinion is not accepted by most authorities, as explained in the Kessef Mishneh. There, fowl that had been disqualified for use as sin offerings would be placed until their form decomposed, at which time they could be taken out to be burnt.61Generally, a sin-offering that is disqualified for use must be removed from the Altar and burned immediately. However, if there are no severe factors to invalidate the sacrifice, it would appear disrespectful to dispose of the sacrifice in that manner. Rather, the sacrifice is left overnight - an act which obligates a sacrifice to be removed and burnt - and disposed of the next morning (Rashi, loc. cit..).A woman who gave birth was obligated to bring a bird as a sin offering. Hence, it was a very common sacrifice. The Rivuvah was constructed to store the birds which had become disqualified. It thus prevented confusion between those birds which were disqualified, and those which were fit to be sacrificed (Tifferet Yisrael).
Two tables were [placed] on the left side of the ramp:One of marble, on which the limbs [of the sacrifices to be offered on the Altar] were placed,62The communal sacrifices were brought directly from the slaughtering area to the top of the Altar by a number of priests. Thus, there was no need to set aside a place for the limbs to be placed. However, sometimes private sacrifices were offered by only one priest, who could not possibly carry all the limbs at one time. This table was useful on such occasions.Though generally an effort was made to use precious metals in the Temple, this table was made of marble. The sages feared that a metal table would conduct heat and cause the sacrificial meat to spoil. Marble is better for this purpose, since it is a very poor conductor of heat. See Shekalim 6:4, and Tamid 31b. andOne of silver, on which sacrificial vessels were placed.
When we build the Altar, it must be made as one solid block, resembling a pillar. No empty cavity may be left at all.63In the sanctuary of the desert, the Altar was a hollow structure filled with earth (Exodus 27:8, Mechilta). However, such a structure was not acceptable for the Temple.We must bring whole stones, both large and small.64See Chapter 1, Halachot 14-16. Then we must create a liquid with lime, pitch, and molten lead, and pour it [over the stones] into a large mold of its dimensions.65As mentioned in the following halachah, the Altar must be entirely square, yet we were forbidden to cut or file it to size. Wooden molds were employed in order to create such a shape. We must build it in this manner, ascending [level by level].66Zevachim 54a describes the Altar's construction in detail: First, a mold 32 cubits by 32 cubits, and one cubit high, was brought to create the base. The mixture of stones, lime, pitch, and molten lead was poured into it. Then, the mold for the second level, the surrounding ledge, was placed down. This mold was 30 cubits by 30 cubits and five cubits high. After the mixture was poured into it, the mold for the Altar's upper surface was brought. That mold, 28 cubits by 28 cubits, was three cubits high. Once it was filled, four molds, each a cubit by a cubit and one cubit high, were placed in each corner for the horns.The measures mentioned above were all rounded off. As mentioned in Halachot 6-7, additional handbreadths must be added or subtracted for all these measures.We must place a block of wood or stone in the southeast corner of the structure, equal to the measure of [the missing portion of the Altar's] base.67See Halachah 10. Similarly, [blocks] must be placed in each horn until the building is completed.68For the horns must be hollow, as mentioned in Halachah 8. Then, the blocks may be removed from the structure, thus leaving the southeast corner without a base, and the horns, hollow.
The four horns, the base, and a square shape are absolute requirements for the Altar. Any Altar which lacks [either] a horn, a base, a ramp, or a square shape, is unfit for use, for these four are absolute requirements.69Regarding these four elements, the Torah uses the expression hamizbeiach, the Altar, implying that the Altar can only be called an Altar if it possesses these elements. If even one is lacking, the Altar is incomplete (Rashi, Zevachim, 62a):In regard to the horns, it is written (Leviticus 4:18 : "the horns of the Altar."In regard to the base, it is written (ibid.:34): "to the base of the Altar."In regard to the ramp, it is written (ibid. 6:7): "to the face of the Altar." This phrase refers to the ramp, for it faces the Altar and allows access to it.In regard to the Altar's square shape, it is written (Exodus 27:1 : "The Altar shall be square."However, the measures of length, width, and height, are not absolute requirements,70See Halachah 3. provided they are not less than a cubit by a cubit [in area,] and three cubits high. [The latter were] the dimensions of the surface [on which the wood for the sacrifices] was arranged for the altar [in the Sanctuary that accompanied the Jews] in the desert.71See Halachah 5.
[The following laws apply when] the structure of the Altar is damaged. If a handbreadth of its structure is damaged, it is unfit for use.72In Chapter 1, Halachah, the Rambam writes: "Any stone which is damaged to the extent that a nail will become caught in it [when passing over it], as is the case regarding a slaughtering knife, is disqualified for [use in the] Altar or the ramp, as it is written (Deuteronomy 27:6 : 'You shall build the Altar of the Lord with whole stones.'The Kessef Mishneh explains that since the Torah requires whole stones to be used for the Altar, even the slightest damage renders them unfit for use. In contrast, the Torah does not make such a specification regarding the Altar itself. Hence, as long as the damage is not extensive, the Altar is not disqualified. If less than a handbreadth [is damaged], it is acceptable,73Chullin 18a records a debate on this subject, between Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai and Rabbi Elazer ben Yaakov. Rabbi Shimon mentions the measure quoted by the Rambam, while Rabbi Elazer maintains that even smaller damage, the size of an olive, can render the Altar unfit for use. Though generally, halachah is usually decided according to Rabbi Elazer's opinion, the Rambam chose that of Rabbi Shimon. provided none of the remaining stones are damaged.74As mentioned above, the Altar is rendered unfit if there is the slightest damage to its stones.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
The design of the Menorah is explicitly [stated] in the Torah.1See Exodus 25:31-40. See also Menachot 28b for a description of the Menorah. The [central] shaft of the Menorah had four goblets, two bulbs, and two flowers,2See Halachah 9 for a definition of the terms "goblets, bulbs, and flowers." The position of the ornaments in the Menorah's shaft is described in Halachah 10. [Exodus 25:34] states: "The Menorah shall have four embossed goblets, together with its bulbs and its flowers."3Since the Torah refers to the plural form for these ornaments, yet it does not specify a number, two bulbs and two flowers are required. A third flower was close to the Menorah's base, as [Numbers 8:4] states: "to its base, to its flower."4Although this flower was not mentioned in the description of the Menorah's construction in Exodus, the Menachot, loc. cit. and all the commentaries include it in their design.
The [Menorah] had three feet.5The Torah does not mention feet in its description of the Menorah's construction. Their presence is recorded in the Talmud (Menachot, loc. cit.), but no specific number of feet is mentioned. Nevertheless, all major commentaries have described the Menorah as having three feet. It must be noted that Josephus' description of the Menorah and the depiction of the Menorah on the Arch of Titus both lack feet. However, there are other inconsistencies in those sources.Six [diagonal]6The Rambam implies that the branches of the Menorah extended diagonally from its central shaft. He depicts the Menorah's branches in this way in the drawings he added to his commentary on the Mishnah. See Rav Kapach's edition.Similarly, the Rambam's son, Rav Avraham, writes in his commentary on the Torah (Exodus 25:32 : "The six branches of the Menorah extended upward as straight lines, as depicted by my father, of blessed memory, and not as depicted by others."Other commentaries, including Rashi (Exodus 25:32  agree with the Rambam on this matter. It is thus difficult to comprehend why most popular portrayals of the Menorah show its branches as semicircles. That form was, indeed, used on the Arch of Titus, but, as mentioned above, there were other imprecisions in that monument. Furthermore, there is no reason to favor the portrayal of the Menorah made by a Gentile to celebrate Jerusalem's downfall over the description offered by our Torah leaders. branches extended from three other bulbs in the [central] shaft of the Menorah, three [branches] on one side and three on the other.Each branch had three goblets, a bulb, and a flower. They were all embossed7In Hebrew, the verse requiring embossment (ibid.:34) reads: "The Menorah had four goblets embossed with bulbs and flowers." Yoma 52a lists five verses in the Torah for which the Sages were unsure of the proper interpretation. This is one of them. The Sages did not know whether the adjective "embossed" described the goblets mentioned before it or the bulbs and flowers mentioned afterwards.Because of this quandary, the Rambam decided that all three ornaments were to be embossed. Nothing would be lost by employing this technique to fashion certain ornaments, even though the Torah did not require them to be made in this manner. However, if one ornament was not embossed, a direct command of the Torah might not have been fulfilled (Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Corcus). by beating them [in a manner that their surface] resembled [tiny] almonds.8In his commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot, op. cit.), the Rambam writes: "The word meshukadim ("embossed") means 'a craft of almonds' (shikeidim). This technique is popular among coppersmiths. They beat a sheet with a hammer until its [surface appears to be] covered with almonds."The accompanying diagram is a copy of the depiction of the Menorah by the Rambam which accompanies his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.).
Thus, the total number of goblets was 22;9Three on each branch, bringing the total to 18, and four on the central shaft. Rabbenu Bachai (Exodus 25:31  notes that the number of goblets equals the number of letters in the Hebrew alphabet. of flowers, nine;10One on each branch and three on the central shaft. of bulbs, eleven.11One on each branch, three on the central shaft from which the branches extended outward, and two on the middle portion of the central shaft. [The absence of] any of these ornaments could render the others invalid.12Menachot, ibid., explains that since each ornament is mentioned in the Torah, the Menorah is not considered complete without them. Even if one of the 42 [ornaments] was lacking, all [the others] would not be valid.
This applies when the [Menorah] is made of gold.13Menachot 28a explains Exodus 25:31: "You shall make a Menorah of pure gold ...its goblets, its bulbs, and its flowers," as follows: "When you make a Menorah of gold, then you shall make its goblets, bulbs, and flowers." [However, if it is made] of other metals,14See Chapter 1, Halachah 19 and the commentary, which explains that if the Jewish people are poor, the Menorah and the other vessels of the Sanctuary need not be made of gold. Indeed, when the Maccabees rededicated the Temple, they made the Menorah of iron, coated with tin. it should not have goblets, bulbs, and flowers.15The Mishneh LiMelech explains that the Rambam writes: "[Should it be made from] other metals, there is no need to be precise about the weight [of the Menorah]." However, regarding the ornaments, the Rambam specifically states that "we should not make goblets, bulbs, or flowers." That statement implies that not only are these ornaments not required if the Menorah is made of other metals, but that it is prohibited to add them.Also, when the Menorah is made out of gold, its total [weight] including its lamps shall be one talent.16The Torah (Exodus 25:39  specifically states: "He shall make it have a talent of pure gold with all its vessels."A talent, kikar in Hebrew, was equal to 3000 shekels, or approximately 68.5 kilograms (153.5 pounds) in modern measure.The "lamps" mentioned by the Rambam are discussed in Halachah 6, which also explains the meaning of the term "vessels" in this verse. It must be fashioned entirely by hammering out one block [of gold].17Exodus 25:36 states: "Their bulbs and branches must be made from it. They shall all be hammered out of one piece of pure gold."[In contrast, should it be made from] other metals, there is no need to be precise about its weight.18Its weight may equal more or less than a talent, as explained above. Also, it may be hollow.19The Kessef Mishneh explains that when the Menorah is made of other metals, it need not be fashioned by beating out one block of metal, as is required when it is made of gold. The Mishneh Limelech explains that even if the Menorah is made of other metals, it is preferable that it be beaten out of one solid block of metal. Otherwise, it is only acceptable after the fact.
[The Menorah] should never be made of fragments of broken vessels, whether it was made of gold or of other metals.20When the Menorah was made of gold, it was not acceptable if it was fashioned in this manner. However, the Mishneh Limelech indicate that if the Menorah was made of other metals, after the fact, it is acceptable if assembled from fragments even though it is not desirable to do so as an initial preference.
[Though the Menorah's] tongs,21Tweezers to adjust and insert the wicks into the lamps. See Rashi, Exodus 25:38. Nachmanides interprets the Hebrew, Melkachayim (tongs), mentioned in the above verse, as "wick-holders" and explains that they were a permanent fixture of the Menorah. ash-scoops,22Small scoops to remove the ashes from the lamps. See Rashi, loc. cit. Nachmanides differs and defines the Hebrew Machtot as ash-catchers, maintaining that they were permanently fixed in the Menorah. and oil containers [shall also be made out of pure gold], they are not included in the talent [mentioned above. This decision was made] because, in connection with the Menorah, [Exodus 25:31] states: "pure gold" and afterwards, [ibid.:38) repeats: "Its wick-tongs and ash-scoops shall be made of pure gold."23The Rambam feels it necessary to elaborate in this instance, because a superficial reading of the Torah's verses might create a different impression. The Torah states (ibid.:38-39): "Its wick-tongs and ash-scoops shall be made of pure gold. He shall make it with a talent of pure gold; all these vessels."The Hebrew word keilim, translated as "vessels," may also be translated as "utensils." Thus, one might conclude that the Menorah's utensils must also be fashioned by hammering out the same block of gold and hence, are to be permanent parts of the Menorah. Indeed, Nachmanides appears to have understood the meaning of the verses in that manner. However, Menachot 88b explains that here the term keilim refers only to the lamps, and not to the other utensils.The verse does not state: "its lamps shall be of pure gold," for the lamps24The receptacles in which the oil and wicks were placed. were permanently fixed in the Menorah, and were included in the talent [of gold from which the Menorah was fashioned].25Menachot, op. cit. records that this statement was the subject of a debate among the Sages. Some maintained that the lamps were separate fixtures which could be removed from the Menorah when necessary.
The [absence of one of the] seven branches of the Menorah invalidates the others.26Exodus 25:32 states, "Six branches extend from its sides." The Menorah's central shaft became the seventh branch. If one branch was missing, the Menorah is considered to be lacking the essential form prescribed by the Torah. Therefore, it is invalidated. The [absence of one of the] seven lamps invalidates the others. This applies whether [the Menorah was made] of gold or of other metals.27In contrast with the goblets, bulbs, and flowers in Halachah 4.All the lamps were [permanently] affixed to the branches.28The Rambam ruled that the lamps were an integral part of the Menorah. Thus, a unique process was employed in their kindling. It was deemed disrespectful to kindle the Menorah from fire that was not sacred. The lamp of the central shaft was to be lit only from the fire of the Altar. All other lamps would be kindled from it or from each other. Since the lamps themselves were permanently affixed in the Menorah, the priests kindled them by extending their wicks with the tweezers until they reached a lamp that was burning. They would then light the wicks and return them to their own lamps. (Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:13-14).It was necessary that every lamp be on a separate branch. If two lamps were made on the same branch, the Menorah was invalid.
The six lamps affixed in the six branches extending out from the Menorah all faced the central lamp which was above the [central] shaft of the Menorah.29Numbers 8:2 commands: "When you kindle the lamps, the seven lamps shall shine towards the center of the Menorah."Rav Yehudah HaChassid explained that according to the Rambam, the lamps themselves were fashioned so that the wicks would face in that direction. The side of the lamps facing the center shaft slanted inward. The diagrams drawn by the Rambam published in Rav Kapach's edition verify this opinion. The central lamp faced the Holy of Holies and was called the western lamp.30This lamp was not positioned any further westward than the others. Nevertheless, it was given that name because it faced the Holy of Holies, which was situated in the west. The Rambam's decision follows the opinion of Rabbi Eliezar ben Shimon, who maintains that the Menorah's lamps spread across the width of the Sanctuary. Accordingly, there is no one lamp whose position clearly identified it as "the western lamp."Menachot also mentions that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi did not accept this opinion and maintained that the Menorah was positioned along the length of the Sanctuary, from east to west. Thus, there was one lamp that was "westernmost."Halachah is usually based on Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi's opinion. Nevertheless, the Rambam favored Rabbi Eliezer's opinion, because there is a verse from the Torah that appears to support it. Leviticus 24:3 states: "Aharon shall prepare [the lights] continuously before the Lord," implying that before kindling the Menorah, it was necessary to prepare the wick to point "before the Lord" (Kessef Mishneh). This difference of opinion was preserved over the generations and many later authorities accepted the view that the lamps of the Menorah extended from east to west.Shabbat 22a relates that the western lamp was "testimony to the entire world that the Shechinah rests in Israel." Each day, the western lamp was the first lamp kindled. Exactly the same measure of oil was placed in it as in the other lamps, yet it was always the last to burn out. Nevertheless, after the spiritual level of the Jewish people declined, this miracle did not always occur (Yoma 39a).
The goblets resembled Alexandrine chalices. They had wide mouths and narrow bases.31Rav Kapach's publication of the Rambam's drawing of the Menorah shows the goblets in an inverted position. Note also the drawing accompanying Halachah 2.Rabbenu Bachai (Exodus 25:31  explains the symbolism of the inverted position. A goblet serves two functions: it enables the collection of liquids, and offers the opportunity of pouring the liquids where desired. Thus, the goblets are symbolic of the Heavenly spheres, which receive influence from Heavenly sources and convey it to our lowly world.The main purpose of the Menorah was to shed light on the world. This intent was expressed in the design of the Temple itself. Though generally, windows are built slanting inward, King Solomon's Temple windows slanted outwards (I Kings 6:4 , so that the Menorah's light would spread to the world at large.Similarly, the inverted position of the goblets in the Menorah emphasizes that the Menorah was intended to disseminate spiritual influence throughout our world. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 21, p. 164. The bulbs were like the apples of Keros which are slightly elongated, [resembling] eggs with both ends rounded.32In his commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot, loc. cit.), the Rambam also emphasize that the bulbs were not entirely round.Rabbenu Bachai explained that the bulbs symbolized boundless spiritual pleasure. The flowers resemble the flowers of a column. They are shaped like bowls, with the edges bent over outward.33Rabbenu Bachai explains that the flowers represent the world's potential for growth and development.
The Menorah was eighteen handbreadths high:34This entire Halachah is a direct quote from Menachot 28b.Eighteen handbreadths equals between 4.5 and six feet depending on the different conversions to modern measurements.Its feet, [base,] and [bottommost] flower were three handbreadths high,35Tosefot, Menachot, op. cit., questions why all three ornaments were crowded into a handbreadth while generally, the bulbs themselves were a handbreadth in length.There were two empty handbreadths,The next handbreadth included a goblet, a bulb, and a flower,Two empty handbreadths [followed],A handbreadth with a bulb and two branches extending outward from it, one to one side and one to the other, extending outward and ascending until reaching the full height of the Menorah,36In his Commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam states that all the bulbs were of equal measure. If so, Tosefot's question mentioned above becomes even more difficult. A possible solution is offered by the Tzurat HaBayit, which explains that the branches did not extend from the bulbs themselves, but from the Menorah's central shaft. Thus, the length of the bulb and the branches, and similarly, the bulb, goblet, and flower, could both be one handbreath. However, as mentioned above, the Rambam's diagram of the Menorah depicts the branches as extending out from the bulbs.See Rashi (Menachot 28b which states that in this handbreadth, the goblet, flower, and bulbs projected from different sides of the Menorah.An empty handbreadth,A handbreadth with a bulb and two branches extending outward from it, one to one side and one to the other, extending outward and ascending until they reached the full height of the Menorah,An empty handbreadth,A handbreadth with a bulb and two branches extending outward from it, one to one side and one to the other, extending outward and ascending, until they reached the full height of the Menorah,and two empty handbreadths[Thus,] three handbreadths remained, with three goblets, a bulb, and a flower.37One might ask: Why does the Rambam omit mention of the Menorah's lamps? Although his source is the Talmud, it is possible to explain that this Talmudic passage follows the opinion that the lamps could be removed from the Menorah. However, as mentioned in Halachah 6, the Rambam follows the interpretation that the lamps were an integral part of the Menorah's structure. Therefore, they should be mentioned.
A stone with three steps was [placed] before the Menorah.38The Sifri notes the relationship between the word used in the command to kindle the Menorah (Numbers 8:2 , he'alah, and the Hebrew word for steps, ma'aleh, and comments: "Make steps with which to light the Menorah."In his commentary to Tamid 3:9, Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura explained that three steps were constructed because on three occasions the Torah refers to the kindling of the Menorah in a similar manner: in the verse cited above, in the following verse (ibid.:3), and in Exodus 27:20. The priest stood on it39The Menorah was eighteen handbreadths (approximately 5 ft.) high. Thus for an average person to have easy access to the lamps, he would have to stand on a raised platform. and kindled the lamps.40In Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:16-17, the Rambam relates that, in the morning, the priest would not light all of the Menorah lamps at once. He entered with a kuz - according to the Har HaMoriah, a large vessel containing the oil containers, the tongs, and the ash scoops. He then lit five candles and left the Sanctuary, placing the kuz on the second step of the stone. Afterwards, he returned to light the two remaining candles and remove the kuz. [Also,] he placed the containers of oil, the tongs, and the ash-scoops upon it while kindling it.
The Table [for the Showbread] was twelve handbreadths long and six handbreadths wide.41The Torah commands (Exodus 25:23 : "Make a table... two cubits long and one cubit wide." As mentioned above, in the commentary to Chapter 2, Halachah 6, the Rambam follows Rabbi Meir's opinion, that a cubit was six handbreadths in measure. Its length was positioned in parallel with the length of the Sanctuary42I.e., from east to west. and its width was positioned in parallel with the width of the Sanctuary.43From north to south. See Menachot 96a.Similarly, the length and width of all the articles in the Sanctuary except for the Ark paralleled the length and width of the Sanctuary. The length of the Ark was placed to the width of the Sanctuary.44Thus, the staves of the ark bulged out from the curtain dividing the Holy of Holies from the Sanctuary (Yoma 54a).The lamps of the Menorah were also positioned in parallel with the width of the Temple, from north to south.45As mentioned in Halachah 8, this matter was a subject of debate among the Sages of the Mishnah. The Ra'avad notes the differing opinions in his commentary.The Nodah BiYhudah (Orach Chayim, Responsum 122) notes that Menachot derives its knowledge of the position of the Showbread Table from the position of the Menorah, and that they were placed in parallel. On that basis, he questions the Rambam's statements that they were positioned perpendicular to each other. He explained that the Talmud's statement was made only in the preliminary stages of debate, and according to the final opinion, there is no contradiction with the Rambam's decision.Note the accompanying diagram which was based on the Rambam's drawings in his commentary on the Mishnah, Menachot 11:6.
The Table46The design of the Table described by the Rambam differs greatly from popularly accepted diagrams, usually based on the text, Ma'aseh Choshev. In order to clarify the Rambam's opinion, this and the following two Halachot will be explained in brief and a more general explanation will be provided later. had four side frames of gold which were Y-shaped at their heads.47This Halachah is quoted from Menachot 11, Mishnah 6. The Hebrew word translated as "Y-shaped" used by the Rambam and the Mishnah is mifutzalim, which means split or forked. Our description is based on the diagrams drawn by the Rambam himself which accompany Rav Kapach's edition of his commentary to the Mishnah. Note the drawing accompanying this Halachah. They supported the two arrangements of the showbread,48The Torah declares (Leviticus 24:5-6): "You shall take fine flour and bake twelve loaves from it.... Place them in two rows, six per row, on the pure Table before the Lord." According to the Rambam, the loaves were arranged on the Table itself. As their name implies, the side frames were placed at its sides for support. two for each arrangement. The Torah49Exodus 25:29. calls them "its kesot."50Rashi (Menachot 97a) explains that this name relates to the word kesheh, meaning hard, or firm. The sideframes supported the showbreads, prevented them from crumbling, and allowed them to become firm.
There were 28 rods of gold. Each resembled half of a hollow reed.51Like half of a bamboo shoot. Fourteen [were used] for one arrangement and fourteen for the other arrangement.52As explained in the following Halachah. [The Torah]53Exodus, loc. cit. calls them "its minakiot."There were two incense bowls. The frankincense was placed inside them on the Table, on the side of the arrangements [of Showbread].54This command to bring the Showbread continues (Leviticus 24:7 : "Place pure frankincense near each arrangement."In Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:9, the Rambam explains that two handbreadths remained between the two arrangements of showbread for the two incense bowls. Other opinions state that the incense bowls were placed on top of the bread, one in each row. [The Torah]55This command to bring the Showbread continues (Leviticus 24:7 : "Place pure frankincense near each arrangement."In Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:9, the Rambam explains that two handbreadths remained between the two arrangements of showbread for the two incense bowls. Other opinions state that the incense bowls were placed on top of the bread, one in each row. calls them "its kapot."The molds used to make the Showbread56Note Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:8 which relates that there were three molds. One was used to prepare the dough, one to bake the loaves, and one in which they were left to cool. According to the Rambam, all three were made of gold. Other opinions, including Rashi, disagree, and maintain that the loaves were baked in an iron mold. are called57This command to bring the Showbread continues (Leviticus 24:7 : "Place pure frankincense near each arrangement."In Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:9, the Rambam explains that two handbreadths remained between the two arrangements of showbread for the two incense bowls. Other opinions state that the incense bowls were placed on top of the bread, one in each row. "its ke'arot."
The 28 rods mentioned above [were used as follows]: The first loaf was placed on the Table itself.58As explained above, the purpose of the rods was to allow air to pass between the loaves and to preserve their freshness. Thus, one might suggest that rods be placed under the bottom most loaves for that same reason. However, the surface of the Table itself was gold, and thus remained cool. Hence, no other measures were necessary. Three rods were placed between the first and the second loaves. Similarly, three rods were placed between each [of the following] loaves. Between the fifth and the sixth loaf, there were only two rods, for another loaf is not placed upon the sixth.59Since these rods had to support a lesser weight, their number could be reduced. Thus, each row [of loaves] required fourteen rods.60As indicated above, the Rambam's concept of the Table differs from that of the other commentaries. The major differences refer to the definition of the Kasot, the side frames. Rashi, Tosafot and the Rashbam each have slightly different concepts of the sideframes. However, all three explanations depict the sideframes as sturdy structures which supported the rods. The latter, in turn, supported the weight of the loaves. Thus, these commentaries interpret the word mifutzalin used by the Mishnah to mean that they possess grooves or holes. The rods were inserted through these grooves or holes, and were able to support the loaves.As explained in brief in the above Halachot, and at length in Chapter 5 of Rambam's Hilchot Temidim U'Musafim, the twelve Showbreads were stacked on top of each other, their weight being supported only by the Table itself and the rods. According to his conception, the side frames were thin Y-shaped rods which were intended to keep the arrangements straight and to support them from the sides. However, they did not bear any of the weight of the loaves.There are two advantages to the explanation offered by the Rambam:a) According to the Rambam, the term mifultzalin used by the Mishnah is interpreted more precisely.b) According to the other explanations, it is difficult to comprehend why only two rods were used for the uppermost row. Since the loaves did not rest upon each other and their weight was borne by the side frames as well, there is no difference between the top row and the others?In contrast, according to the Rambam, there is no difficulty. Since the rods bore the weight of the loaves themselves, and the uppermost rods had to support a lesser weight, their number could be reduced.See the accompanying diagram which depicts the Table according to the Rambam's description.
There were two tables in the Entrance Hall, near the entrance to the Temple building.61Generally, these tables are depicted as being positioned apart from each other, one at either side of the entrance. One was made of marble.62The Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 6:3) asks why this table was not made of silver. It explains that since the loaves were placed on the Table while they were hot, their heat would raise the temperature of the silver. This could cause mold to grow on the loaves. The Showbread was placed upon it before it was brought in.63The Showbread had to be baked before the Sabbath. However, it was not placed on the Table in the Sanctuary until the Sabbath morning sacrifices were offered. In the interim, the loaves were placed on this marble table (Tosefta, Menachot, Chap. 11). The other was made of gold. The bread was placed upon it when it was brought out.64The loaves from the previous week were removed from the Table in the Sanctuary and placed on this table while the new loaves were being placed on the Table and the frankincense was being offered. Afterwards, the loaves were divided among the priests. If Yom Kippur fell on a Sabbath, the loaves remained on this table for the entire day (Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 5:4-5). [The rationale for the use of different substances is that] with regard to holy matters, one must always ascend, and may not descend.65Since the Table upon which the Showbread had been placed was covered with gold, it was not proper to place them on a less precious surface afterwards.This principle applies to other matters as well. For example, on the basis of this principle, the School of Hillel explains that each night, a new candle should be added to the Chanukah lamps to increase the light connected with the festival.
The incense altar66This altar was also referred to as the "golden altar," because it was coated with an outer surface of gold. It was also called "the inner altar," because it was placed inside the Temple building. This contrasted with the Altar for the sacrifices, which was placed in the Temple Courtyard. was one cubit by one cubit square.67Exodus 30:1-3 commands: "Make an altar out of acacia wood to burn incense. It shall be square, a cubit long and a cubit wide, including its horns. Cover it with a layer of pure gold." It was placed in the Sanctuary, exactly [midway] between north and south,68Rav Kapach's edition of the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah (Menachot 11:6) indicates that the Rambam originally wrote that the incense altar was positioned slightly to the north. He later amended his text to read as above. between the Table and the Menorah, towards the outside. These three were all placed beyond the first third of the Temple building, in front of the Parochet, which divided the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies.69See Exodus 26:33, and Halachah 2 of the following chapter.
The washbasin70The command to construct a washbasin and for the priests to sanctify their hands and feet before participating in the Temple services is found in Exodus 30:18-19. had twelve taps,71Originally, the washbasin had only two taps. Afterwards, one of the High Priests, ben Katin, fashioned twelve taps for it. He also constructed the mechanism described later in this Halachah (Yoma 37a). so that all the priests who were involved in offering the daily sacrifice72See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 4:6. could sanctify [their hands and feet] at one time.73As mentioned above, before participating in any element of the Temple service, the priests had to sanctify their hands and feet. See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:1.A mechanism was made so that it could be filled with water at all times. [The mechanism itself] was not sacred, and thus, the water remaining in it did not become invalidated [for future use] because the night passed. [This was necessary] because the washbasin was a sacred vessel and sanctified [its contents].74Once a substance was placed in a sacred vessel, it could no longer be used for mundane purposes. Anything which is sanctified by a sacred vessel becomes invalidated [for future use] after the night passes.75Once an article is placed in a sacred vessel, it must be used in the Temple service on that day. If the night passes, it becomes invalid for future use and must be disposed of.Since the washbasin was sacred, all its water became sanctified and could only be used for holy purposes. Were the water to remain in the washbasin overnight, it would become invalid for future use. The Sages felt that it was not fitting to discard a large amount of water every day after it had become sacred, and they tried to devise means of avoiding that difficulty.Yoma 37a and Zevachim 20a explain that each night the washbasin was lowered into a natural reservoir of water by a pulley-operated crane. Tamid 3:8, explains that the crane was very noisy and it was possible to hear the cranking of its gears as far away as Jericho. Its water was not invalid overnight, and the water it contained when it was lifted up again in the morning, could be used for the Temple service.Based on the sections of the Talmud mentioned above, the Ra'avad questions the Rambam's description of the washbasin and its mechanism. With the statement, "[The mechanism] was not sacred and thus, the water remaining in it did not become invalid," the Rambam seems to imply that the mechanism itself contained water, but the water did not become disqualified, because the mechanism, unlike the washbasin itself, was not a sacred vessel. This would seem to contradict the Talmudic passages which describe the mechanism as a crane.This difficulty is further magnified by the fact that in Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 5:14, the Rambam himself writes that each night, the washbasin was submerged in a natural reservoir of water and raised again the next morning.The Kessef Mishneh explains the Rambam's statements as follows: These Talmudic passages use the expression muchani to refer to the mechanism. Though that expression can be rendered as a pulley-operated crane, as above, it can also be explained as a circular reservoir for water, into which the washbasin was placed. This explanation resolves the contradiction between the Rambam and the Talmud. However, the Kessef Mishneh is also puzzled by the seeming contradiction in the Rambam's own words.The Tosefot Yom Tov (Tamid 1:4) quotes the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah (Tamid 3:8). It explains that the "mechanism" was a vessel of water which would be raised each morning and submerged each evening by a pulley-operated crane. It would be placed over the washbasin to keep it filled with water.The Tzurat Habayit maintains that throughout the ages, various techniques were devised to solve the problem of the water which remained overnight in the washbasin. The Mishnah (Eruvin 10:14) relates that pulley-operated cranes were used to draw water during the days of the prophets. Thus, it was likely that a similar technique was employed for the washbasin. Since ben Katin lived in the later years of the Second Temple, it is likely to suppose that his mechanism was more sophisticated.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
The Ark was placed on a stone1Yoma 53b refers to that stone as the even hashtiah, "the foundation stone", and explains that it was given that name because it was the foundation upon which God fashioned the world. According to certain views, the Dome of the Rock Mosque is located on the Temple site and the stone around which it is built is the same even hashtiah. Other Rabbinical sources, however, do not accept this claim. in the western portion of the Holy of Holies.2There is a slight difficulty in the Rambam's statements. The Jerusalem Talmud (Bava Batra 6:2) states that the Ark was placed in the center of the Holy of Holies. A similar statement is also found in the Midrash Tanchuma (Parshat Kedoshim, sec. 10). However, the latter source states that the Even HaShtiah was placed behind the Ark. Perhaps the resolution is that stone was large. It began in the center of the Holy of Holies, while the ark was placed in its western portion. The vial of manna3Exodus 16:33 commands: "Take a vial and fill it with an omer of manna. Place it before the Lord as a testimonial for your descendants. "Commenting on that verse, Rashi relates that in the time of Jeremiah, the people rationalized the fact that they did not study Torah, because of the pressures they faced in earning a livelihood. Jeremiah took the vial of manna from before the Ark and exclaimed: "See how God sustained your ancestors for forty years! Do you doubt whether He can sustain you today?" and Aharon's staff4After Korach's revolt, God commanded all the princes of the tribes to place their staffs in the Sanctuary. Aharon's staff blossomed, and produced leaves and almonds. Then, He commanded that Aharon's staff be placed before the Ark "as a testimonial" (Numbers 17:21-25). were placed before it.When Solomon built the Temple, he was aware that it would ultimately be destroyed. [Therefore,]5I.e., to preserve the Ark fashioned under the direction of Moses, he constructed a chamber, in which the ark could be entombed below [the Temple building] in deep, maze-like vaults.King Josiah6The last of Judah's righteous kings. He witnessed the spiritual decline of the Jewish people and foresaw the inevitable destruction of the Temple. commanded that [the Ark] be entombed in the chamber built by Solomon, as it is said (II Chronicles 35:3 : "And he said to the Levites who would teach wisdom to all of Israel: 'Place the Holy Ark in the chamber built by Solomon, the son of David, King of Israel. You will no [longer] carry it on your shoulders. Now, serve the Lord, your God.'7The entombment of the Ark is the subject of a debate among the Sages in the Talmud (Yoma 53b) and the Tosafta (Sotah 13:2). Although some Sages agree that the Ark was entombed as explained above, others maintain that it was one of the sacred articles plundered by the Babylonian conquerors. A third opinion agrees that it was entombed, but argues that it was entombed under the Chamber of Wood in the Woman's Courtyard and not under the Holy of Holies.When it was entombed, Aharon's staff, the vial of manna, and the oil used for anointing were entombed with it. All these [sacred articles] did not return in the Second Temple.Similarly, the Urim V'Tumim that existed in the Second Temple did not answer with Ruach HaKodesh (Divine inspiration)8Yoma 73b and the commentaries (Nachmanides and Rabbenu Bachai on Numbers 28:21  explain that the Urim V'Tumim were consulted as oracles by the High Priest. They provided guidance on all important questions involving the people as a whole. See the conclusion of Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash for a discussion of this issue. and questions were not asked of them, as stated [in Ezra 2:63]: "until a priest will arise with the Urim V'Tumim."9Yoma 21b mentions the Urim V'Tumim as one of the five miraculous aspects of the First Temple service, which were lacking in the Second Temple. The Rambam quotes that statement in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 10:10.Nevertheless, they were not completely lacking. Exodus 28:43 commands the priests to wear all of the garments prescribed for them during their service in the Sanctuary. If even one garment was lacking, they would be punished by death. Thus, the High Priest had to wear the breastplate with the stones, the Urim V'Tumim. Otherwise, he would lack one of the eight garments he was required to wear. The Rambam explains that although the stones were embedded in the breastplate in the Second Temple as well, they lacked the spiritual dimension that they had possessed in the First Temple. [In the Second Temple,] they only made them to fulfill the requirement of eight garments for the High Priest.10These garments are described in Exodus, Chapter 28, and in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash, ch. 8. Thus, the High Priest would not lack one of the required garments.11The Ra'avad does not accept the Rambam's statements concerning the Urim V'Tumim. He interprets the Urim V'Tumim as being mystical names of God engraved on the breastplate, rather than the stones themselves.In his Chiddushim, Rav Yaakov Emden questions the reason for including this Halachah: "On the surface, there is apparently no practical relevance to these matters in our behavior....The Rambam generally does not include aspects which have neither Halachic nor ethical significance in this text." Why then is it important for us to know whether or not the ark was entombed and where it was entombed?Rav Emden then explains the question he posed, based on the Rambam's statements in Chapter 6. There, the Rambam stated that after the exile, the sanctity of Eretz Yisrael was nullified regarding the laws of the Sabbatical year, the tithes, and certain other agricultural rulings. However, the holiness of Jerusalem and the Temple Mount always remained intact because:The holiness of the Temple and Jerusalem comes about because of the Shechinah, and the Shechinah can never be nullified. Behold, God declared (Leviticus 27:31 : "I shall destroy your Sanctuaries." and the Sages commented (Megillah 28a): "Even though they are destroyed, their holiness remains intact. "The Shechinah's resting place was the Ark. Therefore, had the Ark not been "entombed...in deep, maze-like vaults," on the Temple Mount, the sanctity of that site would also have been nullified. See also Chatam Sofer, Chullin 7a.Likkutei Sichot (Vol. 21, p. 156-160) also discusses the same question. It explains that the Ark is a fundamental element of the Temple and the Temple building cannot be complete without it.Therefore, from the very beginning of the Temple's construction, the Ark had two locations:a) the place for the ark in the Holy of Holies,b) the hidden vault where the Ark would be kept in the event of the Temple's destruction.On this basis, we can see the Sanctuary built by Moses, the two Temples in Jerusalem, and the Messianic Temple, as unified by one essential bond. Since the same Ark was present in all previous structures and they will be revealed again in the Messianic age, all four buildings share the same essence.
The First Temple had a one-cubit thick wall which separated the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies.12As the Rambam states in the conclusion of the halachah, a divider was necessary between the sanctity of the Holy of Holies and the Sanctuary. In the Tabernacle in the desert, a curtain, the parochet, alone served this function. In the First Temple, a wall was also built in addition to the curtain. When the Second Temple was constructed, they were unsure whether the width of that wall was included in the measure of the Sanctuary or the Holy of Holies.13I Kings 6:2 states: "And the length of the Temple Solomon built was 60 cubits." The narrative continues (ibid.:17, 20): "The Sanctuary was 40 cubits long...and the space for the ark was 20 cubits long." Since the combined length of both chambers was only 60 cubits, the width of the wall had to be included in the measure of one of the chambers. However, it was not clear from which chamber it should be built (Jerusalem Talmud, Kelayim 8:4; see also Yoma 52a for a slightly different explanation). Therefore, the Holy of Holies was made a full twenty cubits long, and the Sanctuary a full forty cubits long, and one additional cubit was left between the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies.14The Marginita D'Rabbi Meir asks why the builders of the Second Temple were willing to add an extra cubit between the two chambers, when they hesitated to increase the width of the dividing wall. In resolution, it is explained that originally the eastern wall built by Solomon was seven cubits thick, while in the Second Temple, it was only six cubits thick. Thus, there was no change in the total length of the Temple building.They did not build a wall in the Second Temple.15Bava Batra 3a,b explains that they did not build a wall because the Second Temple was higher than the First. The First Temple was only 30 cubits high. The Second Temple was 100 cubits high. A wall only a cubit thick would not be sturdy if built to such a height. Nevertheless, the width of the wall was not increased, because its original width was established by Ruach HaKodesh, Divine revelation. Thus, they returned to the pattern established in the Sanctuary of Moses and utilized curtains as dividers. Rather, they hung two curtains, one from the side of the Sanctuary and one from the side of the Holy of Holies, with a cubit between them16Yoma 52b relates that the external curtain had an opening on the south and the inner curtain had an opening on the north. Thus, to enter the Holy of Holies, the High Priest had to go through the entire width of the Temple between the two curtains. in place of the width of the wall of the First [Temple].17Tosafot (Yoma, ibid.) asks why they were not able to resolve their dilemma by hanging one curtain, a cubit in width.In response, the commentary states that both curtains were necessary because the verse quoted above, "the curtain shall divide..." clearly implies that the sanctity of the Holy of Holies begins with the outer surface of the curtain. Thus, based on the possibility that the wall of the First Temple was included within the 20 cubits of the Holy of Holies, an additional cubit would have been included in this sacred area if only one curtain was used. From this perspective, the inner curtain had to be a distinct entity, marking the beginning of the most sacred chamber.Conversely, based on the view that the wall had been included in the measure of the Sanctuary and that the wall and the Holy of Holies encompassed 21 cubits, a thick curtain would have been unnecessary, since the outer curtain was located where the division was required to be made. However, in the First Temple, there was only one curtain,18The Kessef Mishneh explains that the expression "First Temple" refers to the Sanctuary, for the First Temple itself had a wall rather than a curtain. However, Rav Yaakov Emden disputes this issue, quoting Yoma 54a which brings a number of Aggadot concerning the Ark and the curtain in the First Temple. The Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Middot 4:7) specifically states that there was a curtain in addition to the wall in the First Temple. as [Exodus 26:33] states: "The curtain will divide for you [between the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies.]"
The Temple building constructed by the exiles [returning from Babylon] was one hundred cubits long, one hundred cubits wide, and one hundred cubits high. The measurement of its height can be described as follows:19The source for the Rambam's statements is Middot 4:6.They built a solid base six cubits high resembling a foundation for it;20The Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah states that this base was embedded in the ground. In contrast, Rabbenu Shemaya explains that the base actually stood above the ground.The Kessef Mishneh explains that the addition of the word "resembling" in this halachah might imply that the Rambam changed his mind and adopted an interpretation similar to that of Rabbenu Shemaya.Tosafot Yom Tov objects to the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah, explaining that it would be inappropriate to include the measure of this base in the height of the Temple. He also explains that in the Mishneh Torah, the Rambam adopted a different perspective. He thus, defines the base as an extension of the steps leading to the Entrance Hall. These steps were six cubits high, the height of the base.Tzurat HaBayit relates that there was a functional aspect to the base, and explains that it contained the lowest floor of the cells mentioned in Halachah 10.the Sanctuary, 40 cubits high;21Although the total height of Solomon's Sanctuary was 30 cubits, the returning exiles built the Second Temple higher, basing their decision on Haggai 2:9: "The glory of this later house will be greater than that of the former."an ornate ceiling, one cubit high;22The Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah indicates that builders made designs of cement and stone in the ceiling. Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura explains that the ceiling was coated with gold and that designs were engraved inside.above that, two cubits were left empty to allow dripping [water] to collect [and to be drained off];23Rather than seep through to the ornate ceiling. this was called the Beit Dilpa;24In this text and in the commentary on the Mishnah, the Rambam merely writes that the empty space was left for water to collect. The Ra'avad mentions the concept of drainage, implying that the Rambam had not conceived of it. However, it may be assumed that this was the Rambam's intention, since it is difficult to conceive why one would leave a space for water to collect without installing a drainage system.Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura and other commentaries on the Mishnah render the term "Beit Dilpa" differently, explaining that it refers to a solid wooden base which supported the roof.the roof above the Beit Dilpa was a cubit thick;the plaster, a cubit high;an upper storey was built on it; its walls were 40 cubits high;its roof included an ornate ceiling one cubit high;a Beit Dilpa, two cubits high;a roof, one cubit high;plaster, one cubit high;a guard rail, three cubits high;25Deuteronomy 22:8 commands: "When you build a new house, you shall construct a guard rail for the roof." Though, in general, synagogues are not required to have a guardrail, because they are not owned by one individual and are not used as a dwelling (Chullin 136a), a guard rail was constructed for the Sanctuary.a sheet of iron resembling a blade, a cubit high, was placed all around the guard rail so that birds will not rest upon it. It was called the Kaleh Orev.26The Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah translates that term as "the raven decimator" and explains that the sharp blade would cut off the birds' feet.The total of the above is 100 cubits.27Note the accompanying diagram, copied from the Rambam's commentary to the Mishnah published by Rav Kapach.
From the west to the east,28I.e., from the far end of the Temple to its entrance. there were 100 cubits as follows:29The Rambam's statements are based on the Mishnah, Middot 4:7. However, his interpretation of the Mishnah varies from the literal meaning.The Mishnah relates all the measurements from the wall of the Entrance Hall, the easternmost point of the Temple building, until the end of the Holy of Holies. Afterwards, it continues: "The wall of the Temple was six [cubits], the cell was six [cubits], and the wall of the cell was five [cubits]."In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Middot 4:3), the Rambam explains that unlike the northern, southern, and eastern external walls of the Temple, the two walls mentioned in the above Mishnah were not solid. Rather, each wall mentioned by the Mishnah refers to two walls, each a cubit thick, with a vacant space in between. Thus, there were really four walls, with three vacant spaces between. The vacant spaces are called cells, ta'im, in Hebrew and discussed in Halachah 10. In particular, the measurements of these vacant spaces are slightly different, as the Rambam explains.There were four walls, one within the other, with three vacant spaces between them:Between the western wall and the wall inside of it, five cubits,Between the second and third walls, six cubits,Between the third and fourth walls, six cubits.These measurements include the width of the wall and the space between it and the following wall.30As mentioned above, the width of all these walls was one cubit.The length of the Holy of Holies was 20 cubits.31The length of the Holy of Holies and the Sanctuary was the same in the Second Temple and in the First. The length of the Tabernacle built by Moses was one half the combined length of both chambers. However, the same 2:1 ratio was followed regarding the chambers' length.Between the two curtains separating the Holy of Holies and the Sanctuary, one cubit.32As explained in Halachah 2.The length of the Sanctuary was 40 cubits.The width of the eastern wall in which the entrance was positioned was six cubits.33The intent is actually two walls, each a cubit wide, with empty space between them.The Entrance Hall was eleven cubits [long].The wall of the Entrance Hall was five cubits thick.34Unlike the other walls mentioned previously, this wall was solid.Thus, the total is 100 cubits.35See the accompanying diagram taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah.
From north to south, there were 100 cubits:36This Halachah is based on the continuation of the Mishnah (Middot 4:7) cited in the previous Halachah. In this Halachah as well, the Rambam does not follow a perfectly literal rendition of the Mishnah.The width of the wall of the Entrance Hall was five cubits.37This was a solid wall with no vacant space in between, extending the entire length of the northern and southern sides of the Temple.There were ten cubits from the wall of the Entrance Hall until the wall of the Sanctuary.38This and the previous line reflect one of the major differences between the Rambam's concept of the Temple building and that of Rashi, the Ra'avad, and other commentaries.The abovementioned Mishnah concludes: "The rear of the Temple was narrow and its front wide, resembling a lion as it is said (Isaiah 29:1 : 'Oh Ariel, Ariel (lit. Lion of God), the city where David encamped... 'Rabbenu Shimshon, the Ra'avad and others explain that the Temple building had a T shape. The Entrance Hall and its adjoining chambers were 100 cubits wide. However, the Entrance Hall was only eleven cubits long. The remaining 89 cubits of the Temple's length were only 70 cubits in width. The Mishnah states, "from north to south there were 70 cubits" and lists the division of that area. Afterwards, it concludes: "The Entrance Hall extended fifteen cubits to the north and fifteen cubits to the south..." implying, according to these authorities, that there were two measurements of the Temple's width, one including the Entrance Hall and one without it.In contrast, the Rambam conceived of the Temple as being shaped like a trapezoid. See the accompanying drawing taken from his Commentary to the Mishnah. See also Halachah 9.At its easternmost point, the Entrance Hall, it was 100 cubits wide. However, that width was slightly diminished as one proceeded westward, so that it would be "lion-shaped." His opinion is reinforced by the opening statement of Mishnah 4:6, which declares: "The Temple was 100 cubits by 100 cubits and 100 cubits tall," implying that it was shaped like a cube, except for the slight reduction of its width towards the rear.The Sanctuary had six walls, one within the other, with five vacant places between them:39The abovementioned Mishnah reads:The wall of the winding stairwell, five; the winding stairwell, three; the wall of the cell, five; the cell, six; the wall of the Sanctuary, six; the [Sanctuary's] enclosed area, twenty; the wall of the Sanctuary, six; the cell, six; the wall of the cell, six; the drainage chamber, three; and the [outer] wall, five.Again, the Rambam explains that the walls mentioned by the Mishnah were not solid, but rather, each was a cubit thick, with a hollow space in between. The Mishnah can be understood in terms of the Rambam's words according to the clauses that follow:Between the outer wall and the second [wall], there were five cubits;40This refers to the "winding stairwell" mentioned by the Mishnah on the north side and the "drainage chamber" on the south side.Between the second and the third, three cubits;41This clause explains why the Rambam does not define "the walls" as solid structures. It is difficult to conceive that a three cubit chamber would be surrounded by two walls, each five cubits in thickness (Tzurat HaBayit).Between the third and the fourth, five;42This refers to "the wall of the cell."Between the fourth and the fifth, six;43This refers to "the cell." andBetween the fifth and the sixth, six.44This refers to "the wall of the Sanctuary."According to the Rambam, the names for the cells mentioned above refer only to the lowest floor. The equivalent cells in the upper storeys were not called by these names.Thus, these [walls and chambers encompassed] a total of forty cubits on both sides [of the Temple building.] The width of the Temple inside was 20 cubits.45In Solomon's Temple as well, the Sanctuary was 20 cubits wide. In the desert, Moses' Tabernacle was only 10 cubits wide. However, its length was also only half that of the Temple's inner chambers.The total was 100 cubits.
A wicket is a small gateway. The Sanctuary had two wickets on the sides of the great gate in the middle, one on the north and one on the south.46According to the Rambam's diagrams and Rav Kapach's notes to the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, the two wickets are placed at the entrance to the spaces between the fourth and fifth walls (counting from the outside) on the north and south sides respectively (see the diagram accompanying Halachah 4). This area is referred to as "the cell" in the abovementioned Mishnah.No one ever entered through the southern [wicket]. Explicit [reference] to this [is made] by [in the Book of] Ezekiel [44:2]: "This gate will be closed. It will not be opened."47The verse continues: "because the Lord, God of Israel enters through it." The Midrash Tanchumah explains that this is an expression of God's humility. Rather than enter through the "great gate," God chooses to approach the Sanctuary through the modest wicket.[Every morning, the priests] would enter [through the wicket] on the north and proceed between the two walls until reaching an opening to the Sanctuary on the left. [From there], they would enter the Temple, proceed to the great gate, and open it.48This halachah quotes Middot 4:2 and explains the manner in which the gates to the Sanctuary were opened each morning. Rather than open them from the front, the priests came in through the Entrance Hall, turned to the right, and entered through the wicket. They continued walking between the walls until reaching an opening from which they could enter the Sanctuary.According to a diagram that accompanies Rav Kapach's edition of the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, the entrance to the Sanctuary was approximately in the center of the Sanctuary.
The great gate49The term "great gate" is used because of the importance of its position, leading into the Sanctuary, and not because of the gate's size. We find a similar example in Deuteronomy 1:7 which describes the Euphrates as "the great river," though it is not physically large compared to other major rivers. The commentaries explain that this appellation was used because of its unique importance in marking the eastern boundary of Eretz Yisrael (Tosafot Yom Tov). was ten cubits wide and twenty cubits high.50This was the standard size of the gates in the Temple (Middot 2:3). It had four doors: two to the inner [chamber,] and two to the outside.51Ezekiel's vision of the Temple (41:23-24) explicitly describes "two doors to the Temple and to the Sanctuary... two doors for each [set of] doors." The outer gates opened into the doorway, covering the breadth of the walls.52Since this passage was six cubits long, the doors, each only five cubits wide, could not cover the walls entirely. Therefore, they were positioned one cubit inside the passageway (Kessef Mishneh). See the accompanying drawing. The inner [gates] opened into the Sanctuary, covering the [wall space] behind the doors.53Middot 4:1, which is the source for this halachah, continues: "The entire Temple was plated with gold except for the space behind the doors." Thus, when the doors were opened, they were folded against the wall and they covered that space with gold as well.
The opening to the Entrance Hall was forty cubits high and twenty [cubits] wide.54This was the largest gateway of the entire Temple complex. It did not have gates.55The commentaries explain that this gateway, the entrance to the Temple, was always open. In the same way, each Jew has an open pathway of prayer through which he can approach God at any time. Nevertheless, as stated in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 7:17, there was a curtain covering this entrance.Five oak beams56In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Middot 3:7), the Rambam notes that attractive designs and forms were carved into these beams. were [positioned] above this entrance.57Chapter 1, Halachah 9, states that we are forbidden to build the Temple with wood that protrudes. The Tosafot Yom Tov notes this apparent contradiction and explains that these beams were embedded into the wall and were thus, not "protruding." The bottom [beam] extended beyond the entrance, one cubit on either side. Each of the five [beams] extended one cubit on either side of the [beam] below it. Thus, the uppermost beam was thirty cubits [long].58The entrance was twenty cubits wide and the five beams each extended one cubit on each side. Thus, the total length of the uppermost beam was thirty cubits. There was a tier of stones between each beam.59To further enhance the appearance of the entrance.Note the drawing accompanying the following halachah for a depiction of these beams and their position.
The structure of the Temple was wide in its front and narrow in its rear, like a lion. 60See the commentary to Halachah 5.Balconies61These balconies are explicitly mentioned in I Kings 6:5-6 and in Middot 4:4. However, the Rambam's conception of these structures differs from that of other commentaries and has been the subject of much debate. [extended] from the wall of the winding stairwell and surrounded the Temple on all sides.62According to the Rambam, these balconies extended outward from the outermost wall of the Temple on every side except the east (the Temple's facade, when approaching from the entrance to the Temple Courtyard).On the surface, there is some difficulty with the Rambam's statements. As stated above, the Rambam conceived of the Temple building as a trapezoid. The wings of the Entrance Hall continued to the rear of the building, and the wall surrounding them was the Temple's most external wall. If so, it would seem that the balconies mentioned here should have extended out from that wall and not from the wall of the winding stairwell. The lowest balcony was five [cubits long.] The pavement above it was six cubits long. The middle projection was six cubits, and the pavement above it seven cubits. The upper balcony was seven cubits, as it is said (I Kings 6:6 : "The lowest balcony...."63A projection served as a roof for the lower balcony, and above it was another balcony having the same length as the projection. See the accompanying diagram which was copied from Rav Kapach's edition of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah. Thus, three balconies surrounded the Temple from three sides.64From the north, south, and west; corresponding to the right, left, and rear of the Temple when facing it from the entrance to the Temple Courtyard.As mentioned above, the Rambam's conception of these balconies differs from that of the other commentaries. Rashi and the Ra'avad explain that the verses and the Mishnah mentioned above refer to the cells mentioned in Halachot 4, 5, and 10. According to those commentaries, there were no balconies at all. The Tosafot Yom Tov mentions the Rambam's opinion. However, the diagrams drawn by the Rambam himself and accompanying his Commentary to the Mishnah (as published in Rav Kapach's edition) were not at his disposal. Hence, there may be some imprecision in his interpretation of the Rambam's words.To understand the Rambam, we must return to the original sources. However, even that is not easy, since most available translations and even most commentaries in Hebrew follow Rashi's view.The following is a rendition of the verses in Kings, according to the Rambam:And on the walls of the House, he constructed a side-structure surrounding the walls of the House, the Sanctuary, and the Holy of Holies. He made projections around [the House]. The lowest structure was five cubits wide; the middle one, six cubits wide, and the third, seven cubits wide. He placed structures diminishing in size for the House, surrounding it on its exterior, so that [the people] will not take hold of the House.The Mishnah interprets those verses as follows:The lowest [balcony] was five [cubits wide - as mentioned in the verse]. There was a projection of six cubits [the projection mentioned in the verse.] The middle one was six cubits, and there was an additional projection of seven cubits. The upper one was seven cubits wide.The Rambam's diagrams show a straight outer wall of the Temple, and balconies which diminish in length on their outer side (in contrast to the explanation offered by the Tosafot Yom Tov).The balconies in the Rambam's drawings were built as a protective measure, to insure that the priests show proper respect for the Temple and do not lean against its walls.Similarly, [there were projections] from bottom to top, around the wall of the Entrance Hall. The [pattern] was as follows:65These projections also are the subject of a difference in opinion between Rashi and the Rambam. The source for the debate is the interpretation of Middot 3:6 which states:There were 22 cubits between the Entrance Hall and the Altar. There were twelve steps there. Each step was half a cubit high and one cubit wide.A cubit, a cubit; and a protrusion of three; a cubit, a cubit, and a protrusion of three; on the highest level, a cubit, a cubit, and a protrusion of four.Rashi interprets the entire mishnah as referring to the steps leading to the Entrance Hall. In order to fill the space between the Altar and the Entrance Hall, platforms were inserted into the steps. Thus, there were three empty cubits before the first step, a step, a step, and a platform of three, etc. until one reached the Entrance Hall.Rav Kapach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah sees the mishnah as referring to two separate subjects, the steps which had been mentioned previously and protrusions which he describes as follows:Afterwards, [the mishnah] states that the wall of the Entrance Hall was built in the following pattern. A cubit long portion of the wall was left vacant as all the other walls...Above it there was a structure protruding from the wall, three cubits high... called a projection. Similarly, the entire height [of the wall] ...had one cubit of [vacant] wall space, a projection of three cubits... until the uppermost projection, which was four cubits high.Note the accompanying drawing copied from Rav Kapach's edition of the Commentary to the Mishnah. Rather than picture the front wall of the Temple as a flat structure, the Rambam depicts it as being covered with these projections.one vacant cubit,a projection of three cubits,one vacant cubit, and then,a projection of three cubits.This pattern was followed until the top [of the wall.] Thus, the projections surrounded the walls.66All four walls of the Temple were covered with projections to prevent the priests from leaning against them. Each projection67Extending out from the front facade. was three cubits wide until the top [of the wall], and between each projection was a [vacant] cubit. The uppermost projection was four cubits wide.68See the accompanying diagram for an artist's conception of the Temple's front facade.
All the vacant spaces between the walls are called cells.69As mentioned in the commentary on Halachot 4 and 5, the Rambam has a different conception of the cells than the other commentaries.Middot 4:3 states:There were 38 cells: five in the north, five in the south, and eight in the west. In the north and in the south, there were five above five, with five above them. In the west, there were three above three, with two above them.Middot 4:7 states:The wall of the winding stairwell, five; the winding stairwell, three; the wall of the cell, five; the cell, six; the wall of the Sanctuary, six; the [Sanctuary's] enclosed area, twenty; the wall of the Sanctuary, six; the cell, six; the wall of the cell, six; the drainage chamber, three; and the [outer] wall, five.Rashi and the Ra'avad explain the two mishnayot simply: The chamber referred to as "the cell" in mishnah 4:7 was, in fact, divided lengthwise into five cells on the northern and southern sides of the Temple, with three cells on the western side. All the other specific dimensions mentioned by the mishnah can thus be understood without any difficulty.In contrast, the Rambam explains that the walls mentioned in the mishnah 4:7 were not solid, but rather, double walls, each a cubit in thickness, and with a hollow space in between. The five cells mentioned in 4:3 thus, refer to the five vacant spaces between the walls. These spaces extended the entire length of the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies on the northern and southern sides, and the three cells extended to the three vacant spaces between the walls on the western side.Note the accompanying drawings copied from Rav Kapach's edition of the Commentary to the Mishnah. The three divisions must be seen as being placed one on top of the other. Thus, five cells surrounded the Sanctuary on the north, five on the south, and three on the west.There were three levels [of cells,] one level above the other.70The lowest level was six cubits high, equal to the height of the Temple's base. The other two levels were each twenty cubits high. As the Rambam states in Halachah 12, the roof of the cells was on the same level as the upper storey of the Sanctuary. Thus, there were fifteen cells on the south; five above five, with five above them. Similarly, in the north, there were fifteen cells.There were eight cells in the west; three above three, with two above them on one level.71The addition of the words "on one level" is necessary. Since the pattern of cells differed in the west, one might think that rather than have only three levels as in the north and south, the mishnah's words "two above them" could be interpreted as follows: There were four levels of cells, the latter two each possessing one cell. With this addition, the Rambam prevents this misconception from arising. Thus, there were a total of 38 cells.72They were used for storage.
Each cell had three entrances: one to the cell on the right, another to the cell on the left,73The source for this Halachah is Middot 4:7. The Rambam's interpretation again differs from that of Rashi.Rashi would interpret right and left as lengthwise in the row of cells. According to the Rambam, the expressions right and left refer, as they have throughout the discussion of the Temple, to these directions as one faces the Holy of Holies, north and south respectively. and one to the cell above it.74This refers to the bottom floor of cells which had openings to the cells above them and the upper floor which had openings to the cells below. The middle floor of cells had four openings, because it has openings both to the cells below and to the cells above.The cell in the northeast corner of the second storey had five entrances:75This clause, a continuation of the abovementioned mishnah, represents one of the major difficulties in regard to the Rambam's interpretation. The Rambam cannot contradict an explicit mishnah, yet his interpretation of the mishnah's text is by no means straightforward.According to the Rambam, this cell is positioned above the cell called "the winding stairwell." Though it is not the northernmost cell, it is still referred to as "the cell in the northeast corner." one to the cell on its right,76To the northernmost cell, the cell over "the wall of the winding stairwell." one to the cell above it,77In the third storey of cells. one to the winding stairwell,78The cell below it. one towards the cell with the wicket,79"Towards," but not "to." The cell did not possess an entrance to the cell with the wicket, the latter being the second of the cells and the cell in question being the fourth. and one to the Temple.80Here, the word Temple is being used loosely. It does not refer to the Sanctuary itself, but to the Entrance Hall. Nevertheless, the latter can also be called the Sanctuary as evidenced by the Rambam's statements in Chapter 1, Halachah 5.Furthermore, there is an additional problem: The mishnah appeared to intend to single out this cell by the fact that it had five entrances. However, according to the Rambam's interpretation, the cell with the wicket also possessed five entrances: One to the Sanctuary, one to the Entrance Hall, one to the cell above it, one to the cell below it, and one to the cell on its right.
The winding stairwell with which one would ascend to the roofs of the cells81According to the Rambam, one must differentiate between the chamber called the winding stairwell and the winding stairwell itself.The chamber called the winding stairwell refers to the second cell on the right, on the lowest floor. The winding stairwell began at the easternmost point of this cell (the side closest to the Entrance Hall). began its rise from the northeast corner towards the northwest corner [of the Temple]. One ascended on the winding stairwell facing the west and traversed the entire length of [the Temple's] northern side82Walking within the cells a distance of approximately 66 cubits. until reaching the west.83The stairwell ascended approximately 22 cubits across this length.When he reached the west, he would turn towards the south. He walked across the entire length of the western side84Proceeding within the cells a distance of approximately 50 cubits. until he reached the south.85Ascending approximately 17 cubits along this length. When he reached the south, he turned to the east. He walked eastward86Ascending the remaining height (approximately 11 cubits). until reaching the entrance to the Temple's upper storey, since the entrance to the upper storey87Which was on the same level as the roof of the cells was on the south.88Slightly beyond the dividing line between the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies.
At the entrance to the Temple's upper storey, there were two cedar beams upon which one could climb to the roof of the upper storey.89Which is the roof of the Temple building. Marking posts in the upper storey differentiated between the roof of the Sanctuary and the roof of the Holy of Holies.90Some commentaries explain that these marking posts were placed on the roof of the upper storey. However, the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Middot 4:5), explicitly states that they were placed on the floor of the top level.In addition to these marking posts, two curtains were hung in the upper storey, resembling the curtains which divided the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 7:17).Apertures in the upper storey [led to] the Holy of Holies,91Chapter 7, Halachah 23, states that once every seven years, they entered the upper storey so that they could descend from there to inspect the Holy of Holies. Rather than enter the Holy of Holies directly, they used these apertures. through which craftsmen92They would try to find craftsmen who were priests for this task. If no qualified priests could be found, they searched for Levites. If they could not find capable Levites, they would assign the task to Israelites (ibid.). would be lowered in boxes,93Tosafot Yom Tov writes that the boxes were closed on three sides and open on the fourth. so that they would not satiate their eyes [gazing at] the chamber of the Holy of Holies.94Pesachim 26a states that one is not required to bring a guilt offering for deriving pleasure by gazing at sacred objects. However, though no offering is required, it was still forbidden to gaze at the Holy of Holies.Once a year, from Passover to Passover, they coated the Temple building with cement.95The source for the Rambam's statements is Middot 3:4. However, it is difficult to understand which part of the Temple building was to be covered with cement. As explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 14, the exterior of the Temple building was made of fine marble, and at times, it was coated with gold. Surely, these attractive surfaces would not be covered with simple cement.There are sources who suggest that it was the Temple ceiling that was coated with cement each year. It is our prayer that the Temple will be rebuilt in the near future and then, we will understand the Rambam's intent.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
Mount Moriah, the Temple Mount, measured 500 cubits by 500 cubits.1The commentaries, basing themselves on the Jerusalem Talmud (Eruvin 2:5), explain that this figure was derived as follows:Exodus 27:18 states: 'The length of the courtyard shall be 100 cubits and its width, 50 by 50.' This verse can obviously not be understood literally, for area has only two coordinates. Hence, the Sages explained that rather than refer to the courtyard of the Tabernacle, the verse describes a measure related to the future Sanctuaries. The Temple Mount measured a total of 50 x 100 x 50 cubits in area, i.e., a total of 250,000 sq. cubits.The Piskei Tosafot (Middot 5) relate that the total area of the Temple Mount was greater than 250,000 sq. cubits. However, only the latter figure was consecrated. It was surrounded by a wall.2With the exception of the wall on the eastern side, the walls on all sides were very high. We know that their gates were 20 cubits high and the walls themselves were even higher. In modern terms, that would mean at least 10 meters (32.5 feet high). [The earth beneath it was hollowed out to prevent contracting ritual impurity] due to Tumat Ohel.3Tumat Ohel refers to ritual impurity contracted by being under the same tent or structure as a corpse. Even thought the corpse is buried, ritual impurity can be contracted unless there is a vacant space between the corpse and the earth above it. To prevent the possibility of impurity from a grave under the Temple courtyard, the entire earth below was hollowed out. See Parah 3:3. Arches above arches were built underneath [for support].4Though the Mishnah (Parah, loc. cit.) states that the earth beneath the Temple was hollowed out, it does not mention the construction of arches. However, since the Mishnah (ibid.:6) states that arches supported the ramp leading from the Temple Mount to the Mount of Olives, we may assume that a similar technique was used in the instance (Kessef Mishneh). See also the commentary to Chapter 1, Halachah 13. It was entirely covered,5With the exception of the Temple Courtyard. one colonnade inside another.6Rashi (Pesachim 13a) explains that this roof was built to protect the visitors to the Temple fom rain.
Five gates led to the [Temple Mount]: One from the west,7Middot 1:3 relates that this gate was called Kaiphonus. The Shiltei Giborim explains that this means 'garden' in Greek. The name was given because a rose was planted outside this gate. one from the east,8This gate was called the Gate of Shushan, and the image of the city of Shushan was engraved upon it. This was done at the command of King Cyrus of Persia, who gave permission for the Temple to be rebuilt. one from the north,9It was called the Tadi gate, meaning 'hiddenness.' This gate was used when someone was forced to leave the Temple, but he did not want to publicize the circumstances (Middot 1:9, 2:2). Its construction differed from that of the other gates. Rather than have an ordinary lintel, it had two stones leaning against each other (ibid.:3). and two from the south.10These were the gates most frequently used to enter the Temple Mount. They were named after the prophetess Chuldah. In the time of the First Temple, she stood before these gates and urged the people to repent.The tractate Sofrim 19:12 relates that there were two additional gates to the Temple Mount: one for mourners and one for grooms. The Jewish people would sit between these two gates waiting to console the mourners and join in the celebration of the grooms. The Kaftor ViPerach states that these gates were on the east, to the north of the gate of Shushan. They were called the 'gates of mercy.' Today, the term is used to refer to the two gates on the east side of the Temple Mount, which can be seen from the Mount of Olives and are permanently shut. Each gate was 10 cubits [wide] and twenty cubits high.11This was the standard size of the gates in the Temple complex. [Each gate] had doors.12In contrast to the gateway to the Entrance Hall, which had no doors.
Further within, a latticework partition,13Made of wooden shafts arranged in a crisscross pattern. 10 handbreadths high, surrounded it on all sides.14Rabbenu Asher explains that this structure was constructed to allow the articles to be carried on the Sabbath. Therefore, it was made 10 handbreadths high. The Temple Mount was surrounded by a wall and, therefore, could not be considered a public domain. Nonetheless, its size exceeded the limits placed by the Sages, and without this partition, there would have been a Rabbinic prohibition against carrying on the Sabbath.The Tosafot Yom Tov (Middot 2:3) objects to this reasoning, explaining that the Rabbinic prohibitions regarding the Sabbath were generally relaxed within the Temple premises. Instead, he offers the hypothesis that this partition served to delineate the point beyond which gentiles were not allowed to proceed.The Chayl [a rampart] ten cubits high, was located further inside this partition.15Middot 2:3 states: 'The Chayl, ten cubits.' In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Middot 1:4), the Rambam describes the Chayl as a rampart. He, therefore, interprets this statement as referring to its height. In contrast, Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura does not define the Chayl as a wall. Rather, he refers to it as an empty space, 10 cubits wide. It is referred to in the [Book of] Lamentations [2:6]: 'The wall and the rampart mourned.' [This wall] refers to the wall surrounding the Temple Courtyard.
Further inward, beyond the chayl, was the Temple Courtyard.16In this halachah, the Rambam does not mention the Women's Courtyard (See Halachah 7), because he intends to list the dividers which circumscribe an area of the Temple Mount on all four sides. The Women's Courtyard had the same dimensions as the Temple Courtyard on the north and south. Hence, it was not mentioned in this place. The Temple Courtyard was 187 [cubits] long and 135 [cubits] wide.17See Halachot 12 and where the Rambam details the space allocation of the Temple Courtyard.It had seven gates.18This statement raises a number of problems: Three mishnayot in the tractate of Middot mention the number of gates to the Temple Courtyard:Mishnah 1:1 states: "The Levites [stood guard] in twenty one places: five at the five gates of the Temple Courtyard...."Mishnah 1:4 states: "There were seven gates to the Temple Courtyard...."Mishnah 2:6 states: "Thirteen prostrations were carried out there. Abba Yossi ben Chanan declared: [These were instituted] because of the thirteen gates...It is difficult to conceive that the Mishnah would contradict itself within the same tractate. The apparent discrepancies can be explained as follows: The Sages do not disagree about the number of entrances to the Temple Courtyard. They did, however, debate the question of which entrance met the legal criteria for a gate. Guards were required to stand watch over every entrance that was considered a gate.Similarly, although a person who is ritually impure may not enter the Temple premises, it is not clear whether he would be obligated to bring a sin offering if he came in through an entrance which is not considered a gate. See Chapter 8, Halachah 8, and Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 18, p.212-217. Three were on its north side, close to the west,19These gates were:a) the gate of the spark. A two-floor structure with an entrance to the chayl.b) the gate of the offerings. The most sacrifices of the highest order of sanctity, were slaughtered on the north side of the courtyard, and were brought in through this gate.c) the gate to the Chamber of the Hearth. See Halachah 10. and three were on the south side, close to the west. One [gate] in the east was positioned in the center, [directly] opposite the Holy of Holies.20The Gate of Nicanor. It was most commonally used to enter the Temple Courtyard. The notes to the following halachah offers an explanation of that name.
Each gate was ten cubits wide and twenty cubits high.21This was the standard size of the gates on the Temple Mount. Each one had gold-plated doors,22See Chapter 1, Halachot 11 and 19. except for the eastern gate which was plated with bronze that resembled gold. This was called the Upper Gate.23As mentioned in the beginning of Chapter 6, the Temple was built on an incline and had steps leading from the Women's Courtyard to the gate of Nicanor. Hence, the gate leading to the Women's Courtyard was referred to as the lower gate, and the gate of Nicanor, the Upper Gate. See Hilchot Klei HaMikdash, Chapter 7, Mishnah 6. It was [also called] the gate of Nicanor.24In honor of the noble person who donated its doors.Yoma 38a relates that Nicanor journeyed to Alexandria to ask the skilled bronzeworkers there to fashion these gates. When the gates were finished, he set sail with them to return to Eretz Yisrael.At sea, a violent storm almost capsized the vessel. After other measures failed, the crew members decided to jettison some of the ship's cargo to reduce its weight. Immediately, they tossed one of the heavy bronzed gates to the waves.The danger did not cease, and the crew wanted to cast the second gate overboard as well. Hearing this, Nicanor protested and declared that he would have to be thrown into the sea before the gate. Directly after he made that statement, the storm subsided and the ship was able to proceed.Throughout the remainder of the journey, Nicanor was overcome with remorse. Why, he thought, hadn't he defended the first gate as well? How great was his joy when the ship docked at Acre and the gate emerged from under its hull.When the financial situation of the Jewish people improved, they replaced all the Temple's bronze gates with gold-covered gates. Nevertheless, they allowed Nicanor's gates to remain in memory of the miracles which occurred. The Sages declared: "Their bronze shined like gold."
The Temple Courtyard was not situated directly in the center of the Temple Mount. Rather, it was set off further from the southern [wall] of the Temple Mount than from [the wall of] any other direction.25As mentioned above (Halachah 2), the main entrance to the Temple Mount was on the South. Therefore, more space was left in this direction, and more Temple functions were carried out on that side. It was closer to the western [wall] than to [the wall of] any other direction.26In deference to the Holy of Holies, no mundane business was carried on behind it. Hence, less space was left there than in the other directions.According to most opinions, the Wailing Wall at which we worship today, is the western wall which surrounded the Temple Mount (Kaftor Viperach). There was a greater distance between it and the northern [wall] than between it and the western [wall]. [Similarly,] there was a greater distance between it and the eastern [wall] than between it and the northern [wall].27The Tosafot Yom Tov calculated the distances between the Temple Courtyard and the walls as follows:Between the Courtyard and the southern wall, 250 cubits,Between the Courtyard and the eastern wall, 213 cubits,Between the Courtyard and the northern wall, 115 cubits,Between the Courtyard and the western wall, 100 cubits.
The Women's Courtyard28The reason for this name is explained in Halachah 9 and notes. was in front of the Temple Courtyard on the East29Except for certain unique circumstances, people entered the Temple through this area. and was 135 cubits long and 135 cubits wide. It had four chambers, each forty cubits [by forty cubits, one] in [each of] its four corners.30The chambers were inside the walls of the Courtyard, and not on the outside. They did not have roofs, nor will they in the Messianic Age.31The Mishnah (Middot 2:5) bases the latter statement on the prophecy of Ezekiel  46:21-22): "Then he took me out into the outer courtyard.... Behold, there was a chamber in each corner of the courtyard. At the four corners, there were roofless chambers...."
For what purpose were they used?The southeastern chamber32The chamber to the left upon entering the Women's Courtyard. was [called] the Chamber of the Nazirites.33Numbers 6:18 commands: "The Nazirite shall shave off the crown of hair on his head before the Tent of Meeting. He shall take the hair... and place it in the fire under the peace offering." Nazir 45a explains that, in deference to the presence of the Shechinah, the shaving was not carried out before the Sanctuary itself, but rather in this chamber, while the door to the Sanctuary was open. See also Hilchot Nizirut 8:2-3. There, they cooked peace offerings and shaved their hair.The northeastern chamber34The chamber to the right upon entering. was [called] the Chamber of the Woodshed. There, the priests who [were disqualified from the Temple service] because of physical deformities35Leviticus 21:16-24 lists the physical deformities which disqualified a priest for Temple service and the relevant regulations. See also Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash, Chapter 6. checked the wood [brought for the Altar] for worms. If a worm was found, it was unfit for use.36Just as the choicest animals should be chosen for the sacrifices, so too, the wood used to burn them should be of the highest quality (Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, 6:1-2).The northwestern chamber37The chamber on the right side before the entrance to the Temple Courtyard. was [called] the Chamber of Those Afflicted with Tzara'at.38It contained a mikveh in which those seeking purification from tzara'at immersed themselves as part of their process of regaining ritual purity. See Hilchot Michusrei Kapporah, Chapter 4.The southwestern chamber39The chamber on the left side before the entrance to the Temple Courtyard. was used to store wine and oil. It was called "The Chamber of the Oils."40Its name mentioned oil rather than wine, because a sacrifice is acceptable if a wine libation is lacking. In contrast, all meal offerings are invalidated if they lack oil (Yeriat Shlomo).
The Women's Courtyard41Women were not allowed to enter the Temple Courtyard except to perform certain rituals in connection with sacrifices which they had brought. However, they were permitted to enter this outer courtyard and therefore, it was named accordingly. was surrounded by balconies so that women could look on from above and the men from below without intermingling.42The Mishnah (Middot 2:5) relates that these balconies were a later addition to the Temple structure.On the festival of Sukkot, the entire Jewish nation would gather in this courtyard to watch the Simchat Beit HaShoevah celebrations (the festivities associated with the water libation). Though the men and the women were seated in separate sections, the closeness between them aroused a certain dimension of frivolity which was not appropriate to the holiness of the occasion. To avoid such circumstances, these balconies were constructed. See also Sukkot 51b.
Outside the Temple Courtyard,43Although the Kessef Mishneh and other commentaries explain that half of the Chamber of the Hearth was positioned within the Temple Courtyard, and half on the outside, the diagrams drawn by the Rambam depict it as being positioned entirely outside the Courtyard's walls. on its northern side,44To the right upon entering the Temple Courtyard. was a large structure between the Courtyard and the chayl. It was built with a dome45As a roof. and [its inner walls] were surrounded with stone protrusions.46On which the priests slept at night (Tamid 1:1). It was called the Chamber of the Hearth.47Because the priests kindled a fire there to keep warm.It contained two entrances: one to the Temple Courtyard48Each morning, the priests entered the Courtyard through this entrance to prepare it for the morning sacrifices. and one to the chayl.49A priest who became impure at night and therefore, could not participate in the Temple services would leave through this exit.There were four chambers inside it.50Middot 1:5 describes the chambers as resembling "bedrooms opening out to a large hallway."Note the accompanying diagram which was copied from the Rambam's drawings in his Commentary to the Mishnah. Two were consecrated51Thus they were considered extensions of the Temple Courtyard. This distinction is significant in regard to the prohibition against eating the sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity outside the Temple Courtyard. and two were not.52According to the interpretation of the Kessef Mishneh mentioned above, this statement is quite clear. Two chambers were situated inside the Temple Courtyard, and two were on the outside. However, according to the Rambam, the entire structure was situated outside the Temple Courtyard. If so, how could two structures be consecrated?This difficulty can be resolved as follows: The Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 3:4) states that chambers which are built on ground that was not consecrated, but which open up to the Temple Courtyard, are considered as consecrated. Should they open up to the outside, they are not sacred. According to the Rambam's diagram, the two southern chambers of the Chamber of the Hearth faced the Temple Courtyard, while the two northern chambers faced the chayl. Hence, the southern chambers alone were consecrated. See also Chapter 6, Halachah 8. Marking posts53In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam defines "marking posts" as "a lattice divider, sometimes made of reeds, sometimes made of wood, and at other times, made of other building materials." They were placed on the ceiling of this structure. separated the consecrated [chambers] from those which were not consecrated.54In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid, loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that the priests only slept in the part of the chamber which was not consecrated. Hence, these marking posts were useful in clarifying this matter to them.For what purpose were they used?The southwestern [chamber]55The chamber to the right when facing the Temple Courtyard. was the Chamber of the Lambs.56Here the lambs to be offered as daily sacrifices were inspected to see if they had any disqualifying blemishes. The lambs were kept in this chamber before they were sacrificed. In Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 1:9, the Rambam writes that at least six lambs were always kept in this chamber.The southeastern [chamber]57The southeastern [chamber] - The chamber to the left when facing the Temple Courtyard. was the Chamber of the Bakers of the Showbread.58Here, the Showbread offered each Sabbath on the Golden Table was baked.[In] the northeastern [chamber], the Hasmoneans entombed the stones of the Altar59See Chapter 1, Halachah 15. which were defiled by the Greek kings.60The Greeks who occupied Jerusalem before the Maccabean revolt defiled the altar by offering sacrifices to idols upon it.Tamid 3:3 mentions that there was a Chamber of Seals within the Chamber of the Hearth. There, the priests would authorize the sale of the wine and meal offerings. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Middot 1:5), the Rambam explains that this chamber was used for that purpose in addition to the entombment of the altar's stones.[In] the northwestern chamber, [a stairwell] descended to the mikveh.61As explained in the following halachah.
One who descended from this chamber to the mikveh62Tamid 1:1 relates that the priests slept in the Chamber of the Hearth. "If one of them had a seminal emission [in his sleep,] he would descend to the mikveh."The emission of semen renders a man ritually impure (Leviticus 15:16 . Thus, a priest who had a nocturnal emission may not enter the Temple premises or take part in its services. The process of ritual purification involves immersion in a mikveh and waiting until nightfall. In the morning, the priest left the Temple premises through the gate leading to the chayl (Tamid, loc. cit.). proceeded along a winding stairway located under the entire Temple complex.63An intricate chain of underground passageways was located under the Temple Mount, including this stairwell leading to a natural reservoir of water where a mikveh was constructed.This halachah raises a question. As mentioned above, in this condition, the priests were not able to enter the Temple premises. If so, how could they enter these passageways which passed under consecrated ground?The commentaries answer (see Chapter 8, Halachah 7) that since these underground passageways did not open to the Temple Courtyard itself, they were not consecrated. See Pesachim 86a. Candles were kindled on both sides [of the passageway, to illuminate the way] until reaching the mikveh.This [chamber] also contained the hearth64The fire that the priests kindled at night, from which the entire chamber derived its name. See Tamid 3:3. and the seat of dignity.65I.e., a toilet. This was the dignity associated with it. If one found it locked, he knew it was occupied by another person [and did not enter].66Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura wrote that no one ever entered this toilet while it was occupied by another person.There are additional references to the Chamber of the Hearth and to the stairwell leading to the mikveh in Chapter 8, Halachot 5-7.
The Temple Courtyard was 187 cubits long from east to west.67This measure did not include the width of the courtyard's walls. The measurement can be broken down as follows:Eleven cubits from the western wall of the Courtyard to the wall of the Temple building.100 cubits, the length of the Temple building.68As explained above, Chapter 3, Halachah 4.22 cubits between the Entrance Hall and the Altar.69The washbasin and the steps leading to the Entrance Hall (See Chapter 6, Halachah 4) were located here.22 cubits, [the length of] the Altar.70See Chapter 2, Halachah 7.Eleven cubits, the area where the priests could walk.71When they were not directly involved with the Temple services. This was called the Priestly courtyard.72See Chapter 1, Halachah 7.Eleven cubits, the area where Israelites could walk.73As explained in Chapter 7, Halachah 19, an Israelite was only allowed beyond this region for four reasons:a) to perform semichah on an animal he had brought as a sacrifice;b) to offer the confessional prayers that accompany the sacrifices;c) to slaughter a sacrificial animal;d) to wave the peace offerings.The source for this halachah and those following is the fifth chapter of the tractate of Middot. It must be noted that the Rambam's text of the Mishnah does not have a fifth chapter. Rather, all these mishnayot are included as mishnah 8 of Chapter 3.See the diagram of the Temple Courtyard at the conclusion of this chapter. This was called the Courtyard of Israel.
The Courtyard was 135 cubits wide, from north to south.74The Rambam describes the breakdown of this figure in this and the following three halachot. The measurement can be broken down as follows:Eight cubits from the northern wall75In this instance as well, the width of the courtyard's walls are not included in the total measure. until the butchering area.Twelve and one half cubits, the width of the butchering area.76This area included eight posts permanently affixed to the floor of the Courtyard. The posts were made of a short stone pillar in which was embedded a post of cedar wood. Each post had three iron hooks from which the sacrifices were suspended (Middot 3:5). There, they would suspend the sacrificed animals [on posts] and remove their hides.77Also, at this time, the limbs of the animal which was suspended on these hooks were cut off, and given to the priests to bring to the altar.
At its side was the place for the tables; it was eight cubits wide.78Middot 5:2 states as follows:The ramp and the altar took up 62 cubits. From the altar to the rings, there were eight cubits. The area of the rings was 24 cubits wide. There were four cubits between the rings and the tables, and four cubits from the tables to the short pillars. From the short pillars to the wall of the Courtyard were eight cubits. The remainder [of the 5 cubits] was taken up by the short pillars and by the space between the ramp and [the Courtyard's northern] wall.The Rambam's interpretation of the mishnah divides the 25 remaining cubits equally between the area of the pillars, the butchering area mentioned in the previous halachah, and the space between the ramp and the southern wall. The Rambam also combined the two measurements given for the space of the tables into one figure (Kessef Mishneh). It had marble tables79As mentioned on several occasions above, an effort was made to use gold for all utensils in the Temple. However, marble was sometimes used, because it is a poorer conductor of heat. In this case as well, marble tables were used lest the heat cause the meat to spoil. on which the severed limbs were placed. The meat was washed [there]80This statement is somewhat difficult. Tamid 4:2 states that a sacrificial animal's internal organs, except for its stomach, were washed on these tables. It does not mention the washing of the meat at all. The Rambam states that the internal organs were washed in the Washing Chamber (see Halachah 17) and that these tables were used for washing the meat. The commentaries question the source for the Rambam's statements (Ra'avad). Kin'at Eliyahu emphasizes that the Rambam's wording indicates that here we are not speaking about meat offered on the altar, but meat cooked and eaten by the priests. before it was cooked.81As a preliminary stage in the process of salting meat, the meat must be washed to remove all surface blood. There were eight tables.82See Shekalim 3:4.Tosafot (Yoma 16b) notes that Yoma 30b describes the tables as being placed between the pillars. Two possible explanations are offered:a) there were two sets of tables: one between the pillars, and one to their left;b) even though there was a small gap between the pillars and the tables, the expression "between the tables" could be used.The area of the rings83These rings were permanently affixed to the floor of the Temple Courtyard, at the request of Yochanan, the High Priest. The feet of an animal brought as a sacrifice were placed inside the rings to hold the animal in place while it was being slaughtered. (See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah 5:2. Note Rashi, Sukkah 56a for a different interpretation of the rings' use.) [was positioned] next to the location of the tables. It was 24 cubits [wide].84There were 24 rings. There is a debate in Middot 3:5 whether there were six rows of four rings, or four rows of six. Though the Rambam does not specify which opinion he follows, his diagrams which accompany his Commentary to the Mishnah apparently tend toward the former opinion. There, they slaughtered the sacrifices.85As mentioned in Halachah 16, the sacrifices of the most sacred order had to be slaughtered in the northern portion of the courtyard. The rings included in that region were therefore used for this purpose. The sacrifices of a lesser degree of holiness could be slaughtered any place within the Temple courtyard. When many people brought their sacrifices at the same time, for example on the festivals, the priests took advantage of this leniency.Note the accompanying diagram.
There were eight cubits between the Altar and the area of the rings.86See Middot 3:5. The Altar was 32 cubits wide.87See Chapter 2, Halachah 7. The ramp was 30 cubits [long].88See Chapter 2, Halachah 13. There were twelve and a half cubits between the ramp and the southern wall.89See the notes to Halachah 14 of this chapter.[The area] from the northern wall of the Temple Courtyard90The wall on the right upon entering. until the wall91More specifically, the base of the altar. of the Altar, was sixty and a half [cubits] wide.92That measurement can be broken down as follows:the space between the pillars and the northern wall 8 cubits,the area of the pillars 12.5 cubits,the area of the tables 8 cubits,the area of the rings 24 cubits,the space between the rings and the altar 8 cubits. The length of this area, from the wall of the Entrance Hall until the eastern wall of the Courtyard, was 76 [cubits].93See Halachah 12.
The entire rectangle [described above] is called "the northern portion." The sacrifices of the most sacred order of holiness were slaughtered there.94Leviticus 1:11 declares that the burnt offerings are to be slaughtered "on the north side of the altar." Similar instructions were given in regard to sin offerings, guilt offerings, and communal peace offerings.This definition of "the northern portion" of the Temple Courtyard follows the opinion of Rebbi Yehudah HaNasi (Zevachim 20a).
The Courtyard of the Israelites had eight chambers:95See Middot 5:3, 4 and 1:4. three in the north and three in the south.96These chambers were not situated parallel to each other. In the south,97The side of the Temple Courtyard to the left when facing the Temple building. were the Chamber of Salt, Parve's Chamber,98This chamber was named after a Gentile magician who dug a tunnel under the Temple Courtyard to observe the services. He was discovered and killed on the spot (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Middot 5:3). and the Washing Chamber.The salt for the sacrifices was stored in the Chamber of the Salt.99The Rambam writes in Hilchot Issurei HaMizbayach 5:11:It is a positive commandment to salt all sacrifices before they are brought up to the altar, as in Leviticus 2:13: "You shall offer salt on all your sacrifices."In Halachah 13 there, he continues:They placed salt [on the sacrifices] in three places: in the Chamber of Salt, on the ramp [leading to the altar,] and on the top of the altar.The Lechem Mishneh explains that salt for all the Temple's needs was stored in this chamber. The hides of the sacrifices were salted in Parve's chamber.100The hides of the sacrifices were given to the priests for their private use. They were treated with salt to preserve them.There is a difficulty with this halachah. In Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach (loc. cit.), the Rambam states that the hides were salted in the Chamber of Salt. The Lechem Mishneh resolves that difficulty by explaining that although the salt was stored in the Chamber of Salt, the actual salting of the hides was carried out in Parve's Chamber. Its roof had a mikveh, used by the High Priest on Yom Kippur.101On Yom Kippur, the High Priest immersed himself in the mikveh five times. Except for the first immersion, all were carried out in this mikveh (Yoma 3:3). The internal organs of the sacrifices were washed in the Washing Chamber.102As mentioned previously in Halachah 14, there is a slight difficulty with this statement. Tamid 4:2 states that the internal organs were washed on the tables, except for the lower digestive organs. They were not washed in the open since it was not proper to spill out their contents before the Temple building. However, the Rambam goes beyond that source and states that all internal organs were washed in this chamber. It had a winding rampway leading to the roof of Parve's chamber.103Allowing access to the mikveh located there.The three [chambers] in the north were the Chamber of Hewn Stone, the Chamber of the Bowl, and the Chamber of Wood.104The name "Chamber of Wood" is somewhat problematic. As mentioned in Chapter 1, Halachah 9, it is forbidden to build a chamber of wood in the Temple Courtyard. The commentaries explain that the chamber itself was not made of wood. However, it was given that name either because it was used to store wood or because it had wooden paneling.The Supreme Sanhedrin sat105Only kings from the House of David were allowed to sit in the Temple Courtyard (Yoma 25a). [in judgment] in the Chamber of Hewn Stone.106This name was given because of the seats of hewn stone upon which the Sanhedrin were seated. Two reasons are given for the placement of Israel's highest court in the Temple Courtyard. Firstly, to a large extent, they were involved with judging cases related to the priesthood (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 6:11).Secondly, the holiness of the Temple inspired their decisions and provided them with additional insight. Once the Sanhedrin was forced to leave this site, it was not granted the authority to judge capital cases. Half was consecrated107Considered as part of the Temple Courtyard. and half was not.108Commenting on the Mishnah, the Rambam states that the chamber was situated entirely within the Courtyard. Nevertheless, half is considered unconsecrated because one entrance opened to the outside. In Chapter 6, Halachah 7, the Rambam states that even if a chamber is built within the Courtyard, if it opens to the outside, it is not considered consecrated. The Chamber of Hewn Stone had two entrances, one leading into the Temple Courtyard and one leading outside. Therefore, half was consecrated and half was not.Nevertheless, there are unresolved difficulties concerning this Halachah. Among them:a) How was it possible for all the judges and the students who would attend the sessions of the Sanhedrin to sit in so small an area?b) Which entrance leading from the Courtyard is referred to? It was not mentioned among the seven gates mentioned in Halachah 5:4 or even among the 13 gates listed in Middot 2:6. The Sanhedrin sat in the half that was not consecrated.The Chamber of the Bowl had a well from which water was drawn with a bowl. This [well] supplied water to the entire Temple Courtyard.The Chamber of Wood was situated behind these two. It was the Chamber of the High Priest and [also] called "the Chamber of Parhedrin."109Seven days before Yom Kippur, the High Priest left his own home and adjourned to this chamber, where he busied himself, preparing for the service of that holy day (Yoma 2a).Yoma 8b (note Rashi's commentary) explains that the name Parhedrin meant "officer of the king." This name was given to this chamber in the days of the Second Temple when the High Priests would purchase this office from the king at a high price.These "High Priests" were not righteous and as a sign of Divine retribution, they would die within a year of assuming office. Upon their death, the position would be sold again. To emphasize that these "High Priests" received the position through bribery and not through merit, they were referred to as "the officers of the king." The roofs of these three chambers were on the same level.110Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura explains that one roof was placed over all three buildings. However, the Rambam's diagrams do not appear to subscribe to this idea.The Courtyard of the Israelites had two other chambers:111See Middot 1:4. one to the right of the eastern gate, [called] the Chamber of Pinchas, the clothes-butler;112The clothes-butler was responsible for weaving and knitting the priestly garments (Hilchot Klai HaMikdash 7:20).According to the commentaries (Shekalim 5:1), the first person entrusted with this task in the second Temple was named Pinchas. Hence, all his successors were called by that name. and one to the left. It was [called] the Chamber of the Bakers of the chavitin.113This term refers to a meal offering, prepared in a frying pan. The product resembled pancakes. This offering was prepared every day in this chamber and brought by the High Priest, as commanded in Leviticus 6:13-15.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
The entire Temple complex was not built on flat ground, but rather on the incline1This concept is explained in this and the following four halachot. Note the accompanying diagram.There is a homiletic aspect to the placement of the Temple on the incline of a mountain. A Jew must realize that his advance in holy matters resembles the climbing of a mountain.When ascending a mountain it is difficult to remain in one position. One must either climb further upward or descend. Similarly, a Jew must always strive to advance in his spiritual service. Otherwise, he is likely to fall to a lower level. of Mount [Moriah.] Thus, a person who entered from the Eastern Gate of the Temple Mount would proceed to the end of the chayl on one level.2As explained in the commentary to Chapter 5, Halachah 6, a distance of approximately 213 cubits separated between the exterior wall surrounding the Temple Mount and the Eastern Wall of the Temple Courtyard. The Women's Courtyard was 135 cubits long. A thick wall surrounded it, leaving approximately 68 cubits between that wall and the exterior wall.According to the Rambam's diagrams, see Chapter 5, Halachah 6, the ratio of space between the chayl and the exterior wall, and the space between the chayl and the Women's Courtyard, was approximately 3:1. Thus, the distance mentioned here was approximately 51 cubits.He would ascend from the chayl to the Woman's Courtyard on twelve steps. Each step was half a cubit high and half a cubit wide.3Thus, he ascended six cubits when climbing these steps.This was the size of all the steps in the Temple complex, except for the step dividing the Courtyard of the Israelites from the Priestly Courtyard.
One proceeded through the entire Women's Courtyard4135 cubits. on one level.5The steps leading to the Temple Courtyard did not take up the entire width of the Courtyard, and the area on both sides was on the same level as the remainder of the Courtyard. From it, one ascended6Seven and a half cubits. to the Courtyard of the Israelites, which is the beginning of the Temple Courtyard, using fifteen steps.7Middot 2:5 relates that the steps were semicircular in shape. In the Simchat Beit HaShoevah celebrations, during the holiday of Sukkot, the Levites stood on these steps, sang, and played music. Each step was half a cubit high and half a cubit wide.
One would proceed through the entire Israelites' Courtyard on one level8A distance of eleven cubits. and ascend from it to the Priestly Courtyard [using] one step, one cubit high.9This step departed from the standard height of half a cubit. It served as a clear line of demarcation between the two regions.Above [that step] was a platform of three steps.10On which the Levites would stand and chant while sacrifices were being offered, as described in Halachah 6. Each step was half a cubit high and half a cubit wide.11Thus, the height of the platform was 3 x 1/2, for a total height of one and a half cubits. Thus, the Priestly Courtyard was two and a half cubits higher than the Courtyard of the Israelites.
One would proceed through the entire Priestly Courtyard,12The Priestly Courtyard was eleven cubits long. However, one and a half cubits were taken up by the Levites' platform. [the area of] the Altar,1332 cubits in length. See Chapter 5, Halachah 12. and the space between the Entrance Hall and the Altar1422 cubits in length, on one level. From there, one would ascend to the Entrance Hall using twelve steps.15See the commentary to Chapter 4, Halachah 9. Each step was half a cubit high and half a cubit wide.16The Kessef Mishneh questions this statement. It appears to contradict two explicit statements of the Mishnah. Middot 2:3 states: "All the steps there [in the Temple complex] were half a cubit high and half a cubit wide, except for the steps of the Entrance Hall."Similarly, Middot 2:6 states: "Twelve steps [led to the Entrance Hall]. They were half a cubit high and a cubit wide."However, Yoma 16a quotes the latter mishnah, using the same text as the Rambam uses in this halachah.The Entrance Hall and [the remainder of] the Temple building were both on the same level.17The commentaries explain that the differing heights of the various sections of the Temple Mount reflected their levels of holiness. Each level which was more sacred was actually physically higher than the preceding level. Since, as stated in the commentary to Chapter 1, Halachah 5, the Entrance Hall and the two inner chambers of the Sanctuary were considered one integral unit, there was no difference in altitude between them.
Thus, the ground [on which] the Temple building [was located] was 22 cubits higher than the ground [on which] the Eastern Gate [was located].18The 22 cubits can be broken down as follows:The steps leading to the Woman's Courtyard, 6 cubitsThe steps leading to the Temple Courtyard, 7.5 cubitsThe steps leading to the Priestly Courtyard, 2.5 cubitsThe steps leading to the Entrance Hall, 6 cubitsThe Eastern Gate was twenty cubits high.19The standard height of the gates in the Temple complex. Accordingly, a person standing opposite the Eastern Gate could not see the Temple building.20Five gates were placed in a straight line:the Eastern Gate,the gate to the chayl,the gate to the Women's Courtyard,the gate of Nicanor, andthe gate of the Entrance Hall.Thus, had the Temple been built on flat ground, one would have been able to see through all the gates at once. However, because the person would be looking through the gates on an upward incline, he would only be able to see the steps leading to the Entrance Hall. For this reason, the wall above this gate was low.21All the other walls to the Temple Mount were very high. However, the eastern wall was only six cubits higher than the gate (Tifferet Yisrael, Middot 2:4). Thus, the priest [who offered the Parah Adumah] could see the opening of the Temple when he sprinkled its blood,22The Parah Adumah [Red Heifer] was necessary to purify those who had come in contact with a human corpse. Regarding its slaughter, Numbers 19:3-4 commands: "He shall take it outside the camp and ... take from the blood of the heifer and sprinkle it opposite the front of the Tent of Meeting." Similarly, in later generations, the Parah Adumah had to be sacrificed outside the Temple premises, but in view of the Sanctuary. Therefore, it was slaughtered on the Mount of Olives. while standing on the Mount of Olives.23The Mount of Olives is situated directly behind the Temple Mount, with the Kidron Valley in between. The priest stood on the Mount of Olives looking toward the Temple.
There were chambers under the Courtyard of the Israelites opening up to the Women's Courtyard.24As mentioned above, the mountain rose seven and a half cubits at this point. Thus, there was ample room to create storage chambers in the wall. There, the Levites stored their harps, lyres,25The Sages explain that a harp and a lyre were similar in appearance, but the lyre had more strings. cymbals, and other musical instruments.26The Levites chanted Psalms while the daily communal sacrifices were offered and accompanied these songs with music. Also, on special occasions like the Simchat Beit HaShoevah celebrations, they played music for the people. See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 3:2.The Levites stood on the platform which ascends from the Courtyard of the Israelites to the Courtyard of the Priests, when they chanted songs over the sacrifices.27The Har HaMoriah noted that in a number of places the Talmud states that this platform was used by the Levites in the manner described above (e.g., Yoma 20a and 53a, Arichin 13b). Nevertheless, the platform was also used for other purposes. Chagigah 16a and Rosh Hashanah 31b relate that the priests stood on this platform when they blessed the people. Indeed, the Hebrew name for the platform, Duchan, has become synonymous with the priestly blessing. (It must be noted that in Hilchot Nesiat Kapaim 14:14, the Rambam writes that the priests would stand on the steps before the Entrance Hall when they blessed the people.)
[Regarding] the chambers that were built on consecrated ground, but which opened up to an area that was not consecrated:28In this and the following two Halachot, the Rambam defines which structures of the Temple Courtyard share the sanctity of the area. This determination is significant in regard to three matters:a) Sacrifices of the highest holy order of sanctity must be eaten within the Temple Courtyard.b) Sacrifices of lesser degree of sanctity must be slaughtered within the Temple Courtyard.c) Entry to the Temple Courtyard is forbidden when ritually impure.See the Rambam's Commentary to Ma'aser Sheni 3:8. If [their roofs] were on the same level as the earth of the Courtyard, their inner space is not consecrated,29And does not share the sanctity of the Courtyard. but their roofs are consecrated.30And shares that level of holiness.If they are not on the same level [as the Courtyard], their roofs are also not consecrated, for the roofs and the upper floors [of the structures in the Temple Courtyard] were not consecrated.31Pesachim 86a explains that an exception to the latter principle was made regarding the upper storey of the Temple building itself.I Chronicles 28:11 states: "Then David gave Solomon his son the design of the Entrance Hall, its houses, its treasure stores, its upper storeys, its inner chambers, and the place for the ark," implying that the upper storey shared the same level of holiness as the remainder of the Temple building.Therefore, sacrifices of the highest degree of sanctity32Sin offerings, guilt offerings, and communal peace offerings. may not be eaten on these roofs,33Leviticus 6:6 requires the guilt offering to be eaten "in a sacred place," i.e. within the Temple courtyard. The same ruling applies to the other sacrifices of similar status. nor may sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity34for example, individual peace offerings, thanksgiving offerings, or the Passover sacrifice. be slaughtered there.35Leviticus 3:8 states that individual peace offerings must be slaughtered "before the tent of meeting." In the Temple, that phrase refers to the Temple Courtyard. The same ruling applies to other sacrifices of similar status (Zevachim 55a).
[Regarding the chambers] which were built on unconsecrated ground, but were open to consecrated ground:36Among the chambers included in this category were those on the southern side of the Chamber of the Hearth. Though the latter was positioned outside the Temple Courtyard, these chambers were open to it. See Chapter 5, Halachah 10. Their inner space was considered consecrated when eating sacrifices of the most holy order.37Zevachim 56a explains that these chambers are by nature unconsecrated. However, the Torah made an exception in regard to the consumption of these sacrifices. However, the sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity were not slaughtered there. [Similarly,] a person who enters while ritually impure is not required [to bring a sin offering].38Though there is no Scriptural prohibition against entering these chambers while ritually impure, the Sages forbade such an act.The roofs [of these chambers] are considered as unconsecrated ground in all respects.39There is not even a Rabbinic prohibition against one who is ritually impure ascending to them.
The underground passageways which open to the Temple Courtyard40As mentioned above, many underground passageways were constructed on the Temple Mount. are consecrated.41And all the laws applying to the Courtyard apply to them. Those that open to the Temple Mount [outside the Courtyard] are not consecrated.42Therefore, a ritually impure individual may enter them, as described in Chapter 5, Halachah 11.The windows43I.e., the apertures in the wall. and the width44I.e., the upper surface. of the wall are considered within [the Courtyard] in regard to partaking of the sacrifices of the most holy order and [entering while] ritually impure.45The Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh question these statements. Pesachim 86a states that the wall's upper surface is only considered an extension of the Courtyard when it is on the same level as the Courtyard (as the roofs of the chambers mentioned in Halachah 7.) If the wall is higher than the Courtyard, it is not considered consecrated.The following explanation may be offered for the decision rendered by the Rambam: Rashi (Pesachim, loc. cit.) relates that the chayl was the major wall around the inner Temple complex and the wall of the Courtyard itself was not high. Since the Temple was built on an incline, it was possible that the latter wall would be on the same level as the floor of the Courtyard, even though the Courtyard wall was raised above the ground in front of it.However, the Rambam himself definitely cannot accept such an interpretation. He already stated (Chapter 5, Halachah 3) that the chayl was only 10 cubits high. Therefore, it is highly unlikely that it would be the major wall surrounding the inner Temple complex. That likelihood is further reduced by the fact that the chayl was set off from the Temple Courtyard by a considerable distance, especially on the northern and southern sides. See also Tosefot Yom Tov, Middot 2:3.The above three halachot also apply to the city of Jerusalem as a whole. As stated above, the sacrifices of the most holy order could only be eaten within the Temple Courtyard. Similarly, a limitation was placed on where the sacrifices of lesser sanctity could be eaten. One could only partake of those offerings within the confines of the city of Jerusalem, and the definition of the city's limits were therefore of consequence. The particular decisions regarding the Courtyard's chambers, underground passageways, and upper surfaces of the wall, refer to the counterparts of these structures at the city's outer wall.
If the Sanhedrin46This decision can only be made by the Supreme Sanhedrin, the court of 71 judges who were seated in the Chamber of Hewn Stone. desires to add to [the city limits of] Jerusalem47And thus, extend the area in which sacrifices of lesser sanctity may be eaten. or the Temple Courtyard,48And thus, extend the area to which the three mitzvot mentioned in the notes to Halachah 7 apply. they may.49Tosafot (Zevachim 33a) explains that since the design for the Temple was conveyed by Ruach HaKodesh, Divine inspiration, even the Sanhedrin could not add to the limits of the Courtyard unless they could find a verse in the Tanach to support their decision.The passage cited in Zevachim and similarly, Sukkot 51b, reinforce the position of the Tosafot. However, the Yeriot Shlomo and other commentaries question whether the Rambam accepts that principle They may extend the Temple Courtyard to any place they desire on the Temple Mount.50The Or Sameiach cites allusions from the Tanach which appear to limit the size of the Courtyard to the Temple Mount. Isaiah 2:3, Zechariah 8:3, and other prophets frequently referred to "the mountain of God," implying that the Temple could only be situated on that peak. [Similarly, they may] extend the walls of Jerusalem to any place they desire.51Here, no restrictions are placed. Indeed, the Midrash relates that in the Messianic age, Jerusalem will encompass all of Eretz Yisrael, extending until Damascus.
We may not expand [the limits] of the city [of Jerusalem] or of the Temple Courtyard52As the Rambam explains, the construction of the Temple and the establishment of its limits must conform to the pattern followed in the construction of the Shechinah's first resting place, the Sanctuary in the desert. See Sh'vuot 14a,b. Therefore, the expansion cannot take place unless the conditions mentioned by the Rambam are met. unless receiving the consent of the king, a prophet,53Moses was the master of all prophets. the Urim V'Tumim,54The stones of the breastplate of the High Priest. They served as oracles, and were consulted on all matters of national importance. See the commentary to Chapter 4, Halachah 1.Tosafot (Sh'vuot 15a) questions the necessity for the Urim V'Tumim to be used in the establishment of the Courtyard's limits. Aharon, the High Priest, did not don the Urim V'Tumim until after the Sanctuary was constructed and its limits established. Since these requirements were set on the basis of the pattern followed when dedicating the Sanctuary, the Urim V'Tumim should not be required for dedicating future Sanctuaries.Among the answers given to that question are that until Aharon's installation as High Priest, Moses served in that capacity and wore al the priestly garments (Ritbah). and the Sanhedrin of 71 judges,55Some authorities maintain that the Sanhedrin was established before the Sanctuary was built. Other opinions maintain that the Sanhedrin was only established later. Nevertheless, Moses' participation is considered equivalent to that of the Sanhedrin. as [Exodus 25:9] states: "According to all that I show you, [the design of the Sanctuary]...so shall you make it." [The latter phrase was interpreted by our sages to mean that the same conditions should apply in] future generations.[The presence of a king is required] because Moses, our teacher, was a king.56The commentaries explain that Deuteronomy 33:5: "And he was a king in Yeshurun," refers to Moses.
How do we extend [the limits of] the city?57The entire procession described by the Rambam is described in detail in Sh'vuot 15a-16a.The source for these practices is the description of the dedication of Jerusalem in Nechemiah 12:27-44. There, it is related that:At the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, they sought Levites...to bring them to Jerusalem to carry out the dedication with joy and thanksgiving, with songs, with cymbals, with harps, and with lyres....Then, I asked the princes of Judah to ascend the wall, and I brought up the greater portion of two thanksgiving offerings....They ascended to the wall by the stairs of the city of David....They offered great sacrifices that day, for God had made them rejoice with great joy....and the joy of Jerusalem was heard from far away. The Sanhedrin must offer two thanksgiving offerings.58A thanksgiving offering includes three elements: the leavened breads, an animal which is sacrificed and loaves of unleavened bread.Sh'vuot, loc. cit., explains that the leavened breads were chosen because Nechemiah's description of Jerusalem's dedication relates that he "brought up the greater portion of two thanksgiving offerings." That phrase alludes to the leavened breads of the thanksgiving offerings which rose, and thus, were more substantial than the unleavened breads. [Then, two priests]59The bracketed addition was made on the basis of Rashi's commentary, Sh'vuot 16b. take the leavened breads from these offerings [and proceed]. The Sanhedrin would follow the thanksgiving offerings.60Sh'vuot, loc. cit. relates that the leaders of the people, the Sanhedrin, followed the thanksgiving offerings when Ezra and Nechemiah dedicated the city of Jerusalem.This halachah is taken from the Mishnah, Sh'vuot 2:2. Many versions of that mishnah, including the one quoted in the Talmud, add the phrase: "And all of Israel followed after them." However, the Rambam's version of the text omits that phrase. Hence, it is also not included in this halachah. The thanksgiving offerings [would not proceed together, but] one would follow the other.61Similarly, in Nechemiah's narrative, the two offerings were separated.They would stand on each and every corner and every single stone in Jerusalem, [playing] harps, lyres, and cymbals, and reciting [Psalms 30]: "I exalt you, Lord, for You have uplifted me...."62Psalm 30 is called "the song of the dedication of the House." Hence, it is appropriate for this occasion.Sh'vuot, loc. cit., also relates that other Psalms, including 3, 91, and 100, were recited.[They would proceed] until reaching the end of the place [which they desired to] consecrate. There, they would stand and eat one of the two thanksgiving offerings. The other was burnt. A prophet would determine which was eaten and which was burnt.63This procedure was carried out at Nechemiah's dedication of Jerusalem. The prophets Chaggai, Zechariah, and Malachi participated in that dedication, and advised Nechemiah of the procedure to follow.
Similarly, [if the Sages desire] to extend the [limits of the] courtyard,64There is no record of this practice ever being carried out. Rather, the Temple Courtyard remained the same size from the time it was dedicated by Ezra. they must consecrate it with the remaining portion of the meal offering. Just as the thanksgiving offering, which must be eaten inside Jerusalem consecrates it, so, too, the remaining portion of the meal offering, which may only be eaten inside the Temple Courtyard,65Leviticus 2:1-3 states: "When a man offers a meal offering to the Lord, his offering shall be of fine flour....the priest shall burn the memorial part of it on the Altar....and the remnant of the meal offering shall be Aharon's and his sons. It is of the sacrifices of the highest order of holiness." Hence it must be eaten in the Temple Courtyard. consecrates it. It is to be eaten at the end of the space which they desire to consecrate.66Ri Migash, the Rambam's teacher, commenting on Sh'vuot, loc. cit., emphasizes that eating the offerings are not merely signs that the consecration of the city or the Courtyard had been carried out, but rather, the consecration becomes effective by eating of these offerings. The Rambam's statements here appear to be based on that principle.
Any place which was not [consecrated] with all the above [elements] and according to the above procedure is not thoroughly consecrated.67The expression used "not thoroughly consecrated" is somewhat problematic. The Maharit explains that this expression can be understood within the context of the Mishnah's statements (Sh'vuot, loc. cit.): "[In regard to] any place [in the Temple Courtyard] which was not consecrated with all of these [i.e., a king, a prophet, etc.], one who enters [while ritually impure] is not liable [for a sin offering]."Generally, throughout the Talmud, such an expression implies that though a sin offering is not required, the act is forbidden. Similarly, in this context, a consecration which lacks all the elements listed previously in the Mishnah is not totally effective. Therefore, entering the portion of the Courtyard consecrated in this manner does not obligate an impure individual to bring a sacrifice. Nevertheless, there is a Rabbinic prohibition against entering that area. Though Ezra offered two thanksgiving offerings68As described in the passage from Nechemiah quoted above [to dedicate the city,] he merely carried out a testimonial act. The Sanctuary was not consecrated through his deeds, for neither a King nor the Urim V'Tumim69See Chapter 4, Halachah 1. were present there.70Although the dedication procedure carried out by Ezra and Nechemiah was merely a testimonial act, having no Halachic significance, we are forced to say that the testimonial was carried out in precise detail as if the city was actually being consecrated. Therefore, the description of their procedure can demonstrate the process necessary to actually dedicate the city.[If so,] how was [the Second Temple] consecrated?71Since all sacrifices were offered there, we must conclude that it was indeed consecrated. With the first consecration performed by Solomon, for he consecrated the Temple Courtyard and Jerusalem, for that time and for eternity.72This concept is the subject of a debate in the Talmud (Sh'vuot 16a, Makkot 19a, Megillah 10a) and is discussed by the Rambam in the following two halachot.
Therefore, we may offer all the sacrifices [on the Temple site], even though the Temple itself is not built.73See the commentary to Chapter 2, Halachah 4 which explains that the exiles who returned from Babylon built an Altar before they completed the construction of the Second Temple. The prophets assured them that "all sacrifices could be offered on that Altar, even though the Temple itself was not [built] there [yet.]" The construction of the Temple took another twenty two years to complete.Even in later generations, our spiritual leaders have desired to offer sacrifices on the Temple Mount. In the Middle Ages, the Sage, Rabbi Chayim (according to other sources, Rabbi Yechiel) of Paris made Aliyah and settled in Jerusalem. He was prepared to offer sacrifices on the Temple site and refrained from doing so only after his colleagues explained that sacrifices could not be offered because they were unaware of the proper location, size, and dimensions of the Altar. Similarly, sacrifices of the most holy order can be eaten in the entire [area of the] Courtyard, even though it is in ruin and not surrounded by a divider.74Twenty two years passed between the time that the exiles return to Jerusalem and the completion of the Second Temple. During that time, all the sacrifices were offered and eaten even though the walls of the Temple and the Courtyard were not built.We may also eat sacrifices of lesser sanctity and Ma'aser Sheni75The second tithe. After the first tithe was separated, a second tithe also had to be set aside. In four years out of the seven year agricultural cycle, Ma'aser Sheni was brought to Jerusalem and eaten there. See Deuteronomy:22-26, Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni. throughout Jerusalem,76This statement is extremely problematic. In Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 2:1, the Rambam himself writes that "Ma'aser Sheni is only eaten in Jerusalem while the Temple is standing." Though some authorities have explained that the statement in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah refers to the time when the Altar is standing, there is no indication in the Rambam's words to that effect. Furthermore, there are other inconsistencies between the Rambam's statements here and in Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni.Even according to the Rambam's statements here, we are now prohibited from eating Ma'aser Sheni in Jerusalem. We are all ritually impure, and Ma'aser Sheni must be eaten in a state of ritual purity. even though [it is not surrounded by] a wall, for through its original consecration, it was consecrated for that time and for eternity.
77In the previous halachot, the Rambam stated that the sanctity of the Temple Mount and Jerusalem would remain for eternity, because of the initial consecration by David and Solomon. Thus, when Ezra rededicated Jerusalem, as described in the Book of Nechemiah, his act was merely testimonial in nature. There was no need to reconsecrate the Temple, because its original holiness had never been nullified.This seemingly contradicts the Rambam's statements in Sefer Zeraim, the portion of the Mishneh Torah which deals with the agricultural laws to be observed in Eretz Yisrael. There, the Rambam states that the original consecration of Eretz Yisrael was nullified after the Babylonian conquest. When Ezra returned from Babylon, he reconsecrated the Land, causing the various agricultural laws to be in effect again, though only M'd'Rabbanen, according to Rabbinic decree.The portion he consecrated was considerably smaller than the original boundaries of Eretz Yisrael. Nevertheless, his consecration remained in effect even after the Gentiles' subsequent conquests. Indeed, on the basis of that consecration, these agricultural laws must be observed in Eretz Yisrael today.To resolve that contradiction, the Rambam explains that the "consecration" of Jerusalem and of the Temple differs from the "consecration" of Eretz Yisrael as a whole. Jerusalem and the Temple were consecrated by the revelation of the Shechinah in the Temple. That Divine act can never be nullified by man's deeds. In contrast, the consecration of Eretz Yisrael as a whole was brought about by the Jewish people. It can thus be nullified by the Gentiles. Why do I say that the original consecration sanctified the Temple and Jerusalem for eternity,78As stated above in Halachot 14 and 15. while in regard to the consecration of the remainder of Eretz Yisrael, in the context of the Sabbatical year, tithes, and other similar [agricultural] laws, [the original consecration] did not sanctify it for eternity?79In Hilchot Terumah (1:5), the Rambam states:Every [place] which those ascending from Egypt took possession of was consecrated in the initial consecration. When [the Jewish people] were exiled, that sanctity was nullified. The first consecration... sanctified the land for that time, but not for eternity.Because the sanctity of the Temple and Jerusalem stems from the Shechinah, and the Shechinah can never be nullified.80See the commentary to Chapter 4, Halachah 1. Therefore, [Leviticus 26:31] states: "I will lay waste to your Sanctuaries." The Sages declared:81Megillah 28a. "Even though they have been devastated, their sanctity remains."82Support for this statement can be brought from God's response to King Solomon, II Chronicles 7:15: "For now, I have chosen and sanctified this house, that My Name be there for eternity, and My eyes and My heart will be there forever."Similarly, Sh'vuot 16b states that the Temple was consecrated forever.Nevertheless, that statement is not accepted by all Halachic authorities. Both Rashi and the Tosafot interpret the Talmud's statements in Sh'vuot in a manner which indicates that they do not accept its simple meaning.Similarly, commenting on this and the above halachot, the Ra'avad writes:This is [the Rambam's] opinion. I am not aware of his source... According to the opinion in the Talmud which states that it was not originally consecrated for eternity, no differentiation was made between the Temple, Jerusalem, and the remainder of Eretz Yisrael...Even R. Yossi who maintains that the second consecration consecrated the land for eternity made that statement only in regard to the remainder of Eretz Yisrael and not in regard to the Temple and Jerusalem.Ezra knew that ultimately [the status] of the Temple and Jerusalem would ultimately change and that they would be eternally consecrated by God's glory [in the Messianic age]. Hence, he did not consecrate it when consecrating the remainder of Eretz Yisrael.The above was revealed to me, [as it is said:] "The secrets of God [are conveyed] to those who fear Him."In contrast, the [original] obligation to keep the laws of the Sabbatical year and tithes on the Land stemmed from the fact that it was conquered by the [Jewish people, as a] community.83In contrast, lands that were conquered by only a certain portion of the Jewish community, for example, Syria, were not bound by these laws. Therefore, when the land was taken from their hands [by the Babylonians,] their [original] conquest was nullified. Thus, according to Torah law, the land was freed from the obligations of the Sabbatical year and of tithes because it was no longer Eretz Yisrael.84After the Babylonians conquered Eretz Yisrael and exiled the people, the sanctity of the land was nullified. There was no obligation to keep any of the agricultural laws that apply in Eretz Yisrael during the seventy years of the Babylonian exile.When Ezra returned [to Eretz Yisrael] and consecrated it, it was not sanctified by means of conquest, but rather through Chazzakah.85Chazzakah is a manifestation of ownership. It is accepted by Torah law as one of the certain formal acts of contract which acknowledge the transfer of property from one person to another. Therefore, every place which was repossessed by the [exiles returning from] Babylon and consecrated when Ezra consecrated [the land] the second time, is sacred today.Thus, as explained in Hilchot Terumah, it is necessary to keep the laws of the Sabbatical years and the tithes [on this land] even though it was taken from [the Jewish people in later years].86The Kessef Mishnah finds these statements difficult to accept because of the following questions:a) On what basis is Chazzakah considered a more effective means of acquisition than conquest?b) After the initial conquest of Eretz Yisrael, the Jewish people manifested their ownership over it and thus, effected a Chazzakah. If so, why is Ezra's Chazzakah, which was not preceded by conquest, more effective than the Chazzakah which followed the original conquest? Why should the conquest detract from the consecration of the land?These questions can be explained as follows: The Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 5:1) interprets Genesis 15:18: "I have given this land to your seed to mean that from Abraham's time onward Eretz Yisrael became the property of the Jewish people. Though the land was still possessed by the Canaanites, the Jews were already its legal owners. See Bava Batra 119b.Despite this claim of ownership, the sanctity of Eretz Yisrael came about only after the Jewish people entered the land, after the redemption from Egypt. At that time, they were commanded to conquer the land and take it forcefully from the Gentiles (See Numbers 32:29, Deuteronomy 3:21, etc.) Since God made the consecration of the land dependent on its conquest by Israel, it follows that conquest by a Gentile nation can nullify that holiness.In contrast, Ezra was not commanded to reconquer Eretz Yisrael, but to settle it. In this instance, God made the sanctity of the land dependent on the Jewish people manifesting their ownership over the land which had been given to them as an eternal inheritance. Since Eretz Yisrael remains our land, regardless of how many times it has been conquered by Gentiles, the sanctity effected by that manifestation of ownership is also eternal. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 15, 102-109.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
There is a positive commandment to hold the Temple in awe,1Sefer HaMitzvot(Positive Commandment 21) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 254) consider this as one of the 613 mitzvot, incumbent on both men and women. as [Leviticus 19:30] states: "And you shall revere my Sanctuary."2As explained in Halachot 7-9, the fulfillment of this Mitzvah is not limited to the time when the Temple stood, but is applicable even at present. Nevertheless, it is not the [physical building of] the Temple which must be held in awe, but rather, He who commanded that it be revered.3This clause is quoted from Yevamot 6a,b. Tosefot explain that such a clarification is necessary, lest the Jewish people worship the Temple per se, bowing down to the physical building or showing it other signs of reverence.
How is reverence for it manifest? A person should not enter the Temple Mount holding a staff,4The source for these statements is the Mishnah (Berachot 9:6). The Talmud accepts these as signs of reverence without even questioning the source for these practices. or with sandals on his feet,5When God appeared to Moses in the burning bush, He told him (Exodus 3:5 : "Remove your shoes from your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy." Similarly, on the Temple Mount, shoes had to be removed.The Minchat Chinuch states that one may wear shoes on the Temple Mount if they are not made of leather. or wearing only underwear,6In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Berachot, loc. cit.), the Rambam defines the word, afundaso, as "a garment which one will wear against his flesh to collect sweat, so that his sweat will not spoil his dress clothing." with dust on his feet, or with money wrapped in his kerchief.7Tosafot, in Bava Metzia 26a, explain that only the public display of money is prohibited. One may carry money discreetly in his pockets.It is superfluous to say that it is forbidden to spit on the entire Temple Mount.8Berachot 62b explains that this concept may be inferred from the prohibition against wearing shoes. If wearing shoes which generally is not considered an act of disrespect is forbidden, then surely spitting is not allowed. If one must spit, he should let it be absorbed in his clothing.9The Har HaMoriah explains that this law was derived from Berachot 24b, which recommended this course of action to someone who has to spit in the midst of the Amidah prayers.One should not take a shortcut through the Temple Mount, by entering from one gate, and leaving from the opposite one, in order to shorten the way.10Berachot, loc. cit., also considers this as a lack of respect. Rather, one should walk around from the outside, entering only for the purpose of a mitzvah.11The Kessef Mishneh explains that the latter concept is derived from Megillah 28b, where a similar statement is made in reference to a person's entering a synagogue.
All who enter the Temple Mount12The Rambam's statements are based on Middot 2:2. By quoting that mishnah here, he implies that these practices are also an expression of deference to the Temple (Rambam LeAm). should [face] the right side, walk around [in that direction],13In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam writes: "For example, one who enters through the gate of Shushan, [the eastern gate,] should not turn toward the Chuldah gates, [the southern gates,] but rather toward the Tadi gate, [the northern gate]." and leave on the left side.14Tosafot Yom Tov explains that this does not necessarily mean that one would exit from the gate in the opposite direction. Rather, one would continue circling towards the right, even though it would be shorter to leave by turning towards the left. [This applies to everyone] except to one to whom [a grievous] event occurred. He would circle around towards the left side.15Tifferet Yisrael (Middot, loc. cit.) explains that this distinction was made so that all who see him would be aroused to pray for his welfare. See also Shabbat 67a. Therefore, [those who met him] would ask him: "Why are you circling towards the left?"16Magen Avraham 651:21 states that from these statements, it appears that only a person who suffered one of the fates listed would circle to the left. Generally, a left-handed person must give his left hand prominence, as others do the right. In this instance, however, he would circle to the right even though it is his weaker side."Because I have become a mourner," [he would answer]."May the One Who rests in this House comfort you," [they would reply].[Or he might answer:] "Because I have been ostracized."17Under certain circumstances, the court would place a person who did not follow its directives under a ban of ostracism, restricting the business and social relations he could have with other Jews. See Hilchot Talmud Torah, chs. 6-7.[In which case, they would reply:] "May the One Who rests in this House bring about a change in your heart and thus, you will follow the words of your colleagues. Then, they will draw you near."18The Mishnah (Middot, loc. cit.) relates that Rabbi Meir maintained that the people would answer: "May the One Who dwells in this House cause them to have a change of heart and accept you." Rabbi Yossi explained that such an expression makes it appear that the court was unfair in its judgment and suggests the phrase quoted by the Rambam.
Anyone who has completed his service [in the Temple and desires] to leave, should not [turn around and] leave with his back to the Temple. Rather, he should walk backwards slightly19Yoma 53a explains that one must leave the Temple service facing in the same direction as when he entered. and [then], walk slowly, and [turn] to his side20One need not walk backwards the entire way. However, it is also improper to turn one's back to the Temple. until leaving the Temple Courtyard.21At which point he may walk in an ordinary manner.Similarly, the members of the priestly watch,22In order to allow the priests to serve in the Temple throughout the year in an organized manner, the prophets organized a rotation system, dividing the entire priestly family into 24 watches. Each watch would serve for a week and perform all the sacrificial functions required. The following week they would be replaced by a new watch according to the order of rotation. See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash, Chapter 4, Halachah 3. the representatives of the Jewish people,23This refers to the Anshei Ma'amaad, who represented the entire Jewish people. In Hilchot Klei HaMikdash, Chapter 6, Halachah 1, the Rambam describes their function as follows:It is impossible for a person's offering to be sacrificed unless he is present. The communal offerings are the sacrifices of the entire Jewish people, [and hence, their presence should be required. Nevertheless,] since it is impossible for the entire Jewish people to be present in the Temple Courtyard while sacrifices are being offered, the first prophets established a practice of choosing worthy and God-fearing men....to serve as the representatives of all of Israel, and to be present at the sacrifices...They were divided into 24 watches.See also Ta'anit 4:2. and the Levites [when they descend] from their platform,24After accompanying the sacrifices with songs and music. should leave the Temple in this manner, similar to one who steps backwards after his prayers.25After the conclusion of the Amidah prayer, one retreats backwards three steps as "a servant departs from his master's presence." (Yoma 53b. See also Hilchot Tefillah 5:10.The commentaries on the Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 123:1) explain that since the prayers were instituted to replace the sacrifices, one should conclude his prayers in the same manner as the priests departed from their service. All these [are expressions of] reverence for the Temple.
A person should not act frivolously before the gate of Nicanor, the eastern gate of the Temple Courtyard,26Rashi, commenting on Berachot 54a, explains that this also applies to someone standing outside the Temple Mount. See also Halachah 8. for it is positioned opposite the chamber of the Holy of Holies.Everyone who enters the Temple Courtyard should walk in a dignified manner,27On this statement, the Ra'avad comments: "And not as common people conduct themselves." in the region where he is permitted to enter.28As explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 7, and in Chapter 5, Halachah 12, there were divisions in the Temple Courtyard for the priests and for the Israelites. He should conceive of himself as standing before God, as [I Kings 9:3] states: "My eyes and My heart will be there forever."One should walk with awe, fear, and trembling,29The Targum Yonatan renders Leviticus 19:30: "And you shall revere My Sanctuary" as "Walk to My Sanctuary with fear." See also Ecclesiastics 4:17: "Guard your feet when you walk to the House of God." as [Psalms 55:15] states: "We would walk in the House of the Lord with fervor."30See Rashi, Avot 6:3.
It is forbidden for anyone to sit in the Temple Courtyard,31The Mishneh LiMelech states that this prohibition appears to have its source in the Torah itself.Sefer HaMitzvot, positive commandment 21, the Rambam includes this prohibition as one expression of reverence for the Temple. [for] sitting in the Temple Courtyard is prohibited32Rashi (Yoma 25a) explains that this prohibition is derived from Deuteronomy 18:5: "For the Lord has chosen him...to stand and to serve in the name of the Lord."Tosafot (Yoma, ibid.) question whether the priests are permitted to sit in the courtyard when they partake of the sacrifices of the most holy order. From the Rambam's statements, it appears that he does not permit such leniency. except for the Kings of the House of David, as [II Samuel 7:18] states: "And King David entered and sat before the Lord."33The narrative in II Samuel relates that after sitting, David stated: "Who am I, O Lord, God, and what is my house that You have brought me this far." At the moment when he was granted this great honor, he displayed humility.The Sanhedrin34Who sat. met in the half of the Chamber of Hewn Stone which was not consecrated.35See Chapter 5, Halachah 17, and Chapter 6, Halachah 7.
Even though, the Temple is now in ruin because of our sins,36The Rambam uses the expressions "our sins," rather than "the sins of our ancestors," for all Israel, in every generation and every place, is one communal body.The usage of the term "our" also implies a deeper concept. Our Sages declared: "Whoever does not witness the rebuilding of the Temple in his days must consider as if it was destroyed in his days."The exile and the Temple's destruction were caused by the sins of the Jewish people. As soon as sin, the cause for the exile, is eradicated, the effect, the exile, will cease. Similarly, our Sages declared: "If Israel repents, she will immediately be redeemed." a person must hold its [site] in awe, as one would regard it when it was standing.[Therefore,] one should only enter a region which he is permitted to enter. He should not sit in [the area of] the Temple Courtyard, nor should he act frivolously when standing before [the place of] the eastern gate, as [implied by Leviticus 19:30]: "You shall observe My Sabbaths and you shall revere My Sanctuary." [Explaining the analogy between the two commands, the Sages comment:]37Midrash Tanchuma, Vayikra 6. "Just as the observance of the Sabbath [applies] for eternity, so too, the reverence for the Temple must be eternal. Even though it is in ruin, it remains holy."
When the Temple is standing, a person may not act frivolously in the area from Mt. Scopus,38As stated above, even when the Temple is destroyed, one may not act frivolously directly opposite the gate to the Courtyard. However, when the Temple was standing, that prohibition was extended, and included any place within sight of Jerusalem. (Meiri, Berachot 61b.) which is outside of Jerusalem, and inwards [towards the city.39Berachot, loc. cit., explains that Mt. Scopus is the most distant point from which one can see the Temple site. This prohibition only applies] when he can see the Temple, and there is no fence between him and the Temple.
At all times,40I.e., even at present, when the Temple is destroyed. It must be noted that with slight emendations, the following laws are all quoted as Halachah by the Shulchan Aruch, Orach Chayim, sec. 3. a person may not defecate41Most of the Rabbis explain that there is no prohibition if the toilet is surrounded by a wall. However, the Rambam's phraseology does not imply such license. Therefore, some authorities recommend that, if possible, one should construct his home with the toilet facing the north or south. or sleep42Most authorities follow the opinion of the Tosafot (Berachot 5b) who explain that this prohibition only applies when sleeping with one's wife. However, Rav Yosef Caro emphasizes that according to the Rambam, the prohibition applies even when sleeping alone and strongly urges that this ruling be accepted. [with his body positioned] between the east and the west.43The Halachic authorities question whether the Rambam's intention is to stress the directions of east and west or the direction of the Temple itself. The Jerusalem Talmud (Berachot 9:5) states that, regardless of where one is located, one should not face the west, because "the Shechinah is in the west." On the other hand, certain authorities emphasize that according to the Babylonian Talmud (Berachot 61b), the location of Jerusalem is the determining factor. It is superfluous to state that one should not place a toilet between the east and the west in any place [throughout the world,] for the Temple is in the west. Therefore, one should not defecate to the west nor to the east, for it is opposite the west. Rather, we should always defecate and sleep [with our bodies] to the north and south.44The Rabbis explain that although it is preferable to follow the Rambam's view, one may position his bed between the east and the west if there is no other alternative.Whoever urinates from Mt. Scopus inward to the city should not sit facing the Temple. Rather, [he should position himself] to the north or to the south, or have the Temple at his side.45Less severe restrictions are placed on urinating than on defecating. However, from the point where one can see the Temple site, Mt. Scopus, one should also control oneself in this regard.
A person may not make46The Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 254), explains that this prohibition also stems from the command to revere the Sanctuary. A building or utensil that cannot be copied is obviously unique and special, and emphasis on its uniqueness will lead to reverence. a house47Based on Avodah Zarah 43a, it would appear that the prohibition forbids constructing a building following the Temple's measurements exactly, but making a model in miniature would be permitted. according to the Temple's design,48The Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 254) analyzes this prohibition in depth and raises a number of issues, including the following:a) The Talmud (Avodah Zarah 43a) explains that the source for this prohibition is the command against making images, as the Torah commands (Exodus 20:20 : "Do not make with Me gods of silver..." If so, on the surface, it would have been more appropriate for the Rambam to mention this concept within the laws of Avodah Zarah (worship of false gods) rather than in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah. Indeed, the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah 141:8, discuss these prohibitions in that context.b) As explained above, the structure of the Second Temple differed from the First and the dimensions of the Third Temple will not resemble those of the Second in their entirety. Thus, we must understand: Which structure are we forbidden to copy, that of the First or the Second Temple? Does the prohibition apply only when the Temple is standing, or does it apply to all three structures?The Minchat Chinuch himself, tends towards the opinion that at present there is no prohibition to duplicate the previous structures of the Temple. Only in the Third Temple, may it be built speedily in our days, will this prohibition apply.The text, Ma'asai LiMelech, explains that the Rambam's source for this prohibition is not the abovementioned Talmudic portion, but rather the obligation of awe and reverence referred to previously. It is not respectful to duplicate the Temple or its structures and use them for mundane purposes. a porch with the design of the Entrance Hall,49Despite the fact that the Entrance Hall had walls on all four sides. Nevertheless, since its gate was large, 40 cubits high and 20 cubits wide, and open at all times, it resembled a porch. a courtyard resembling the Temple Courtyard,50The Minchat Chinuch (loc. cit.) states that this prohibition does not extend beyond the Temple Courtyard. One may make a copy of the chayl, the rampart surrounding the Courtyard, or another similar structure. a table according to the design of the Table for the Showbread, or a lamp in the design of the Menorah.51The Minchat Chinuch questions if these two utensils were mentioned only as examples, and the same prohibition applies to the other sacred utensils, or if the Rambam meant them exclusively. He concludes that we may not make a replica of any utensil whose exact dimensions are known to us.He also emphasizes that the prohibition against making a replica of the Menorah applies even if the goblets, bulbs, and flowers are omitted, since the Menorah is acceptable without them when made from other metals (Chapter 3, Halachah 4). However, one may make a lamp [resembling the Menorah] with five branches or with eight branches52Indeed, it is customary to make Chanukah lamps in the shape of the Menorah. [even] with seven branches if it is not made of metal.53As explained in Chapter 1, Halachah 18, the sacred utensils must be made of metal. Hence, there is no prohibition against making a replica from other substances.
The [encampment of the Jewish people] in the desert[ was divided into] three areas:54With these statements, the Rambam introduces the following twelve Halachot, which discuss various gradations of holiness. These statements are based on the Tosafta, Kelim 1:10 and Zevachim 116b.the camp of Israel, which was itself subdivided into four camps;55See Numbers 2:1-31, which describes the division of the twelve tribes into the camps of Judah, Reuven, Ephraim, and Dan.the camp of the Levites about which [Numbers 1:50] states: "They shall camp around the Sanctuary;"56The Levites would dwell in a separate encampment, between the camp of Israel and the Courtyard of the Sanctuary. The particular encampment of each Levite family is described in Numbers, Chapter 3.and the camp of the Shechinah [which included the area] beginning at the entrance to the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting inwards.57No one was permitted to dwell in this region. People would enter only to participate in the service of the Sanctuary.Correspondingly, for [future] generations:[The area] from the entrance to Jerusalem to the Temple Mount is comparable to the camp of Israel.58The strictures to be observed because of its sanctity are described in Halachah 14.[The area] from the entrance to the Temple Mount until the entrance to the Temple Courtyard, the gate of Nicanor, is comparable to the camp of the Levites.59The strictures to be observed because of its sanctity are described in Halachah 15.[The area] from the entrance to the Temple Courtyard inward, is comparable to the camp of the Shechinah.60The strictures to be observed because of its sanctity are described in Halachah 18.The chayl61The strictures to be observed because of its sanctity are described in Halachah 16. and the Women's Courtyard62The strictures to be observed because of its sanctity are described in Halachah 17. were regions of increased sanctity which were first instituted in the Temple.63Parallels to these divisions did not exist in the encampment in the desert. They were instituted when the First Temple was constructed.
The entire land of Eretz Yisrael is more sanctified than all other lands. How is its holiness expressed?The Omer offering, the two loaves (offered on Shavuot), and the first fruits must be brought from its [territory] and cannot be brought from other lands.
Eretz Yisrael has ten gradations of holiness, each higher than the preceding level. The cities which are surrounded by a wall are holier than the rest of the Land.[How is this holiness expressed?]Those afflicted by tzara'at are sent out of [these cities].A corpse cannot be buried inside them until the entire city or its seven chosen representatives agree.If a corpse has been taken outside a city, it should not be returned, even though all of the inhabitants are willing.If the inhabitants of a city desire to disinter [a corpse] and remove it from the country, they may. The graves [of any individual] may be disinterred except for those of a king or of a prophet.[The following rules apply in the case of a grave which was originally placed outside a city. Afterwards, the city grew in size to the point where] it surrounded the grave on all four sides, or merely on two sides which faced each other. If [originally,] there was more than 50 cubits between the grave and the city on either side, [the corpse] cannot be disinterred from the grave until every inhabitant of the city agrees. If a smaller distance [had originally been left,] it may be removed.
Jerusalem is holier than other walled cities. We must eat the sacrifices of lesser sanctity and the second tithes within its walls.[Because of this holiness], the following [restrictions] were enacted in regard to Jerusalem:No corpse is left within [its boundaries] overnight.Human bones may not be transported within it.Homes cannot be rented within it.A resident alien may not be given the opportunity to settle in the city.No graves may remain within [its boundaries] except for the graves of the House of David and the grave of Chuldah, the prophetess, which were there from the days of the first prophets.We should not plant gardens or orchards within the city. It cannot be sowed or plowed [as a field], so that it will not smell foul. No trees may be maintained within it, except for a rose garden which was there from the days of the first prophets.We may not maintain a garbage dump there, because of creeping animals.We may not [build] balconies or protrusions extending into the public domain because of Tumat Ohel.We may not create furnaces within it because of the smoke.We may not raise chickens within it, because they may cause ritually pure articles [to become impure]. Similarly, a priest may not raise chickens throughout Eretz Yisrael, because they cause ritually pure articles [to become impure].A house in the city which is sold is never designated as the permanent property of the buyer.A house in the city is never designated as leprous.It cannot be judged as an "apostate city."An Eglah Arufah is never brought from it.[The latter four statements apply] because [Jerusalem] was never divided among the tribes.
The Temple Mount is holier than [the city of Jerusalem]. Zavim, Zavot, Niddot, and women who have given birth may not enter there. [However,] a corpse may be brought into the Temple Mount and one has contracted ritual impurity from a corpse may definitely enter there.
The chayl is holier than the Temple Mount. Gentiles and those who contracted impurity through contact with a corpse or engaging in sexual relations with a Niddah may not enter there.
The Women's Courtyard is holier than the chayl. A person who has immersed himself in a mikveh, but must wait until the sun sets to become ritually pure, may not enter there.This prohibition was instituted by the Sages. According to Torah law, such a person may enter the camp of the Levites. [Similarly,] a person who contracted ritual impurity through contact with a corpse and who entered the Women's Courtyard, is not liable for a sin offering.
The Courtyard of the Israelites is holier than the Women's Courtyard.64As mentioned in the commentary to Chapter 6, Halachah 4, the physical height of the different regions of the Temple Mount corresponded to the difference in spiritual level. There was a marked distinction between the Temple Courtyard and the preceding regions. Until this point, there was no Scriptural prohibition against entering when ritually impure. Correspondingly, the greatest rise in height between the different levels occurred at this point. A person who has purified himself, but has not brought the required sacrifices,65In Hilchot Michusrei Kapporah (1:1), the Rambam writes:There are four who are considered "lacking in purification:"a) a zavah,b) a woman who has just given birth,c) a zav,d) one afflicted with tzara'at.Why are they called "lacking in purification?" Because in each of these cases, even though the individual has:a) been purified from [the cause of] his impurity,b) immersed [in a Mikveh,] andc) waited until the day has passed,he is still lacking. His purification process is not complete enough to entitle him to partake of the sacrifices until he brings the offering [required of] him. may not enter there.66In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Kelim 1:8), the Rambam writes:We have prevented a person from entering the Women's Courtyard though he has immersed himself in a mikveh, because he must wait until the sun sets to become ritually pure. However, we need not force away a person who has purified himself, but who has not brought the required sacrifices.[Why is there a distinction between the two?] Because the former is prohibited from eating Terumah, while the latter is permitted to partake of Terumah. The above is based on the principle mentioned above: "All those whose state of impurity is more severe will be banished in a more severe manner." Similarly, an impure person who enters there is liable for karet.67Premature death by the hand of God.
The Priestly Courtyard is holier than [the Courtyard of the Israelites].68To clarify this distinction, the step between the two was a cubit high (See Chapter 6, Halachah 3) and marking posts were placed at either side. An Israelite may only enter there when required for:a) Semichah,69In connection with the peace-offerings, Leviticus 3:2 declares: "He shall lay his hands on the head of his offering." See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 3:6-13. c) slaughtering,70A person who brings a sacrifice is not required to slaughter it. However, the slaughtering of a sacrifice need not be performed by a priest. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:1. b) confession,71In Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 3:14-15, the Rambam relates that a person offering a sacrifice is required to confess his sins while laying his hands on his sacrifice.It must be noted that the source for this Halachah, Kelim 1:8, does not mention these confessional prayers. Note the commentary of the Har HaMoriah. tenufah.72With regard to the peace offerings, Leviticus 7:30-31 states: "With his own hands, he must bring the choice parts.... He shall wave the chest with the prescribed motions...." The waving of these offerings had to be performed by the person bringing the sacrifice himself. See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 9:6-10.
[The area] between the Altar and the Entrance Hall is holier than the area mentioned above. Priests who have physical deformities,73Leviticus 21:16-23 describes the various physical deformities which disqualify a priest from service in the Temple. The concluding verse of that passage reads: "He shall not come near the Parochet or approach the Altar." In Hilchot Biat HaMikdash (6:1) and in Sefer HaMitzvot (neg. command 69), the Rambam explains that entering this area constitutes a violation of a Torah prohibition.It must be noted that Nachmanides does not accept the Rambam's opinion and views this prohibition as Rabbinic in origin (Hasagot L'Sefer HaMitzvot). have grown long hair,74In Hilchot Biat HaMikdash (1:8), the Rambam writes:A priest who has grown long hair is forbidden to enter [the area] beyond the Altar. If he transgresses [this command] and enters, he is liable to die by the hand of God, as a drunkard who participates in the Temple service, as it is said (Ezekiel 44:20-21): "All the priests shall not drink wine...nor shall they grow long hair." or whose [priestly] garments are torn may not enter there.75In Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 1:14, the Rambam explains that the Torah established an analogy between priests who have long hair and those whose priestly garments are torn, as Leviticus 10:6 states: "Do not let the hair of your heads grow long, nor rend your clothes." Therefore, the same prohibitions apply in both cases.Kelim 1:9, which is the source for this Halachah, does not mention the prohibition against entering this region with torn garments. Also, it is significant to mention that in Hilchot Biat HaMikdash (1:1), the Rambam explains that a priest who has drunk wine is bound by the same prohibitions.
The Temple building is holier than [the area] between the Altar and the Entrance Hall. Only a priest who has sanctified his hands and feet may enter there.76The priests were obligated to sanctify their hands and feet before taking part in the Temple service. Thus, with this terminology, the Mishnah (Kelim, loc. cit., and the Rambam are referring to a priest involved in the Temple service.The above statement can be compared with Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:2, where the Rambam writes:All the priests were warned not to enter the Sanctuary or the Holy of Holies except when involved in the Temple service as [Leviticus 16:2] states: "Let him not enter the Sanctuary at all times, [to] the chamber of the Parochet." ["The Sanctuary"] refers to the Holy of Holies, "the chamber of the Parochet," to the entire Temple building.
The chamber of the Holy of Holies is holier than it. Only the High Priest may enter there, on Yom Kippur, while he is involved in the Temple service.77The above-mentioned verse in Leviticus continues: "In this manner, shall Aaron enter the Holy place" and proceeds to describe the details of the Yom Kippur service.The High Priest would enter the Holy of Holies four times on Yom Kippur:a) to bring the incense offering;b) to sprinkle the blood of the bull offered as atonement for himself;c) to sprinkle the blood of the goat sacrificed as atonement for the Jewish people;d) to remove the incense holder.We recite a description of the High Priest's service on Yom Kippur in the Avodah portion of the Musaf prayers on Yom Kippur. See also Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim.
There was a place in the upper storey [of the Temple]78See Chapter 4, Halachah 13.which was located directly opposite the Holy of Holies.79The Tosefta (Kelim 1:7) states:Abba Saul declares: "[The status of] the upper storey of the Holy of Holies is more strict [than that of] the Holy of Holies. In regard to the Holy of Holies, the High Priest enters four times each year, on Yom Kippur...[In contrast,] they would only enter the upper storey of the Holy of Holies once in seven years..."They replied to him: "That is not considered a distinguishing quality."Certain commentaries explain that the Rambam placed this Halachah here to indicate his acceptance of Abba Saul's view. Although there are other reasons to support this argument, it would appear that the Rambam subscribes to the other view mentioned in the Tosefta. In Halachah 13, he stated that there are ten levels of holiness and proceeded to enumerate them, concluding with the highest level in Halachah 22.Furthermore, the opening phrase of each of those halachot, states: "... is holier than it..." and this halachah does not begin in that fashion. It was entered only once in seven years, to [inspect it] and find out what is necessary for its repair.80Pesachim 86a mentions three opinions concerning the frequency in which this chamber was entered: twice in seven years, once in fifty years, and once every seven years as quoted above. See Tosafot Yom Tov, Middot 4:5.When builders [are required] to enter the Temple building to construct or repair it, or to remove an impure object,81Eruvin 104b and 105a explain that this impurity could be either the body of one of the eight crawling species (sheratzim) which convey ritual impurity, or alternatively, sacraments belonging to idol worship that were placed in the Temple. II Chronicles (Chapter 29) explains that the Temple was cleansed of idol worship by King Chezekiah, and that narrative serves as a source from which these laws were derived. it is a mitzvah for the [craftsmen] who enter to be priests who do not possess any disqualifying physical deformities.82As mentioned in Halachah 20, priests with disqualifying physical deformities were generally forbidden to proceed beyond the Priestly Courtyard.If no [capable craftsmen meeting those criteria] can be found, priests with disqualifying deformities should enter.83Eruvin, loc. cit., explains that the prohibition against these priests entering the more sanctified portions of the Temple implies the permission to enter should they be required for their craftmanship.If none are found, Levites should enter.84The Levites are granted precedence, since they are allowed to proceed beyond the Israelites and to stand on the steps within the Priestly Courtyard.If none are found, Israelites should enter.It is a mitzvah for [those who enter] to be ritually pure. If no [capable craftsman] who are ritually pure can be found, impure [craftsmen] may enter.85This leniency is allowed because the restrictions stemming from the laws of ritual purity do not apply to cases involving communal offerings for the entire Jewish people.[If there is a choice between a craftsman] who is impure and a priest with a disqualifying deformity, the priest with the deformity should enter, for [although the prohibitions against] ritual impurity are put aside in regard to matters which concern the entire people, [they are not relaxed completely].86This statement has stirred much controversy among the commentaries. See the Kessef Mishneh and the Mishneh LiMelech.Although the Sages all agreed that the restrictions stemming from ritual impurity did not apply to cases involving communal offerings for the entire Jewish people, they debated (Yoma 6b) the nature of the leniency. Rav Nachman maintains that once a need arises, all the restrictions governing ritual impurity are relaxed entirely. Rav Sheshet argues that these restrictions are only "put aside" when there is no alternative, and wherever possible, the restrictions should be maintained. In Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 4:15, the Rambam rules according to Rav Sheshet's opinion.In our mishnah, both a craftsman who is impure, and a priest with a disqualifying physical deformity, are prohibited from entering the Temple. The prohibition against entering while impure is more severe. Thus, Rav Sheshet's opinion would explain that although the restrictions against entering while impure are "put aside" to repair the Temple, total license is not granted. Hence, in this instance, since an alternative exists, it should be employed, and the priests with the deformities should be allowed to enter.All those who enter to repair the Temple87Middot 4:5 mentions this practice only in regard to the Holy of Holies. However, Eruvin (loc. cit.) and the Tosefta (loc. cit.) apply the concept to the entire Temple building. should be lowered down inside crates [from the upper floor].88Middot 4:5, and Rambam (Chapter 4, Halachah 13) explain that this practice was instituted "so that they would not satiate their eyes, [gazing at] the chamber of the Holy of Holies." If no crates are available or if it is impossible [to make arrangements for them to enter] using crates, they may enter through the [usual] entrances.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
There is a positive mitzvah to guard the Temple.1The Rambam (Sefer HaMitzvot, positive commandment 22) and the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 388) list this as one of the 613 commandments. [This mitzvah applies] even though there is no fear of enemies or thieves, for the guarding [of the Temple] is an expression of respect for it. A palace with guards is [much more impressive] than a palace without guards.2The Kessef Mishneh mentions another reason for guarding the Temple: to prevent those who are forbidden to enter from entering.The place where both the Mishnah and the Rambam describe the watch which the priests and the Levites kept over the Temple has aroused the attention of the commentaries: The Mishnah repeats its description of the watch in two places: at the beginning of the tractate of Tamid, which relates the order of the priests' service, and the beginning of the tractate of Middot, which defines the structure of the Temple. The Rambam describes this mitzvah in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, which describes the construction of the Temple, but not the details of the priests' service.On this basis, the commentaries explain, we can understand two dimensions implicit in this mitzvah:a) The priests' responsibility to prevent those forbidden to enter from entering; andb) The responsibility incumbent on the entire Jewish people to construct and maintain the Temple in the most fitting manner.Since the presence of guards enhances the glory of the Sanctuary, the mitzvah of guarding the Sanctuary can be seen as an aspect of its very structure. See Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 13, p. 56-65.
The mitzvah of guarding [the Temple] applies throughout the night.3In his commentary to Tamid, the Ra'avad states that the priests and Levites also stood watch during the day. The Minchat Chinuch mentions that view, explaining that the Rambam explained that the reason for the priestly watch was to show deference to the Temple during the day as well. Just as a palace of an earthly king is guarded both at day and at night, so too, it is proper to keep watch over the Temple in this manner.Nevertheless, the Tifferet Yisrael (Middot 1:1) explains that since the priests were involved in the Temple service throughout the entire day, that in itself is a clear sign of honor and respect to the Temple, and no further measures were necessary.This view is supported by the commentary of the Rabbenu Asher at the beginning of the tractate of Tamid. He explains that the reason for keeping watch over the Temple was to have our attention focused on it at all times. That purpose is surely accomplished by the Temple service, and hence, watchmen are not required then.Accordingly, it appears that the watch would be maintained until the service in the Temple began, with the removal of the Altar's ashes at dawn. Thus, we can understand the last halachah of this chapter, which deals with the preparation of the Sanctuary for the service of the following day, as describing the final aspects of the nightly watch. See Likkutei Sichot, loc. cit.The priests and Levites shall serve as guards,4The places where the priests and Levites kept watch are described in Halachot 4-9. as [Numbers 18:2] states: "And you and your sons [shall be] before the tent of the testimony,"5This verse begins: "And the Lord said to Aaron," thus, indicating the responsibility of Aaron and his sons, the priests, to keep watch over the Sanctuary. i.e., you shall keep watch over it. Also, [ibid. 18:4] states: "And they [the Levites] shall watch over the Tent of Meeting,"6Indicating that the Levites were also charged with that responsibility. and [ibid. 3:38] states: "And Moses,7A Levite. Aharon, and his sons8Priests. shall camp before the Sanctuary towards the east, and they will be the guardians of the holy watch."9Thus, this verse indicates that the task was shared by the Priests and Levites together (Tamid 26a).It must be noted that, in order to emphasize the concept he wishes to communicate, the Rambam does not quote the latter verse exactly.
Anyone who nullifies this watch transgress a negative commandment,10(Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 67) and the Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 391) list this as one of the 613 commandments. as [Numbers 18:5] states: "And you shall take care to keep the Holy Watch." Any form of the verb, shemar, "take care," implies a warning against transgressing a negative command.11See Menachot 36b.Thus, guarding [the Temple fulfills] a positive command and nullifying its watch [represents the violation of] a negative command.
The mitzvah of guarding [the Temple] is [as follows:] The priests stood guard from the inside and the Levites from the outside.12According to the simple meaning "inside" and "outside" refer to the Temple Courtyard. The Levites stood guard outside the Courtyard and the priests, inside. However, the Minchat Chinuch renders "inside" as within a building, and "outside" as in the open. 24 groups of guards stood watch over it continuously, each night, in 24 [different] places.13Tamid 27a explains the derivation of this practice as I Chronicles  26:17-18), which states:To the east there were six Levites, to the north, four..., to the south, four..., towards Assupin, two and two. At Parber to the west, there were four at the winding stairway and two at the Parber.Thus, there were a total of twenty-four guard positions. Even though this verse describes the watch over the Sanctuary constructed in David's time, and not the Temple itself, the same basic pattern was followed in the later structure. The priests stood guard in three places14As described in the following three Halachot.Although the above verse specifically mentions Levites, the priests are sometimes (e.g., Ezekiel 44:15  referred to as Levites (Tamid, loc. cit.).Tamid 26a offers two different explanations why the priests would be placed in three different positions. The first explains that the command to keep watch over the Sanctuary was originally given to Aharon and his sons, a total of three individuals. The second notes that the command to guard the Temple mentions the words "keep watch," three times in the same verse. and the Levites, in 21 places.15As described in Halachot 8 and 9.
Where did they keep watch? The priests kept watch in the Chamber of Avtinas, the Chamber of the Spark, and the Chamber of the Hearth.16See Tamid 1:1, Middot 1:1.The Chamber of Avtinas17This structure was located on the south side of the Temple Courtyard, adjacent to the Water Gate. and the Chamber of the Spark18This was the westernmost gate on the northern side of the Temple Courtyard. See Chapter 5, Halachah 4. were two-storey structures built at the sides of the gates of the Temple Courtyard.19The reason why these were two-floor structures can be explained in terms of the Rambam's words above, Chapter 6, Halachah 7. There, the Rambam writes that the roofs and upper floors of the structures in the Temple Courtyard were not consecrated. This is very significant, for were they to have been consecrated, it would have been forbidden for the priests to sit or lie there, as stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 6. The young priests kept watch there.20According to Tamid 27a, the term, "young priests," refers to youth who were too young to participate in the Temple services. According to the Ra'avad, these youth were not even thirteen years of age.The Mishneh LiMelech rejects that opinion, declaring that this Mitzvah would not be entrusted to children that young. He explains that until the age of twenty, priests were not granted the opportunity to take part in the Temple services. Thus, the "young priests" were youth below that age, but past majority. See also the Minchat Chinuch.The Chamber of the Hearth was a large, domed structure,21See Chapter 5, Halachot 10 and 11. surrounded [on the inside] with projections of stone.22As mentioned above, half of the Chamber of the Hearth was considered consecrated, while half was not. According to the principle that one could not lie or sit in the consecrated areas of the Courtyard, it would appear that only half of the chamber was surrounded by these projections. The elders of the priestly watch of that day23As mentioned in the commentary to Chapter 7, Halachah 4, there were 24 priestly watches. Each served in the Temple for a week, and then another watch was given a chance to serve. There was a set pattern of rotation.Within these watches, there were further subdivisions. Each weekly watch was broken down into six daily watches for each day of the week. On the Sabbath, all the priests of that watch served together. slept there24Tamid 26b explains that they slept on these protrusions, because it was disrespectful to bring beds into the Temple complex. with the keys to the Temple Courtyard25The gates to the Temple Courtyard were locked at night. in their hands.26The Vilna Gaon renders this expression as "in their possession." This change is made on the basis of Middot 1:9, which states that the keys to the Temple Courtyard were kept on a special ring in the Chamber of the Hearth.
The priests on watch did not sleep27From the Rambam's statements, it appears that the priests would be permitted to sleep while on guard duty. This is difficult to accept, for the following reasons:a) The purpose for posting guards around the Temple was to show respect. That objective is not fulfilled by sleeping.b) Halachah 10, which quotes Middot 1:2, states that the guards would be punished for sleeping while on duty. Although the Rambam and the Mishnah specifically mention "Levites," it is reasonable to assume that term was used because the majority of the guards were Levites.For these reasons, the Mishneh LiMelech explains that all of the guards were not required to remain awake the entire night. Rather, at any particular time, there would be one or two guards awake at each station and the others were permitted to sleep. in the priestly garments.28This refers to the four priestly garments which an ordinary priest was required to wear while serving in the Temple. Instead, they folded them, placed them at their heads,29The priests could not place their priestly garments under their heads to serve as pillows, for they were forbidden to derive benefit from them. See Yoma 69a.In his commentary to Tamid, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1, the Rambam explains that this prohibition was instituted because the priestly garments contained Sha'atnez, a mixture of linen and wool. Hence, though a priest was permitted to use them during the Temple service, once that service was concluded, he was forbidden to do so. See also the Kessef Mishneh. and wore their own clothes.They slept on the ground. It is customary for all those who stand watch over the courtyards of kings not to sleep on beds.
If one of them had a seminal emission [in his sleep],30Leviticus 15:16 explains that a man who has a seminal emission becomes ritually impure. To purify himself, he must immerse his entire body in a mikveh and wait until the end of the day. he would proceed down the winding underground stairwell.31Which lead to a natural mikveh positioned under the Temple Courtyard. [There was no prohibition involved], because the underground passageways that opened up to [the portion of] the Temple Mount [outside the Courtyard] were not consecrated.32As explained in Chapter 6, Halachah 7. This passageway passed below the Courtyard. However, since it opened up to the portion of the Chamber of the Hearth that was not consecrated, there was no prohibition in entering while ritually impure.[There,] he would immerse himself. [He would then] return and sit among his fellow priests33There was no prohibition against remaining in the non-consecrated portion of the Chamber of the Hearth. As stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 17, a person who has already immersed himself in the mikveh, but must wait for the day to pass before becoming ritually pure, may remain on the Temple Mount and proceed until the Women's Courtyard. until the gates were opened in the morning. [At that time,] he would leave and proceed [to his own affairs].34Though there was no prohibition against him remaining in the Chamber of the Hearth, it was proper for him to leave so that no one would think that he was prepared to participate in the Temple services (Tifferet Yisrael, Tamid 1:1).
Where would the Levites stand watch?35This halachah is based on Middot 1:1.Inside the five gates to the Temple Mount;36See Chapter 5, Halachah 2, for a description of the gates to the Temple Mount.At its four corners [of the wall surrounding the Temple Mount] from the inside;At the outside of four corners of the Temple Courtyard, for it is forbidden to sit in the Temple Courtyard;37See the commentary to Halachah 4.At the outside of five [of the seven] gates to the Temple Courtyard, for the priests stood watch at [the remaining two gates], the Chamber of the Hearth and the Gate of the Spark;38See the commentary to Chapter 5, Halachah 4.a total of eighteen locations.
They also stood watch in the Chamber of the Sacrifices,39Tifferet Yisrael (Middot 1:1) explains that this refers to the Chamber of the Lambs, one of the four smaller chambers in the Chamber of the Hearth. See Chapter 5, Halachah 10. the Chamber of the Parochet,40This chamber is not mentioned in Chapter 5, Halachah 17, as one of the chambers within the Temple Courtyard. Similarly, Tifferet Yisrael (op. cit.) states: "I do not know where it was located." and behind the Holy of Holies.41As a sign of respect for the Shechinah.
An overseer was appointed over all the watches of guards. He was called: "The officer of the Temple Mount."42He was given the keys to all the gates of the Temple complex.Throughout the night, he checked on all the watches. Torches were lit before him.43Tifferet Yisrael (Middot 1:2) explains that the torches were not carried before him, but positioned as lights at the guard stations. Although there is no evidence that the Rambam accepts this view, a comparison with the following halachah indicates this possibility. If a guard did not stand before him and greet him: "Peace be unto you, officer of the Temple Mount," he would assume that he was sleeping, and would strike him with his staff.44Chapter 7, Halachah 2, states that it was forbidden to enter the Temple Mount with a staff. Nevertheless, an exception was made to allow "the officer of the Temple Mount" to perform his task (Yeriot Shlomo). He was even granted permission to burn [a sleeping guard's] clothing.45Although generally, one may not destroy things of value (bal tashchit), an exception is made in this case to allow the Temple to be guarded properly.The "officer of the Temple Mount" could be authorized to destroy private property on the basis of the principle: Hefker Beit Din, Hefker, i.e., a Jewish court may forfeit a person's ownership over an article (Rabbenu Asher, Commentary to Middot 1:1).The Ezrat Kohanim does not accept this explanation because the prohibition against destroying things of value applies even in regard to ownerless articles.Another possible explanation is that this step is taken for the watchmen's own good. A father or a teacher is allowed to hit a student to shape his character. Similarly, in this instance, "the officer of the Temple Mount" was entitled to burn a watchman's clothing so that he will perform his task more effectively (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 18, p.465).Thus, it was commonly said in Jerusalem: "What is the noise in the Temple Courtyard [at night]? It must be the voice of a Levite being beaten and his clothes burned because he slept on his watch."46As mentioned in the commentary to Halachah 6, there is a debate among the Rabbis if the priests were allowed to sleep on their watch or not. Rav Ovadiah of Bartinura (Shekalim 5:1) states that both priests and Levites would be beaten for sleeping. However, the Tosafot Yom Tov argues that this punishment was only administered to Levites.It would appear that the Rambam subscribes to the latter view. In Hilchot Klei HaMikdash (7:4), he writes: "The officer of the Temple Mount walked around, [checking on] the Levites..."
In the morning, shortly before dawn,47The Temple services began with the removal of the ashes from the Altar. Generally, this was done at dawn.The term dawn, alot hashachar, refers to the time before sunrise when the first rays of the sun begin to illuminate the horizon. This is more than an hour before sunrise. the overseer of the Sanctuary48This does not refer to the "officer of the Temple Mount" mentioned above. In Hilchot Temidim U'Musafim 6:1, the Rambam describes this entire procedure a second time. There, he ascribes the waking of the priests to the priest responsible for delegating different sacrificial functions. See also Tamid 26a. came49From the chayl. and tapped50On the external gate of the Chamber of the Hearth, to awaken the priests sleeping in the Chamber of the Hearth.51As explained in Halachot 5 and 6. [When] they opened [the gate] for him, he took the keys52Middot 1:7 mentions that the keys to the Courtyard were hung on a ring in the Chamber of the Hearth. See also the notes to Halachah 5. and opened the small gate leading from the Chamber of the Hearth to the Temple Courtyard.53Tamid 28a relates that there was a small wicket next to the large gate leading from the Chamber of the Hearth to the Temple Courtyard. The large gate would not be opened until dawn. Therefore, the priests entered through the wicket to prepare the Courtyard for the service of the coming day.[Then] he entered the Courtyard, and the priests followed him. They held two torches of fire in their hands and divided into two groups. One proceeded eastward and the other, westward.54As explained in Chapter 5, the Chamber of the Hearth was positioned on the north side of the Temple Courtyard, slightly beyond the entrance of the Temple building. From this point, one group would proceed westward, towards the western end of the Courtyard. The other group walked towards the east, in the direction of the Gate of Nicanor, the major entrance to the Courtyard. Both groups walked near the walls, so that they would make a complete circuit around the Courtyard.They walked on, checking the entire Temple Courtyard.55To make sure all of the sacred utensils were in their proper places. Both groups [met when they] reached the Chamber of the Bakers of the Chavitin.56See Chapter 5, Halachah 17, where this chamber is described.The Chamber of the Bakers of the Chavitin was located on the southern side of the Courtyard's eastern wall. Thus, the group of priests who turned westward had a much longer route than those who proceeded to the east. When both groups reached [that point], they declared: "Peace be unto you. Everything is at peace."57The Ra'avad in his commentary to Tamid 28a explains that each group would greet the other in this manner. [Afterwards,] they prompted the bakers of the Chavitin to begin their work.58The Chavitin was offered each day by the High Priest shortly after the morning sacrifice.A general question may be asked concerning this and the following halachah: Why did the Rambam include them in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah which describes the construction of the Temple? It would appear more appropriate to mention them in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim, where the laws governing the daily service in the Temple are described. Indeed, we find that these laws are repeated there.The reason is based on the explanation of Halachah 1. There, the Rambam states that the watch kept over the Temple was an act of deference, enhancing the glory of the Temple. Thus, maintaining that the watch is part of the responsibility of the entire Jewish people to construct and maintain the Temple in the most fitting manner.A similar principle can be explained in regard to this inspection of the Courtyard. Over and above the need for checking to see that all the sacred utensils were in there appropriate positions, this inspection was an act of deference and honor which enhanced the importance of the Temple (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. 18, p. 244-249).
59This is the final halachah of Hilchot Beit HaBechirah. There are a total of 7 halachot in the text. The latter figure matches the age of Levi when he passed away. Levi was the ancestor of the priests and the Levites who served in the Temple. This pattern was followed each night except on Sabbath eve. [Then,] they did not hold torches in their hands.60Because it is forbidden to carry a flame on the Sabbath. Rather, they checked by the light of the candles, which remained burning from the Sabbath eve.61The Kessef Mishnah, Tosafot Yom Tov, and other commentaries, question why they were not permitted to carry the torches with them. Although carrying fire is prohibited on the Sabbath, the prohibition is only Rabbinic in origin in the category of shvut. The Rambam states (Hilchot Shabbat 21:27) that all Rabbinic prohibitions of this nature were suspended in the Temple.Among the explanations offered are: Since it was possible to use candles which were lit before the Sabbath, there is no need to violate even a Rabbinic prohibition. Alternatively, this inspection was carried out in preparation for the service of the entire day to follow and, as above, it was an act of deference to the Temple. Therefore, to emphasize the holiness of the Temple, it was proper that it be carried out without violating any prohibition whatsoever.The structure of the final chapter of Hilchot Beit HaBechirah can be explained homiletically: It begins with the obligation to guard the Temple at night, and concludes with the preparations for the Temple services at dawn.As mentioned above (Halachah 2), the commentaries explain that the mitzvah of guarding the Temple was instituted so that the Temple would be prominent in our minds at all times. Thus, during the day, there was no necessity to stand guard, for that purpose was accomplished by the Temple service. However, at night, when there was no service, we were required to keep a watch around the Temple.The period of exile is often described as night and the advent of the Messianic era, as dawn. By guarding the Temple at night, and studying the laws of its construction during the exile, we will merit the coming of the dawn, the coming of Mashiach.A similar idea can be seen in the last halachah, which deals with the priests' procedure on the Sabbath. The Sabbath is described as me'ein olam haba'ah, a microcosm of the world to come, and the time of the coming of the Mashiach. On the Sabbath, in the Messianic age, the preparations for the Temple service will be carried out with the light kindled on the Sabbath eve, representing the present age - and before the coming of the Mashiach. Our service at present generates spiritual light. We will use that light to prepare for the sacrifices to be offered in the Third Temple.May we merit the Messianic redemption and the rebuilding of the Temple speedily, and in our days. 47Then, shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasing to God, as in days of old and former years 48 (Malachi 3:4 .
