=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Seven days... We separate the High Priest. Since all the service of Yom Kippur is not kosher except through him [Yuma 32a and many other places], as it says in regard to Yom Kippur (Vaikra chapter 16) "And the Cohen ,who will be anointed with oil, will atone." [note of the translator: from this verse we see that only the anointed Cohen, i.e. High Priest can perform atonement service of Yom Kippur]. And this separation is learned out for us from what is written in regard to seven days of the dedication [of the Mishkan] (ibid. chapter 8) "And from the entrance of the Tent of Meeting don't go away for seven days", and after this it is written (ibid.) "Just like was done on this day commanded Hashem to do to atone for you", and the sages expound: [the phrase] "to do" this is doings of the cow [red heifer], [and the phrase] "to atone for you" this is doings of the Yom Kippur. Thus, the Cohen that burns the cow [red heifer] and the Cohen serving on Yom Kippur, both require separation from their houses for seven days just like were required Aharon and his sons during the seven days of dedication [of the Mishkan]. [note of the translator: thus, from the proximity of the two verses, the verse that talks about the seven days of separation during the dedication of the Mishkan and the verse that was expounded to mean "just like was done on this day, commended Hashem to do for the procedure of the Red heifer and the Yom Kippur service", the sages learn that the Cohen that does the burning of the red heifer and the High priest that serves on Yom Kippur should be separated from their houses similar to the seven day separation of the days of dedication of the Mishkan.]   
ללשכת פלהדרין – the officers of the king are called Palhedrin/counselors, for since that the High Priests that existed in Second Temple times after Shimon HaTzaddik/the Righteous (see Mishnah Avot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2) would give money in order to serve in the High Priesthood, and because they were wicked, they would not complete their years, and would be exchanged every twelve months like the officers of the king, who would exchange them every year, therefore, they call this apartment the apartment/cell of the counselors.
ומתקנין לו – They would invite another Kohen to become the High Priest in his place if a nocturnal pollution would occur to him or some other kind of defilement.
אם כן אין לדבר סוף – if so, that he would concerned for his death, and there would be no end to this, lest she (i.e., his wife) would also die, but for defilement that is frequent we are concerned, therefore we appoint for him another Kohen, for death is not frequent that he would die suddenly, we are not concerned, therefore, we do not appoint for him another wife. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
בראשונה כל מי שרוצה לתרום – Every Kohen who is from the same priestly division and wants to remove the ashes in the morning, removes the ashes, for there was no arbitration (by counting out a certain number on the raised fingers of those among whom a decision is to be made) in the matter.
ובזמן שהם מרובים – who come to remove the ashes, this one says: “I am removing the ashes” and that one says “I am removing the ashes,” this is their judgment.
רצים ועולים בכבש – of the altar, which is thirty-two cubits in length.
וכל הקודם – to enter into the upper four cubits of the ramp nearest the top of the altar, is worthy of/merits removing the ashes, and this is their lottery.
ואם היו שניהם שוים – through their entrance, neither one of them merits removing the ashes, but from now, all of them come to take a lottery. And what is the lottery? He who is appointed over the arbitration says to all of them to raise their fingers, that is to say, they should release their fingers so that each person can see his finger, since it is forbidden to count people from the Israelites; therefore, it was necessary for them to release the fingers in order that the fingers can be numbered, and not the people. And how would they do this? They would go around and stand together in a circle and the appointed one comes and takes hold of the turban from the head of one them (see Talmud Yoma 25a) and from him, the arbitration begins to count. And each one of them removes his finger and the appointed one/officer enunciates from his mouth a number and counts, either one hundred or sixty, many more than there are Kohanim present there, and says, whomever finishes with this total, through him will merit. And he begins to count from the one who took it from the head of the turban, and such were all of the arbitrations in the Temple Sanctuary.
אחת או שתים – one finger if he is health or two if he is sick, for the sick are unable to control/have mastery over his fingers, and we releases one [finger], its neighbor is released with it. But the two are not counted other than as one [finger].
ואין מוציאין אגודל במקדש – because of the deceivers, when the end of the numbering draws near and they would understand who would finish, that one standing before him would set out two fingers in order that he would count for two people and the number would hurry to end with him. But the appointed official did not comprehend because a person can distance his thumb from his finger a great deal until it appears as the fingers of two people, which one cannot do with the other fingers.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
אמר להם הממונה – he is the assistant.
צאו וראו – on a high place that they had in the Temple.
זמן השחיטה – for the slaughtering is invalid at night, as it states (Leviticus 19:6): “It shall be eaten on the day you sacrifice it…”
ברקאי – the morning shines through and flashes (Talmud Yoma 28b).
האיר פני המזרח – this time is after the morning star that the first Tanna/teacher mentioned. And the Halakha is according to Mattitya ben Shmuel.
Until Hebron: Those who are standing below ask him "Has the light reached Hebron?" and he answers, "Yes."  Hebron is mentioned in order to invoke the merit of the forefathers.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
טרף בקלפי – seized forcibly, hastily and took suddenly with a haste of the ballot, as we taught [in the Mishnah] above (Tractate Yoma, Chapter 3, Mishnah 9), and there was an urn for the drawing of lots. And why with haste? In order that they should that they should not intend to recognize with his touch which was for God and take it in his right hand, because it was a pleasant sign when he would raise it with his right hand.
והעלה שני גורלות – one in his right hand and one in his left, and the goats stand one to his right and the other to his left, and he would give the lot that came up on the right [hand] on the goat of the right side, and the lot that rose in his left [hand] on the goat of the left.
לה' חטאת – he would mention the explicit name of God, and that is the name of Yud, Hei, (Vav, Hei) as it is written.
ור' ישמעאל אומר לא היה צריך וכו' – But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.
והן עונין אחריו – when he would mention the Name [of God].

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
הוציאו לו – from the chamber of the utensils.
וכך היתה מדתה – as its measurement outside, so its measure inside, what on the outside he would take grabs of incense with his actual hands and not with a utensil, so also inside, when he pours the incense from the ladle into his handfuls, he would not pour with a utensil that is made like the measure of his handfuls, but into his actual handfuls.
נטל את המחתה בימינו – since it is heaven and hot and the ladle of the incense is lighter than it, therefore, the firepan is in his right-hand and the ladle is in his left-hand.
היה מהלך בהיכל – he enters and walked within towards the west.
לבין שתי הפרוכות – since they were doubtful in Second Temple times if the partition that separates between the Holy and the Holy of Holies which was [found] in the First Temple and was a cubit thick, if that cubit was within or from the outside, therefore, they made two curtains, one an outer one and one an inner one. וביניהן – the airspace of a cubit to retain between them the air space of the partition.
החיצונה פרופה מן הדרום – The Rabbis stated it, that they dispute on that of Rabbi Yosi and state that the curtain divided them in the Tabernacle alone, it was stated.
פרופה – its top was doubled to the outer side and was held with a gold clasp in order [to be open] from the south and standing.
מהלך ביניהן – he entered in the southern clasp and walked between them until he reaches the northern clasp.
הגיע לצפון – when he entered into the space between the Holy of Holies, he turned his face to the south to walk until he was between the bars projecting from the Ark (Tractate Yoma 42b) which is in the middle of the empty space, for the bars were long until the curtain, one head facing to the west and the other one to the east, one at the top of the ark to the north and one at the top to the south.
מהלך לשמאלו עם הפרוכת – when he walks from the north to the south, his left is to the east and the curtain was in the east, his left side is found with the curtain.
עד שהוא מגיע לארון – to the place of the Ark and not to the Ark itself, for the in the Second Temple, there was no Ark there.
דרך כניסתו – so that he would not turn his face to leave, but rather depart in the path of his back with his face towards the Ark.
ומתפלל תפלה קצרה – and this is (Talmud Yoma 53b): “May it be Your will, O LORD my God, for if this year is parched (explanation: hot), that it be rainy, and that the ruler’s staff will not depart from the House of Judah, and that your people Israel will not need substance either one from the other nor from another people, and that the prayers of those on the crossroads will not enter before You,” meaning that people they pray that rain will not fall.
בבית החיצון – in the Temple/the hall containing the golden altar.
שלא להבעית את ישראל – that they will say that he has died.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
שני שעירי. במראה – both of them are white or both of them are black.
ובקומה ובדמים – Three verses are written (Leviticus 16:5,7,8): “And from the Israelite community he shall take two he-goats…,” “Aaron shall take the two he-goats…,” “And he shall place lots upon the two goats…” And since [the word] “he-goats” implies two, what does the thrice-time repetition of “two” come to teach us? But that they should be equivalent in appearance and in height and in worth/value.
ויאמר אם של שם מת – this is how it should be explained: If the [goat designated] for “the LORD” died, this one, upon which the lot “for the LORD” has come will stand in its place. ואם של עזאזל מת – he should say, this one [upon which the lot “for Azazel” has come will stand in its place] etc.
והשני – if [the goat] “for Azazel” died and now there are two goats “for the LORD,” one that remains from the first pair and one from the second pair, and with one of them, they have been atoned, the second should be put out to pasture. And similarly, if [the goat] “for the LORD” had died, and behold, there are two [goats] “for Azazel,” the one should be sent away into the wilderness and the second one should be sent out to pasture. And it is the second one of the second pair that should be sent out to pasture until a defect occurs to, but the second [goat] of the first pair is what should be offered, if it is “to the LORD, ” or it should sent to the wilderness if it is “for Azazel,” for animals (dedicated for sacrifices) cannot be removed forever from sacred use (as long as the obstacle lies not in their physical unfitness – See Talmud Yoma 64a), and if they reach a point of time of being ritually unfit, one can repair it when you pair it with another animal.
שאין חטאת צבור מתה – for when they derive that sin-offerings die, it is regarding an individual that they derive it. And the goats of Yom Kippur are community sin-offerings, as it is written (Leviticus 16:5): “And from the Israelite community he shall take [two he-goats for a purification offering and a ram for a burnt offering].” But sin-offerings that die, he should bring it into one house and leave it there until it should die.
ועוד אמר ר"י נשפך הדם – of the he-goat “for the LORD”, let the one to be sent to the wilderness die, for it does not become a marked-off place of blood and in all of the Divine Services that are performed in white clothing, whether inside or outside, [the word] “statute” is written regarding them to invalidate an act by an omission, and one must bring other blood and it is impossible other than through a lottery, and since he holds that animals [dedicated for sacrifice] can be removed forever from sacred use, the first he-goat that was to be sent away to the wilderness should die.
מת המשתלח – even though the sending out is not indispensable (i.e., to invalidate an act by an omission), according to everyone, when it is written, “statute” to be indispensable for the things that the Kohen does in white clothing, or on things that are done “through a designated man”(Leviticus 16:21), nevertheless, we derive from the Biblical verse, as it is written (Leviticus 16:10): “[while the goat designated by lot for Azazel] shall be left standing alive before the LORD to make expiation with it [and to send it off to the wilderness for Azazel],” until when is it necessary for the goat to be sent to the wilderness to be left standing alive? Until the time when the blood of its fellow [goat] is sprinkled; but if it dies prior to that, the atonement of the blood is worthless, and therefore requires compensation. But without a lottery, it is impossible and it needs two – the first is superseded, and everyone admits that with slaughtered animals that are superseded.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
בא לו כהן גדול לקרות – the [Torah] portion of the day (i.e., Leviticus, chapter 16).
בבגדי בוץ – that he performed the Divine Service of the day.
קורא – for it is permitted to wear the clothing of the Priesthood even not at the time of Divine Service, for the clothing of the Priesthood was given to derive benefit from them.
באצטלית – clothing made in the form of a white garment/undershirt.
משלו – for the reading of the [Torah] portion is not Divine Service.
חזן הכנסת – the sexton/beadle.
ראש הכנסת – through his word, all the needs of the community are decided, who recites the Maftir portion (i.e., Haftarah), and who spreads a cloak over the head for the recitation of the prayers preceding the Shema (Kaddish and Barchu) (alternatively, to recite the prayers for the benefit of those who come too late for the regular service), and who goes before the Ark (to lead the service). And we give the Torah Scroll from this one to that one, because of the honor/dignity of the High Priest to demonstrate that there are many authorities below him.
עומד ומקבל – it follows that until here he was sitting, and we find that we learned that he would read in the Ezrat Nashim/courtyard of the women, for if he read in the courtyard of Israel/Ezrat Yisrael and all the more so, in a holier place than that, it would be prohibited to sit other than the Kings of the House of David that were permitted to them to sit in the courtyard, as it is written (2 Samuel 7:18): “Then King David came and sat before the LORD.”
וקורא אחרי מות ואך בעשור – that is in the [Torah] portion of Emor (Leviticus chapter 23, verses 26-32). For it is permitted to skip in the Torah in one subject matter when it is close in order that the [Aramaic] translator not stop. But if prior to his rolling the Torah Scroll until the place of the skip that the [Aramaic] translator would stop who is translating the verse that the reader read/recite, it is prohibited to skip and to roll, for it would be found that the community is sitting and waiting/anticipating and this is not the dignity of the congregation.
יותר ממה שקריתי לפניכם כתוב כאן – so as to not to spread evil talk against/to discredit the Torah scroll, when they see him (i.e., the High Priest) read a third portion by heart that they would think that the Torah scroll is missing that portion.
ובעשור שבחומש הפקודים קורא על פה – [Numbers chapter 29, verses 7-11] which is far from the portion of Aharei Mot, and “Mark the tenth day of the month” (Leviticus 23:27 and following), which is more than the [Aramaic] translator can stop, therefore, he cannot roll the Torah scroll to there since we do not roll a Torah scroll in public because of the honor/respect of the congregation, and he cannot bring another Torah scroll because of the [perceived] defect of the first [scroll] so that people won’t say that it is lacking/missing parts.
על התורה – two blessings, one before [the reading] and one after it in the manner that we recite the blessings in the synagogue.
על העבודה ועל ההודאה – “Accept” (i.e. the third-to-last blessing of the Amidah) and “We give thanks” (the second-to-last blessing of the Amidah).
ועל מחילת עון – “Forgive us.”
ועל המקדש – that the Divine Presence should dwell in it.
ועל הכהנים – that they should be blessed and that their sacrifices [would be accepted] with favor.
ועל ישראל ועל שאר התפלה – it is explained in the Gemara (Tractate Yoma 70a): a prayer for grace, chant and request from before You that Your people Israel needs to be saved. Praised are You, who Hears prayer.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
יום הכפיורים אסור באכילה ובשתיה – even though that regarding eating and drinking [on Yom Kippur] which are punishable by extirpation, because the Mishnah is required to teach the rest of the “afflictions” that lack [the punishment of] extirpation, it is taught [in the Mishnah] that it is prohibited. And these five afflictions correspond to the five [times] affliction is written in the Torah, of “The Sabbath of complete rest” of the Torah portion “Say to the Kohanim” (Leviticus 23:32) and “The Sabbath of Complete Rest” of “Aharei Mot/After the Death” (Leviticus 16:31), and “on the tenth day of the seventh month” (Numbers 29:7) of the Book of Numbers and “Mark the tenth day of this seventh month” (Leviticus 23:27) of “Speak to the Kohanim” (EMOR), and “This shall be to you for a law for all time” (Leviticus 16:34) of Ahahrtei Mot, in all of them, it is written, "תענו ועניתם"/”you shall afflict” (singular and plural), and these of our Mishnah are also five forms of affliction, as drinking and eating are considered as one.
המלך – needs to appear nice, as it is written (Isaiah 33:17): “When your eyes behold a king in his beauty.”
והכלה – she requires beauty in order to make her beloved to her husband, and all thirty days [immediately following her marriage] she is called a bride.
והחיה – a woman in childbirth.
תנעול – on account of the cold.
דברי ר"א – these refer to all of them – to the king, the bride and the woman in childbirth. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer.
