=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
It is a positive commandment from the Torah1Sefer HaMitzvot (Positive Commandment 171) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 105) count this as one of the Torah's 613 mitzvot. that every adult Jewish male2Both concepts are implied by the Hebrew word ish. (See Halachah 7.) give a half3One might ask: why were the Jews not commanded to give a full shekel? There is normally an emphasis that one's offerings be complete and unblemished. Why in this instance were we obligated to give only a half-shekel?To offer a homiletic resolution to this question: Giving a half-shekel emphasizes that a person is only a half and can never reach fulfillment until he joins together with another individual. Alternatively, it is God who contributes the second half, which enables an individual to reach fulfillment (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. III, Parashat Ki Tissa).-shekel each and every year.4Sefer HaKovetz states that this teaches that one may not give several shekalim in one year to fulfill the mitzvah for many future years. Even a poor man who derives his livelihood from charity is obligated [to make this donation]. He should borrow from others or sell the clothes5See Halachah 9. (See also Hilchot Chanukah 4:12, which also mentions that one should sell one's clothes to perform the mitzvah mentioned there.) he is wearing so that he can give a half-shekel of silver, as [Exodus 30:15] states: "The rich shall not give more,6The Ramban (in his commentary on the Torah, Exodus 30:15  and others raise the question: why is this not considered one of the 365 negative commandments of the Torah?In resolution, the commentaries point to the Rambam's introduction to Sefer HaMitzvot (General Principle 8), where the Rambam explains that the use of negative terminology by the Torah - e.g., לא, "Do not..." - does not always imply that the subject should be considered a separate negative commandment. For example, concerning a Hebrew maidservant, Exodus 21:7 states, "She shall not go out [to freedom] as the slaves go out."The Rambam explains that this is not a negative commandment, but a narrative verse introducing the concept. Similarly, the commentaries explain that the verse under discussion is not a negative commandment, but rather a description of how the half-shekel is given (Nimukei Mahari). nor should the poor give less."7There is also a homiletic dimension to this requirement: The half-shekel relates to a level of soul shared equally by all.[The half-shekel] should not be given in several partial payments - today a portion, tomorrow a portion. Instead, it is to be given all at once.8Rav Kapach emphasizes that there are two dimensions implied by this law: a) that the half-shekel should be given on a single day, not in several payments;b) that a single coin should be given, not several coins equal in value to a half-shekel.
The sum of money mentioned in the Torah concerning [the fines paid by] a rapist,9One who rapes a maiden, whom Deuteronomy 22:29 obligates to pay 50 silver pieces. a seducer,10One who seduces a maiden, whom Exodus 22:16 obligates to pay 50 silver pieces. a slanderer,11One who slanders his wife, claiming that she was not a virgin at the time of marriage. Deuteronomy 22:19 requires such a person to pay 100 silver pieces. or a slave killed [by an ox]12Thirty silver pieces (Exodus 21:32 . is [calculated] in shekalim, a coin [of equal value] whenever mentioned in the Torah. Its weight is 320 barley corns [of pure silver].13See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Bechorot 8:8), where the Rambam describes the traditional measures for this figure in detail. According to the figures he gives, in modern measure, a shekel of the Torah is 16 grams of pure silver.The Sages increased its value and made it equivalent to the coin called a sela, [which was prevalent] during the Second Temple period. How much did a sela weigh? 384 average size barley corns [of pure silver].14Today, it is common custom to give 96 grams of silver for the five shekalim required for the pidyon habeyn ceremony. Thus a shekel is 19.2 grams. According to the Piskei Siddur of Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi a shekel is 20.4 grams.
A sela is four dinarim, a dinar is six ma'ah and a ma'ah was called a gerah in the time of Moses our teacher.15Exodus 30:13 describes a shekel as being twenty ma'ah. Thus, in Talmudic times, the Sages increased the shekel's worth by one fifth, making the old value five sixths of the new total. A ma'ah equals two poondionin, and a poondion is equal to two isarin. A prutah16The coin of minimum value. Less than a prutah's worth is not considered as a significant financial amount. is worth an eighth of an [Italian] isar.Thus, the weight of a ma'ah - and a gerah - is sixteen barley corns [of silver]; the weight of an isar is four barley corns; and the weight of a prutah is half a barley corn.
[At that time,] there was also another coin that was worth two selaim; it was called a darcon.17This is the Talmudic term for the god Neptune. In his Commentary on the Mishnah, Shekalim 2:1, the Rambam mentions darconim of gold, which, though smaller, were equal in value to the silver coins mentioned here.These coins whose weights we have listed and explained are used universally as standard measures. We have described them so that we will not have to describe their weight at all times.
The mitzvah of giving the half-shekel entails giving half of the coin that is [common] currency at the time in question, even if that coin is larger than the shekel used for the sanctuary. [The converse, however, does not apply.] Never should one give less than the half-shekel18The Mishnah (Shekalim 2:4) relates that, at one time, the dinar was the common currency in Eretz Yisrael, and the people proposed giving half a dinar instead of a half-shekel. The Sages, however, did not accept this proposal, since it entailed giving less than the half-shekel given at the time of Moses. that was given in the time of Moses our teacher, which weighed 160 barley corns [of silver].
At the time when the common currency was a darcon, everyone would give a sela as a half-shekel.19This halachah provides examples of the principles mentioned in the previous halachah, quoting from Shekalim, loc. cit. The Mishnah refers to the initial years of the Second Temple period.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's interpretation of that Mishnah and offers another explanation why the people gave a larger coin at that time: Only a small portion of the Jewish people returned to Zion with Ezra. Had the people been required to give only the minimum amount, there would not have been enough funds to purchase communal sacrifices. In his Commentary on the Torah, the Ramban (Exodus 30:12  also follows the Ra'avad's interpretation. At the time when the common currency was a sela, everyone would give half a sela, the equivalent of two dinarim, as a half-shekel. At the time when the common currency was half a sela, everyone would give that coin, half of a sela, as a half-shekel.20Because it was the equivalent of the half-shekel given in the time of Moses. At no time did the Jews ever give less than the half-shekel mentioned in the Torah for the half-shekel.
Everyone is obligated to give a half-shekel: priests,21The Mishnah (Shekalim 1:4) mentions an opinion that maintains that priests are not obligated to give a half-shekel because they are entitled to partake of certain communal offerings.The Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 1:3) mentions another rationale why some maintain that priests are not obligated: The Torah (Exodus 30:13  states that the half-shekel should be given by: כל העובר על הפקודים, "all those included in the census." Since the priests were not included in the census, they are not obligated to fulfill this mitzvah.Significantly, in his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim, loc. cit. Avot 4:7), the Rambam appears to accept the view that the priests are not required to give a half-shekel. Similarly, in his Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam cites the above verse as a proof-text explaining why women are not obligated in this mitzvah. Thus, his ruling in this halachah appears to reflect a change of position. Levites, Israelites, converts, and freed slaves. Women,22Although giving a half-shekel is a positive mitzvah that is not limited to a specific time, in Sefer HaMitzvot (loc. cit.) the Rambam states that women are explicitly excluded from the obligation to perform this mitzvah, as implied by the verse cited above, "all those included in the census." As mentioned in the previous note, although the Rambam appears to have changed his mind in relation to this phrase, it nevertheless appears that there is a specific exclusion concerning women, for the previous verse states, "A man shall give...." (See the glosses of Rabbenu Asher and Rabbenu Ovadiah of Bertinoro, Shekalim 1:3.) slaves, and children23Although the Torah obligates only those included in the census - and that meant men of the age of twenty and above - for posterity, the mitzvah must be fulfilled by any child who reaches the age of thirteen.This ruling is not accepted by many authorities. The Sefer HaChinuch (loc. cit.) and Rabbenu Ovadiah of Bertinoro (Shekalim 1:3) maintain that the requirements of the original census were observed for posterity. are not obligated. Nevertheless, if they give [a half-shekel], it may be accepted.24Several commentaries have offered explanations why the Temple treasury was allowed to accept the gift of a child, when (as reflected in Hilchot Lulav 8:10) according to Torah law, a child is not able to transfer ownership of his property to others.[K'tzot HaShulchan (Section 235) uses this law as the basis for a thesis of a larger scope: That once a transaction sanctioned only by Rabbinic law is completed, it is acceptable according to the Torah. For if the child's gift of the half-shekel (a transaction sanctioned by Rabbinic law only) were not acceptable according to the Torah, the money could not be used to purchase sacrifices. Netivot HaMishpat and others do not accept this thesis and offer other explanations why a child's gift is acceptable.] By contrast, if a Samaritan25This restriction would appear to refer to all gentiles. Indeed, Rav Kapach's Yemenite manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah state גוי, "a gentile," rather than כותי, "a Samaritan."Without discounting the possibility of a change having been made because of censorship, it would appear that the reference to Samaritans is historical in nature. The reason why donations were not accepted from gentiles is that, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 8, funds from these donations were also used to maintain the city of Jerusalem. No monies from gentiles may be used for that purpose, as reflected by Nechemiah 2:20: "You have no portion, or right, or memorial in Jerusalem." And that narrative (ibid. 3:34) relates that the Samaritans were among the foes of Israel at that time. (See also Hilchot Matnot Ani'im 8:8.) gives a half-shekel, it should not be accepted.A father who began giving a half-shekel on behalf of a child should not stop. Instead, he should [continue to] give a half-shekel on the child's behalf every year until he comes of age and gives [the half-shekel] by himself.26In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 1:3), the Rambam mentions that by giving a half-shekel once, a father "obligates his son in this mitzvah." Hence, it is inappropriate for him to cease giving on his son's behalf.
[The mitzvah of giving a half-]shekel is observed only during the era that the Temple is standing.27It is customary to give a half-shekel to charity on the Fast of Esther in the present age. Nevertheless, this practice is merely a custom and is not considered as fulfillment of the mitzvah of giving a half-shekel. During the era that the Temple is standing, the [half-]shekel should be given both in Eretz Yisrael and in the diaspora.28In explanation, the B'nei Binyamin cites the Mishnah at the conclusion of the first chapter of Kiddushin, which states that the half-shekel is an obligation incumbent on a person's body, like tefillin. Therefore, it must be performed in all places. The Kessef Mishneh draws attention to Shekalim 3:4, which states that the third time during the year that funds were taken from the Temple treasury, they were taken on behalf of the Jews living in the diaspora. When, however, it is destroyed, even in Eretz Yisrael it is not necessary to give.
On the first of Adar, the court would announce [the collection of] the [half-]shekalim, so that every single individual would prepare his half-shekel and be ready to give.On the fifteenth [of Adar],29The Mishnah (Shekalim 1:1) and the Rambam (Hilchot Arachin 8:1) mention other communal responsibilities that were also discharged on that day. the money-changers would sit in every city30Our translation of the Hebrew מדינה is based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 1:3). Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro and others differ in the interpretation of the Mishnah and maintain that the money-changers would sit only in Jerusalem. and would gently prod [the people to give]. If people gave them, they would accept it. If someone did not give, they would not compel him to give.On the twenty-fifth [of Adar], they would sit in the Temple to collect [the half-shekalim]. From this time onward, everyone who had not given [a half-shekel] as yet would be compelled to give.31For the court is obliged to compel the people to perform all the positive commandments. When a person did not give [voluntarily], his property would be taken by force as a pledge. Even his clothing was taken from him.
We do not take property as a pledge by force from those individuals who are not obligated to give a [half-]shekel, even though they are accustomed to giving,32I.e., women or slaves. or they will give in the future.33I.e., a minor. Nor do we take the property of priests as a pledge by force, as a reflection of the ways of peace.34The Tosefot Yom Tov explains that the priests have a reputation for being short-tempered. (See Hoshea 4:4; Shabbat 149b.) If they were compelled to give, strife might arise. The Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 1:3) offers a different explanation. The priests were not compelled to give as a token of respect for their office. Instead, when they give, we accept their donations. We do, however, [continue to] demand from them until they give.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
How would the moneychangers collect the shekalim? In each and every city, they positioned two chests before them. The bottoms of the chests were wide, and the tops narrow like a shofar,1In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 6:1), the Rambam refers to the Jerusalem Talmud, which explains that the chests had curved necks to prevent people from removing the coins from them. so that the money could be deposited in them, but could not be removed from them easily.Why did they have two chests? One to deposit the [half-]shekalim of the present year, and one to deposit the [half-]shekalim of the previous year,2There is a reference in the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 2:1) that differs and maintains that in the outlying cities collections would be made only for the present year. It was in Jerusalem alone that they would collect for the previous year.The Or Sameach explains that this reference follows a minority opinion, while the Rambam's decision is accepted as halachah. Other authorities maintain that there were variant versions of the passage in the Jerusalem Talmud. for [the collectors] would demand payment from the people who did not give in the previous year.
In the Temple, there were always thirteen chests, each chest [shaped] like a shofar. The first chest was for the shekalim of the present year; the second for the shekalim of the previous year; the third was for all those who where obligated to bring an offering of two turtle doves or two common doves,3These offerings were brought by zavim, zavot, and women after childbirth. Since the money was placed in the chest without distinction, half was used to purchase doves for burnt offerings, and half for sin-offerings. one as a burnt offering and one as a sin offering. The funds [for these offerings] were deposited in this chest.The fourth was for those who were obligated to bring [doves] as a burnt offering only. They would deposit the funds [for these offerings] in this chest. The fifth was for those who volunteered to buy wood for the altar; the sixth, for those who donated money [to purchase] frankincense;4This was used for the meal offerings as well as the incense offerings. the seventh, for those who donated gold for the covering [of the ark].5In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 6:5), the Rambam states that these funds were to repair the Holy of Holies. Rav Kapach notes that, on occasion, the Holy of Holies is referred to as "the chamber of the kaporet." This appears to be the Rambam's intent. Rabbenu Ovadiah of Bertinoro, by contrast, interprets this term as referring to the Temple vessels made from gold.The eighth6Concerning the purpose of the latter six chests, the Mishnah (loc. cit.) states "six were for voluntary donations." The Tosefta and the Jerusalem Talmud each offer a different interpretation of the purposes for which these six chests were used. The Rambam chooses the interpretation of the Tosefta. was for the [money that] remains after [purchasing] a sin-offering - i.e., a person set aside funds [to use to purchase] a sin-offering, and money remained after purchasing it. Those funds were deposited in this [chest].The ninth was for the [money that] remains after [purchasing] a guilt-offering; the tenth, for the [money that] remains after [purchasing] the pairs [of doves necessary] for [the offerings of] zavim, zavot,7Zavot is a venereal condition resembling gonorrhea that renders men (zavim) ritually impure. For women (zavot), the term refers to a woman who experiences vaginal bleeding at times other than those of her menstrual period. She also becomes impure. and women after childbirth; the eleventh, for the [money that] remains after [purchasing] the offerings of a nazirite; the twelfth, for the [money that] remains after [purchasing] the guilt offering of a leper; the thirteenth, for a person who pledged money for an animal [to be brought] as a burnt offering.8The commentaries note that by choosing this interpretation, the Rambam defines a purpose for this chest that is different in nature from that of the previous five. Since these six chests were mentioned in one group by the Mishnah, this represents somewhat of a difficulty.
The [purpose] for each category for which the funds in the chest were used was written on the outside of the chest. The court stipulated that all the monies that remained after the purchase of sacrifices for which they were designated should be used to offer animals as burnt offerings.9Had the court not made such a stipulation, it would not have been permissible to change the purpose of these funds from the intent for which they were originally donated. (See also Chapter 4, Halachah 9.)It thus follows that all the funds in the latter six chests were used [to purchase] animals for burnt offerings. Their hides belonged to the priests, as did the hides [of other burnt offerings].10Shekalim 6:6 relates that from Leviticus 5:19, "a guilt offering unto God," one might think that the offering should be consecrated entirely. Since II Kings 12:17 states, "The money from the guilt offerings and the money from the sin offerings shall... be for the priests," the following resolution was offered. The remaining funds were used to purchase burnt offerings that were dedicated entirely to God; the priests did not partake of them at all. The hides, however, were given to the priests. All the funds in the third chest were to be used to purchase doves: half of them burnt offerings, and half of them sin offerings. All [the funds in] the fourth [chest] were to be used to purchase doves to be sacrificed as burnt offerings.
When the shekalim were collected from each and every city, they were sent to the Temple with emissaries.11More particulars concerning these emissaries are discussed in Chapter 3, Halachot 8-9. They might be exchanged for golden dinarim, so that [they would not become a] burden on the journey.12I.e., a golden coin is far lighter than several silver coins of equivalent value. [All the funds] were amassed in the Temple.They were placed in one of the chambers of the Temple. All the doors to the chamber were closed [under lock and] key, and then they were covered with seals. All the shekalim that were collected there [were stored] in three large baskets. Each of the baskets was large enough to contain nine seah.13Thus, the basket would contain 74.6 cubic liters according to Shiurei Torah and 130 cubic liters according to Chazon Ish. The remainder [of the money] was left in the chamber.The money in the baskets was referred to as terumat halishcah ("[the funds of] the chamber that were set aside").14These funds were used to purchase the communal sacrifices and for other purposes, as related in Chapter 4, Halachot 1-7. [The funds that] remained besides [the funds] stored in the baskets were referred to as sheyarei halishcah ("the remainder within the chamber").15These funds were used for various communal projects, as mentioned in Chapter 4, Halachah 8. There is a substantial difference in status between these two groups of funds. The funds in the three baskets were considered sanctified, and a person who used them for mundane purposes would be liable for the misuse of a sacred article (me'ilah). The other funds, by contrast, were used for mundane purposes, albeit those of the community, and not those of an individual. (See Hilchot Me'ilah 6:13.)
On three occasions during the year16In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 3:1), the Rambam explains that the funds were set aside on these three occasions so that the matter would be publicized. funds were taken from this chamber: On Rosh Chodesh Nisan, on either the day before or the day after the festival of Rosh Chodesh Tishrei17Although the wording of the Mishnah (Shekalim 3:1) implies that the money was set aside on Rosh HaShanah, since Rosh HaShanah is a holiday, the money was set aside either beforehand or afterwards., and fifteen days before Shavuot.18Note also the parallel to (and slight difference from) Hilchot Bechorot 7:8, which describes the setting aside of the tithes of the herds on three occasions during the year.How is the money set aside? One person enters the chamber, while the guards stand outside. He asks them: "Should I set aside the funds?" They answer him: "Set them aside; set them aside; set them aside," [repeating the answer] three times.19Responses were frequently repeated in the Temple service for the purpose of emphasis. (See Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 7:11 and Hilchot Parah Adumah 3:2.)The person then filled three smaller baskets, each containing three seah, from [the funds in] the three large baskets. He then took the money outside to use it until it was depleted. Afterwards, he returned and refilled the three small baskets from the three large baskets a second time before Shavuot. The money was then used until it was depleted.
In Tishrei, he returned a third time, filled [the three small baskets] from the three large baskets, and used the funds until they were exhausted [or] until Rosh Chodesh Nisan.20There is an apparent difficulty with the Rambam's wording here, which appears to imply that the measures of funds set aside on each occasion were equal. This is inaccurate, for there are far more days between the middle of Iyar - the time of the second separation - and Tishrei - the time of the third - than between Tishrei and Nisan - the time of the first separation. And both of these periods are far greater than the period from Rosh Chodesh Nisan until the middle of Iyar. In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 3:1), the Rambam resolves this difficulty, explaining that on each occasion they would set aside an amount of money appropriate for the period, implying that the amounts were not equal. On Rosh Chodesh Nisan, [funds] were set aside from the new collection.21Rosh HaShanah 7b emphasizes that Rosh Chodesh Nisan was considered to be Rosh HaShanah concerning the Temple sacrifices, and from that time onward the funds to purchase the sacrifices were taken from the new collection.If the funds in the three large containers were insufficient and were exhausted before the month of Nisan, they would set aside other funds from the remainder within the chamber.22I.e., the funds that were not within the three large baskets and were ordinarily used for other communal purposes.In explanation of this halachah, the Kessef Mishneh points to a difference of opinion in the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 3:3) between Rabbi Meir and the Sages. The Sages maintain that if the funds were exhausted, a new collection should be made. Rabbi Meir, by contrast, maintains that the funds should be taken from those remaining in the chamber.There is, however, a difficulty with the reference to this source, because Rabbi Meir maintains that the funds remaining in the chamber were consecrated, and therefore one who uses them for his individual purposes transgresses the prohibition against me'ilah. As mentioned above, the Rambam (Hilchot Me'ilah 6:13) does not accept that ruling.
The three smaller baskets into which the funds were set aside and taken outside were labeled alef, bet, gimmel.23The first three letters of the Hebrew alphabet. The Hebrew letters also serve as numerals. In this instance, it is as though the baskets were labeled 1, 2, and 3. [In this manner,] he would know to take [the funds] from the first until they were exhausted, and then to take from the second, and then to take from the third.He should fill the first basket from the first large basket, and then cover the large basket with a handkerchief. Afterwards, he should fill the second basket from the second large basket and then cover the large basket with a handkerchief, and then the third basket from the third large basket.He does not cover this large basket with a handkerchief, thus making it apparent that he concluded with it. And he would begin with it when he entered a second time before Shavuot. At that time, he would first set aside [the funds] from the large basket that was uncovered, and then he covered it. He then set aside from the large basket from which he had taken [the funds] first on the previous occasion, and covered it. He would then take funds from the large basket that is next to it.He would not cover this basket, so that [he would know] to start from it in Tishrei, the third time he entered.24The Rambam's ruling is dependent on his interpretation of the Mishnah (Shekalim 3:4). (See his Commentary on the Mishnah.) The Ra'avad, Rabbenu Asher, and others offer a different interpretation, which appears to fit more closely the plain meaning of the Jerusalem Talmud's explanation of the Mishnah. Thus, he would have placed [funds] into the first, second, and third of the small baskets from each of the large baskets.
When he placed the funds in these three [small] baskets, he placed the funds in the first basket on behalf of [the inhabitants of] Eretz Yisrael; in the second basket, on behalf of [the inhabitants of] the walled cities surrounding Eretz Yisrael,25Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro (Shekalim 3:4) gives as examples, the inhabitants of the lands of Ammon and Moab. and on behalf of [the inhabitants of] the totality of Eretz Yisrael; and in the third basket, on behalf of [the inhabitants of] Babylonia, on behalf of [the inhabitants of] Media, on behalf of [the inhabitants of] other distant countries, and on behalf of the remainder of the Jewish people.26Rav Ovadiah of Bertinoro (who interprets the abovementioned Mishnah differently from the Rambam) explains that the reason for the mention of these three locales is chronological. First, the shekalim would be collected from Eretz Yisrael, then from the surrounding areas, and lastly from the outlying diaspora. Nevertheless, whenever they set aside the money for the communal sacrifices, they had the intent that the money was to be given for the entire Jewish people.It is unlikely that the Rambam would follow this view. It appears that he considers these divisions as merely geographic indicators.
When he set aside the funds, he had the intention of including [all those whose shekalim] had been collected and were present in the chamber, [all those whose shekalim] had been collected and had not reached the chamber, and [all those whose shekalim] would be collected in the future.27I.e., even if for some reason a person had not given his half-shekel as yet, retroactively he received a share in these sacrifices. In this manner, everyone who ultimately contributes toward the sacrifices will have a portion in all the communal sacrifices, even those offered before his contribution was made.Ketubot 108a, cited by many as the source for this halachah, also mentions that the person setting aside the funds had in mind those people whose half-shekalim were lost and never reached the Temple treasury. Nevertheless, since the lost shekalim were not mentioned in the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 2:1), nor in the Tosefta (Shekalim 2:5), the Rambam also omits mention of them. (See also Chapter 3, Halachot 8-9.)[In this manner,] the shekalim that he set aside to use [to purchase the sacrifices] would serve as atonement for the entire Jewish people. It is as if their shekalim had already reached the chamber, and were included in the money that was set aside.
When the person entered to set aside the funds, he should not enter wearing a garment in which he could hide money, nor wearing shoes or sandals,28See Yevamot 102b, which mentions in this context that it is forbidden to enter the Temple courtyard wearing shoes or sandals. The Rambam quotes this law in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:2. nor wearing tefillin or an amulet, lest the people suspect that he hid funds from the chamber underneath them when he set aside the funds. And they would talk to him [continuously] from the time he entered until the time he departed, so that he could not place [a coin] in his mouth.Even though all these safeguards were taken, a poor person or someone who craved money should not [be appointed to] set aside these funds.29The source for this law is the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 3:2), which states "A קווץ should not set aside funds." The Rambam interprets this term as referring to either a poor or a greedy individual. The Ra'avad maintains that the term refers to a person with long hair, lest he be suspected of hiding a coin among his locks. [In this way,] the matter will not arouse suspicion, thus [fulfilling the advice of Numbers 32:22]: "You shall be blameless before God and before Israel."

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
Coins of a half-shekel were required by everyone so that each individual could give the half-shekel he was obligated to give. Therefore, when a person went to a money-changer to exchange a shekel for two half-shekalim, he would give the money changer an extra amount in addition to the shekel.1Rashi (Chulin 25b) explains that this additional amount was given to tip the scales in favor of the money changer. The Meiri explains that since half-shekel coins were in demand, the value of two such coins was slightly more than a shekel. Rav Kapach [based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 1:6)] explains that this additional amount was a fee paid to the Temple treasury for providing the services of a money-changer. Based on the latter two explanations, if a person gives a half-shekel coin, he is not obligated to add a kolbon. This extra amount is referred to as a kolbon. Therefore, when two individuals give a shekel [to discharge the obligation incumbent] upon both of them, they are obligated to give a kolbon.2A single kolbon. (See the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah [loc. cit.].)
Any [two individuals] who are not obligated to give shekalim - e.g., two women or two slaves - and who gave a shekel are not obligated to give a kolbon.3Since their gift is voluntary in nature, they are not obligated to add more to it. Similarly, if one person was obligated and another was not obligated, and the one who was obligated gave [a half-shekel] on behalf of the one who was not obligated - e.g., a man gave a [full] shekel on his own behalf, and on behalf of a woman, or on behalf of a slave - he is not obligated to give a kolbon.Priests are also not obligated to give a kolbon,4Since priests are not compelled to give a half-shekel for the reasons mentioned above (see the notes on Chapter 1, Halachah 10), they are also not obligated to give a kolbon (Kessef Mishneh). nor is a person who gives on behalf of a priest.
A person who gives a shekel on behalf of himself and a poor person, or his neighbor, or an inhabitant of his city, is not obligated to give a kolbon, if he gave [the half-shekel on behalf of his colleague] as a gift.5Although these individuals are obligated to give a half-shekel, since they did not give on their own behalf, the individual who gave on their behalf is doing a service for the Temple treasury. Hence, he is freed of the obligation of the kolbon. [The rationale is] that he gave an [extra] half-shekel to increase the number of shekalim. If, however, he gave the half-shekel on behalf of his colleagues as a loan to be repaid when they have the means, he is obligated to give a kolbon.
Brothers who have not divided the estate left to them by their father - and similarly, partners6The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, because of a disagreement regarding the version of the text in the Mishnah (Shekalim 1:7), which serves as the Rambam's source. The Rambam's version of the text appears to have read האחים והשותפים, "The brothers and the partners." The Ra'avad's version of the text read האחים השותפים, "The brothers who are partners." According to the Ra'avad, ordinary partners are obligated to give a kolbon. who give one shekel on behalf of the two individuals - are not obligated to give a kolbon.7Since their business interests are combined, they are considered as a single individual. In the above-mentioned Mishnah, and in Bechorot 9:3 and other sources, our Sages contrast the obligation to give a kolbon with the obligation to tithe one's herds. Whenever these individuals are not obligated to give a kolbon, their herds are considered as a single entity, and they are obligated to tithe them together. Whenever they are obligated to give a kolbon, their herds are not considered as a single entity, and they are not obligated to tithe them together.When does the above apply? When the partners have conducted business with the funds of the partnership, and [the initial funds are no longer present]. If, however, one individual brought funds and the other brought funds and they joined them together, but did not exchange or spend the funds, they are obligated to give a kolbon.8Although joining the funds together establishes a partnership (Hilchot Shluchin V'Shutafin 4:1), as long as the initial funds are still in the hands of the partnership, there is still an individual dimension to each person's investment (loc. cit.:3). When the initial funds have been spent and the partnership begins generating its own income, then the two people are considered to have a joint income.If they conducted business with the funds of the partnership, afterwards divided the assets, and then entered into a new partnership, they are obligated to give a kolbon until they conduct business under the new partnership agreement, and exchange the money [in the partnership's account].
When [by contrast] brothers or partners jointly own an animal and funds, and then they subsequently divide the funds, they are obligated to give a kolbon although they have not divided the animal.9The intent appears to be that since the brothers or the partners divided the funds available to them, it is clear that they no longer desire to conduct business as a single entity. We assume that the reason they did not divide the animal was merely one of convenience, and ultimately the partnership will be divided entirely.The Ra'avad quotes the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 1:7), which states that this applies only when the livestock do not comprise the majority of the assets of the estate or the partnership. If they did comprise the majority of the assets, a different ruling would apply. The Kessef Mishneh and the Migdal Oz offer different explanations for the Rambam's position. Conversely, however, if they divided the animal, but did not divide the funds, they are not obligated to give a kolbon until they divide the funds. We do not say that the funds are about to be divided.10Although there is no difficulty in dividing funds, the very fact that the funds have not been divided is an indication that the brothers and the partners still intend to do business as a single enterprise.
When a person gives a shekel to the Temple treasury so that it will be considered as if he gave the half-shekel he is obligated to give, and so that he should receive a half-shekel that was collected from others, he is obligated [to give] two kolbonot.11He is requiring that two different exchanges be made on his behalf: a) the division of his shekel so that he will have fulfilled his obligation of giving a half-shekel; andb) that he receive a half-shekel in return.He is obligated to pay a kolbon for each of these transactions (Rav Kapach, based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah, Shekalim 1:6). In contrast, if his shekel were given entirely to [the Temple treasury], he would be obligated to give one kolbon [only].12As stated in Halachah 3.
What is the value of a kolbon? When two dinarim were given as a half-shekel, the value of a kolbon was half a ma'ah - i.e., one twelfth of a dinar. A kolbon of a lesser value was never given.13For as explained in Chapter 1, Halachot 5-6, this was the value of the half-shekel given in the desert. A lesser amount was never given.The kolbonot do not have the same status as the shekalim. The money-changers would gather them in a separate collection until they were required by the Temple treasury.14The Tosefta and the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 1:4) quote different Sages who offer varying opinions regarding the purpose for which the kolbonot were used. The Kessef Mishneh maintains that the Rambam used an indefinite choice of words because no final decision is reached in these texts.
A person whose shekel is lost is responsible for it until it is given to the Temple treasury.15Even if the initial setting aside of funds had already been performed in the Temple, the half-shekalim given afterwards are required actually to reach the Temple treasurers.[The following rules apply when] the inhabitants of a city send their shekalim by means of an emissary and they are stolen or lost: If [the emissary] was an unpaid watchman, he should take an oath to them,16The emissaries must take three oaths: that the funds were lost or stolen, that they did not use them for their own purposes prior to their being lost, and that they were not negligent (Hilchot She'ilah UFikadon 4:1). and then he is freed of liability, as is any other unpaid watchman. [The people] then must give their half-shekalim a second time.17In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 2:1), the Rambam emphasizes that the people are required to pay a second time because entrusting the funds to an unpaid watchman is considered a careless and irresponsible approach.Note the contrast to the laws regarding a paid watchman in the following halachah, which differentiates between whether or not the loss took place before funds were set aside from the Temple treasury.The Kessef Mishneh notes that it is possible to interpret Bava Metzia 58a as implying that the inhabitants should be freed of the obligation of paying a second time if the money was lost after the funds were set aside in the Temple treasury. The Rambam, however, does not choose this interpretation, for the reasons mentioned above.If the inhabitants of the city say, "Since we are giving our shekalim a second time [regardless], we do not desire for the emissary to be required to take an oath, for he is trusted by us," their request is denied. It is an edict of the Sages that [nothing] consecrated should be released without an oath having been taken.18According to the Torah itself, an oath is never required concerning consecrated articles. Bava Metzia (loc. cit.) explains, however, that our Sages instituted this oath so that the people would not treat consecrated articles in a disrespectful manner.If the first19We have translated the terms "first" and "later" without adding any clarification at this point, because, as mentioned in the conclusion of the following halachah, there is a difference of opinion regarding their meaning. shekalim were discovered after the emissary took the oath, both sets of shekalim are consecrated, but [the later shekalim] are not considered [as payment] for the following year. The first [shekalim] should be included among the shekalim of the present year, and the later [shekalim] should be included together with [the collection of shekalim] from the previous year.20As mentioned in Chapter 2, Halachot 1-2, every year, it was possible for a person to give a half-shekel to compensate for his failure to do so in the previous year. The extra shekalim were added to this collection.
[The following rules apply when] they sent their shekalim with a paid watchman, who is liable in the event of theft and loss, and [the shekalim] were lost because of forces beyond their control - e.g., they were taken by armed thieves. [The emissary] is not held liable.21A paid emissary is never liable for losses due to forces beyond his control, as explained in Hilchot Sechirut, Chapter 3.[Whether or not the inhabitants of the city are required to pay a second time depends on whether or not the funds in the Temple treasury have been set aside22As described in Chapter 2, Halachot 4 and 9..] If [the inhabitants' funds] were lost because of forces beyond [the emissary's] control after the funds [in the Temple treasury] were set aside, the emissary is required to take an oath23This oath, like the one mentioned in the previous halachah, and like the one mentioned in the following clause, is Rabbinic in origin. to the Temple treasurer,24The Kessef Mishneh notes that the Rambam is quoting the text of the Mishnah (Shekalim 2:1) despite the fact that the meaning of that phrase is changed by an interpretation offered in the preliminary discussion of the issue in Bava Metzia 58a: that the emissary takes the oath to the inhabitants of the city in the presence of the Temple treasurer in order to collect his wage, or in order to clear their reputation.The Kessef Mishneh maintains, however, that once the Talmud mentions the reason for the oath stated in the previous halachah, "that [nothing] consecrated should be released without an oath having been taken," this interpretation is no longer necessary. and the inhabitants of the city are no longer liable. For the person who set aside the funds in the Temple treasury, did so on behalf of [those whose funds] have been collected, and on behalf of [those whose funds] have not yet been collected. Thus, the funds were already in the custody of the Temple treasury.25As explained in Chapter 2, Halachah 9, when the person setting aside the funds in the Temple treasury makes the separation, he has the intention that the money set aside should be used to purchase sacrifices on behalf of all the Jews who donated or who will donate money for that purpose. Therefore, after the inhabitants of the city fulfill their obligation by sending the funds with a paid watchman, it is considered as if the funds were already given to the Temple treasury.The inhabitants of the city [are freed of liability], because there was nothing more that they could have done. They gave [the funds] to a paid watchman, who is liable in the event of theft and loss, and [the loss of property] due to forces beyond a person's control is an uncommon phenomenon.If [the inhabitants' funds] were lost before the funds [in the Temple treasury] were set aside, they are considered as still being in the possession of the inhabitants of the city. The emissary is required to take an oath to the inhabitants of the city, and they are required to pay [their half-shekalim a second time].If [the emissary] took [the required] oath, and they collected shekalim a second time, and then the thieves returned [the stolen funds], both sets of shekalim are consecrated, but [the later shekalim] are not considered [as payment] for the following year. Instead, [the later shekalim] should be included together with [the collection of shekalim] from the previous year.There is an opinion26The source for the difference of opinion mentioned by the Rambam is the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 2:1). that states that the first shekalim, which will be included among the shekalim of the present year, are the shekalim that were originally stolen, lost, or taken by forces beyond the emissary's control and returned. Another opinion states that the first shekalim are the shekalim that come to the hands of the Temple treasurer first.
[The following rules apply when] a person gives a half-shekel to a colleague to give to the money-changer on behalf of the donor, and instead the agent gives it to him on his own behalf, so that he will not be compelled [to give his own half-shekel at this time]: If the funds [in the Temple treasury] were already set aside,27This ruling is also based on the principles mentioned in the previous halachah: that the person who set aside the funds has in mind all the funds that will be donated in the future. Accordingly, once the person gives his half-shekel to his colleague, it becomes the property of the Temple treasury. the agent is considered to have misappropriated consecrated property.28If his act was intentional, he receives lashes as punishment and must reimburse the Temple treasury. If his transgression was unintentional, he is obligated to bring a sacrifice for atonement and to reimburse the Temple treasury, adding a fifth of the shekel's value. (See Hilchot Me'ilah 1:3.) For the [half-]shekel was already considered to be the property of the Temple treasury, since [the funds] were set aside on behalf of all those who would give in the future. Thus, [the agent] extricated himself29A person is liable for misappropriating consecrated property when benefit is derived from it. In his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 2:2), the Rambam emphasizes that the benefit the person derives is that he extricates himself from a situation where his property would be taken to compel him to pay the half-shekel. The actual fulfillment of the mitzvah is not taken into account, because "the mitzvot were not given for our personal satisfaction." [by using] consecrated funds and hence derived benefit from this [half-]shekel.If the funds [in the Temple treasury] have not yet been set aside, the agent is not considered to have misappropriated consecrated property. He is, however, obligated to return the half-shekel to the colleague who gave it to him. Similarly, a person who robs [one of the money-changers of the Temple treasury] of a half-shekel, or steals30In halachic terminology, robbery refers to the seizure of a person's property by force, while stealing refers to the theft of an object without his knowledge. it from him, and uses it for his half-shekel, is considered to have fulfilled his obligation [to give a half-shekel]. He must [reimburse] the [money-changer], [and] pay twice its value31This ruling applies to a thief, but not to a robber. If, at the time of the theft the funds had not been set aside in the Temple treasury, the half-shekel the person steals has not been consecrated. Hence, the thief is required to make double restitution, as stated in Exodus 22:3. or add a fifth of its value32The Kessef Mishneh explains that this refers to a person who steals from a money-changer after the funds have been set aside in the Temple treasury. He is thus making personal use of consecrated property and must add a fifth of its value when making restitution, as explained above.The Or Sameach differs and states that this refers also to a person who steals before the funds have been set aside in the Temple treasury. A person who is charged with theft, clears himself by taking an oath in court, and later admits the theft, is required to add a fifth of its value when making restitution, as explained in Hilchot Gezeilah 7:1. [depending on the situation].
[The following rules apply when] a person gives his half-shekel from consecrated funds:33I.e., money that was designated for the improvement of the Temple complex. The Rambam is speaking about an instance where the person is unaware that the funds that he used had been consecrated. If he had been aware, different rules would apply. After the funds from the Temple treasury are set aside, when the funds [from the Temple treasury] are used [to purchase a sacrifice], the person becomes obligated for the misappropriation of consecrated property.34For a portion of his half-shekel is considered to have been used towards this purchase. The commentaries question why the Rambam does not mention the need for an animal to be purchased with the funds from the Temple treasury in the previous halachah as well. (See Or Sameach.) He has, however, fulfilled his obligation to give a half-shekel.Should one give [a half-shekel] from funds that were designated as the second tithe,35I.e., money used to redeem the second tithe, which must be used to purchase food that will be eaten in Jerusalem. (See Deuteronomy 14:24-26.) he should partake of a quantity of food that is of equivalent value in Jerusalem.36I.e., after the fact, it is as if he transferred the designated nature of the half-shekel to the funds he later used. Should one give [a half-shekel] from funds that were given in exchange for the produce of the Sabbatical year,37When produce that grew in the Sabbatical year is purchased, the seller may use the funds he receives for only one purpose: to purchase produce (that was not grown in the Sabbatical year). Moreover, the produce he purchases must be eaten according to all the laws that pertain to produce of the Sabbatical year. (See Hilchot Shemitah V'Yovel 6:6-10.) he should partake of a quantity of food that is of equivalent value, and treat it with the sanctity of the produce of the Sabbatical year.38In this instance, as well, after the fact it is as if he transferred the designated nature of the half-shekel to the funds he later used. Should one give [a half-shekel] from an apostate city,39Which must be destroyed entirely, together with all the property contained within it. (See Deuteronomy 13:17.) his act is of no consequence whatsoever.40For the property from such a city is considered as having no value whatsoever. It is as if he gave ashes. The Kessef Mishneh questions the Rambam's statements, noting that this concept is so well known that it would seem unnecessary for the Rambam to mention it.Several of the later commentaries offer possible resolutions to this difficulty. For example, the Merkevet HaMishneh states that this refers to money from the second tithe found in an apostate city. (See Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 4:15.) Aruch HaShulchan states that this refers to money set aside for the half-shekel, but not given to the money-changers for that purpose. If it has already been given, it should be brought to the Temple treasury.
When a person has set aside a [half-]shekel under the impression that he was obligated to give it, and then discovers that he was not obligated, his [half-]shekel is not consecrated.41This follows a general principle that when a person consecrates property because of a misconception, the property is not consecrated.When a person gave two [half-]shekalim, and later discovered that he was obligated to give only one, [the following rules apply:] If he gave them one after another, the second [half-]shekel is not consecrated.42For this is identical to the situation described in the first clause. If he gave them both at one time, one is a [half-]shekel, and one is considered as overpayment for a [half-]shekel.43Which, as stated in the following halachah, remains unconsecrated. If a person set aside a [half-]shekel and died, the [half-shekel] should be designated as funds donated [for the purpose of purchasing burnt offerings].44The Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 105) explains the reason for this law. Exodus 30:15 states that the half-shekalim are given for the purpose of atonement, and the dead are not in need of atonement.
[The following rules apply when a person] takes coins in his hands and says, "These are for my [half-]shekel,"45The decision rendered in this clause represents a reversal of the Rambam's opinion from that of his Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 2:3), where he writes that if a person brings money and says that it is for his half-shekel, the remainder is considered a donation and is used to purchase burnt offerings. This change of view is based on the discussion of the subject in the Jerusalem Talmud. or when he collects ma'ah46A ma'ah was worth one sixth of a half-shekel in Talmudic times (Chapter 1, Halachah 6). after ma'ah or prutah47A coin of little value. after prutah, and says, "I am collecting money for my [half-]shekel": Even if he collects an entire purse-full, [all that he is required] to give is the half-shekel that he is obligated to give, and the rest of the funds remain unconsecrated. For [any] overpayment given for the [half-]shekel remains unconsecrated.
[The following rules apply when] money is discovered [in the collection area in the Temple] between the chest of the [half-]shekalim and the chest designated for donations [for burnt offerings]:48Kin'at Eliyahu notes that there is a slight difficulty with the Rambam's statements, which are based on those of the Mishnah (Shekalim 7:1). According to the description of the order of the chests in Chapter 2, Halachah 2, there are several other chests between the chests of the half-shekalim and the chests for the donations for burnt offerings. [If the funds are] closer to [the chest of] the shekalim, they should be considered as shekalim. If they are closer to [the chest designated for] donations [for burnt offerings], they should be used for that purpose.49Actual closeness is considered the determinant of primary importance in this and other halachic questions. If the funds are equidistant between the two chests, they are designated as donations for burnt offerings. [The rationale is that] these donations [involve a more severe type of offering,50And this becomes the determining factor, as stated in the following halachah. for they] are used entirely for burnt offerings. The shekalim, by contrast, are used for burnt offerings and for other purposes.51As explained in the following chapter.
Similarly, all the funds that are found between chests should be designated for the purpose of the chest to which they are closest. If [funds] are [discovered] equidistant between chests - for example, if they are between the chest [whose contents are used to purchase] wood and the chest [whose contents are used to purchase] frankincense - they should be designated [for purchasing] frankincense.52For the frankincense was itself considered a sacrifice, in contrast to the wood, which was considered merely a medium to make possible a sacrifice (Kessef Mishneh). [If they are discovered] between the chest [whose contents are used to purchase] pairs of doves53Which were sacrificed, one as a burnt offering and one as a sin offering. and the chest [whose contents are used to purchase] doves for burnt offerings, they should be designated [for purchasing] doves for burnt offerings.54For the pairs of doves are offered, one as a sin offering and one as a burnt offering. Since the priests also partook of the sin offerings, the burnt offerings are considered more stringent.The Kessef Mishneh cites the commentary of Rabbi Ovadiah of Bertinoro on Shekalim 7:1, where he states that a pair of doves were also donated from communal funds to be sacrificed, one as a burnt offering and one as a sin offering. In this manner, if the funds came from those donated for this purpose, the person would receive atonement.This is the general principle: In all cases, we designate [the funds for the purposes of the chest] to which they are closest;55Regardless of whether the contents of the chest are used for purposes that are governed by more lenient or more stringent requirements.if [the funds] are equidistant [from two chests], [we designate them] for the purposes that are governed by] more stringent requirements.All the coins found on the Temple Mount are [considered] unconsecrated funds,56As indicated by Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:2, a person was not allowed to enter the Temple Mount holding money in a visible manner. Thus, we can assume that most of the money lost there came from the Temple treasury, and that as the Rambam continues to explain, that money had already been redeemed through the purchase of the sacrifices. because the Temple treasurer does not take money out of the Temple treasury until he transfers their consecrated dimension to the animals that he purchases for sacrifices.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
What [are the funds in] terumat halishcah1As mentioned in Chapter 2, Halachah 4, this term refers to the funds collected from the half-shekalim and placed in the three large baskets. In addition, other funds remained from the half-shekalim in this chamber, and the Temple treasury had other funds from other sources. used for? From [these funds] they would purchase the daily offerings sacrificed every day, the additional offerings [sacrificed on Sabbaths, Rashei Chodashim and festivals], all other communal sacrifices, and the wine libations [that accompany them].Similarly, [these funds were used to purchase] the salt that was placed on all the sacrifices,2This applies even to the private offerings that people would bring. A person was not required to bring the salt (or wood) to be used for his sacrifice (Hilchot Issurei Mizbe'ach 5:13). and similarly, the wood for the altar, if no wood was provided3As mentioned in Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 6:9, certain families were given the privilege of providing the wood for the altar in the Temple. If, however, the wood they brought did not suffice, additional wood would be purchased from the funds in the Temple treasury. and it was necessary that it be purchased.[They were used to pay for spices contained in] the incense offering and the wages of those who prepared it,4See also Halachah 12. the showbread and the wages of those who prepared it, the omer [of barley], the two loaves, a red heifer, the goat sent to Azazel and the scarlet thread tied between its horns.5Note the Mishneh LaMelech, which states that the text contains a printing error, and that the scarlet thread is a reference to the scarlet thread used in the ceremony of the burning of the red heifer. There are, however, later commentaries that justify the standard text.
In contrast, [the funds to purchase] a bull brought as a sin offering [for a transgression performed by the community due to] lack of awareness, and the goats [offered by the community for transgressing the prohibition against] the worship of false divinities should be collected [from communal donations], and should not be purchased [with the funds of] terumat halishcah.The curtains before the Sanctuary replaced a [permanent] structure.6Based on Rashi, Ketubot 106a, it appears that this refers to the two curtains that separated the Sanctuary from the Holy of Holies. In the First Temple, a wall served this function. The Second Temple was much taller than the First Temple (100 cubits, as opposed to 30), and a wall only a cubit thick and 100 cubits high would not be structurally sound. Therefore, the Sages replaced the wall with two curtains. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 4:2. Since these curtains replaced a structure of stone, they were governed by different rules from those governing the other curtains in the Temple. Among the differences was that they were not paid for from these funds.Therefore, they should not be purchased [with the funds of] terumat halishcah, but rather [with funds that were] consecrated for bedek habayit ["the upkeep of the Temple"]. The curtains covering the gates, by contrast, should be purchased [with the funds of] terumat halishcah.It is ordained that [the funds necessary to fashion] the menorah and the other sacred articles should come from [the funds stemming from] the remainder of the libations. In Hilchot Klei HaMikdash V'Ha'ovdim Bo (the "Laws Governing the Temple Vessels and Those Who Serve Within"),7One of the 83 sections of the Mishneh Torah; the second section of Sefer HaAvodah, "the Book of Divine Service." the term "the [funds stemming from] the remainder of the libations" will be explained.8In Chapter 7, Halachah 13 of those laws, the Rambam writes that the prices for the wine for the libations and the flour for the meal offerings are fixed with the suppliers every thirty days. If the price for these commodities increases on the general market, the suppliers are still obligated to provide the Temple with the commodities at the price agreed upon previously. If, however, the price for them decreases on the general market, the suppliers must sell them to the Temple at their present market value. The profit realized by the Temple treasury in this manner is referred to as "the [funds stemming from] the remainder of the libations."Significantly, however, in those laws the Rambam mentions that these funds are used to purchase burnt offerings, and does not mention that they were used to fashion the sacred articles. The commentaries resolve this discrepancy by stating that only rarely was it necessary to purchase sacred articles. Hence, these funds were primarily used for the purchase of burnt offerings. If, however, no such funds are available, [the funds necessary for] these [sacred articles] should come from terumat halishcah.[The funds necessary to fashion] the priestly garments, those of the High Priest and those of all the other priests who serve in the Temple should come from terumat halishcah.
All the animals that are found in Jerusalem or its outskirts should be sacrificed as burnt offerings, as stated in [Hilchot] Pesulei HaMukdashim [the "Laws Governing Consecrated Animals That are Unfit"].9Chapter 6, Halachah 18. The wine libations for these offerings should come from terumat halishcah.10Shekalim 7:5 relates that the Temple officers would originally require the person who discovered the animal to bring the wine libation that accompanied it. When this led to a negative outcome, they decided to have the wine libations brought from communal funds.Similarly, if a gentile sent a burnt offering11For the burnt offering sent by a gentile may be sacrificed in the Temple (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 3:2). Were the gentile to send wine for the libations, it would not be acceptable (ibid.:5). from another land, and did not send with it the funds for a wine libation, the wine libation should come from terumat halishcah.
[The following laws apply when] a convert12I.e., a convert without Jewish heirs. If he has heirs, and similarly for a native-born Jew who dies after having designated animals as offerings, the heirs are required to supply the wine libations. dies and leaves [animals designated as] offerings. If he also designated wine [or funds for] their wine libations, they should come from [what he designated]. If not, they should come from terumat halishcah.When a High Priest dies, and a successor is not appointed [immediately], we should [pay] for the chavitin offering13A meal offering resembling a pancake, brought daily by the High Priest. from terumat halishcah.14The Kessef Mishneh notes a contradiction between the Rambam's statements here and those in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:22, where he states that the High Priest's meal offering should be brought by his heirs after he dies. (It must be noted that a similar contradiction can be found in the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah. In his commentary on Shekalim 7:5, he renders a decision similar to the ruling in this halachah, while in his commentary on Menachot 4:5, his decision is analogous to that rendered in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim.)Rav Kapach offers the following resolution: If a High Priest dies without bringing a meal offering on a particular day, his heirs are required to bring it. On subsequent days, however, the offering should be brought from communal funds.The [Rabbis who] inspect blemishes [on first-born animals]15A first-born animal that has a permanent blemish must be given to a priest as a gift. It is not, however, sacrificed on the altar. One of the points of Rabbinic expertise mentioned by the Talmud is the ability to distinguish between a temporary blemish and a permanent one.Although Tosafot, Ketubot 106a, offers this explanation, they also note that Bechorot 29b forbids accepting a wage for inspecting the blemishes of a first-born. Tosafot, however, differentiate between a wage paid by a private individual and one paid by the community. Alternatively, Tosafot explain that this refers to scholars who inspected animals before they were sacrificed. This was necessary because an animal with a blemish was unfit.in Jerusalem, the Sages who teach16This statement is very significant within a totally different context. In Hilchot Talmud Torah 1:7, the Rambam writes that it is forbidden to accept a wage for teaching the Oral Law. See also Chapter 3, Halachah 10 of those laws, where the Rambam writes:Anyone who comes to the conclusion that he should involve himself in Torah study without performing work, and derive his livelihood from charity, desecrates [God's] name, dishonors the Torah, and extinguishes the light of faith.... [See also the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Nedarim 4:3; Avot 4:7).]The above ruling appears to contradict these statements. Among the resolutions offered is that here, the Rambam is allowing the teachers to receive recompense because instructing the students is their occupation. Were they not charged with this responsibility, they would occupy themselves in another profession. Alternatively, they were allowed to receive payment for teaching the practical side of these activities, and not their theoretical dimensions. the laws of ritual slaughter and the laws of taking a handful from the meal offering, and the women who raise their sons to take part in the offering of the red heifer17See Hilchot Parah Adumah 2:7, which explains that it was customary that a person who never contracted ritual impurity at all be the one who takes part in the purification rite of the High Priest before he offers the red heifer. For this purpose, women would raise their children in a specific area of Jerusalem, making certain that they never came in contact with a source of impurity. all receive their wages from terumat halishcah.What would their wages be? An amount decided by the court.
In a Sabbatical year, when [the produce of the fields] is ownerless, the court hires watchmen to protect some of the produce that grows on its own,18Although we are forbidden to plant any crops in the Sabbatical year, the Torah allows us to benefit from the small amount of produce that grows on its own accord from left-over seeds and the like. Our Sages forbade deriving personal benefit from such produce (Hilchot Shemitah 4:1-2); it may, however, be used for a mitzvah. Nevertheless, because the prohibition was only Rabbinic in origin, it was not observed carefully by the entire population. Hence, to ensure that there was a sufficient quantity of grain available for these offerings, it was necessary to hire watchmen. so that it will be possible to offer the omer [of barley]19Offered on the sixteenth of Nisan (Leviticus 23:11 . and the two loaves of bread,20Offered on the holiday of Shavuot (Ibid.:17).for these offerings may come only from the new harvest. These watchmen receive their wages from terumat halishcah.
Should a person volunteer to watch the produce without charge, his offer is not accepted, lest men of force come and take it. [To prevent this,] the Sages ordained that the watchmen be paid from the funds of the Temple treasury. [This] will prompt everyone to avoid that place where the guards are posted.21Rashi, Bava Metzia 118a, states that hiring people to watch it makes it public knowledge that it was designated for use as an offering. Hence, even men of force will refrain from harvesting these crops.
Scribes who check Torah scrolls in Jerusalem and judges in Jerusalem who preside over cases of robbery receive their wages22Hilchot Sanhedrin 23:5 states that a judge is forbidden to receive a wage for presiding over a case. Nevertheless, these judges were paid a wage, for their involvement in these cases prevented them from pursuing any other means of deriving a livelihood. from terumat halishcah.How much are they paid? Ninety23Ketubot 105a states ninety-nine maneh. maneh24A maneh was 100 dinarim. As can be derived from Chapter 1, Halachah 3, a dinar was equivalent to the weight of 96 barleycorns of silver. a year. If this is not sufficient for their [needs], they are given - even against their will25I.e., even if the judges do not feel it correct to impose on the community, the needs of their households are to be met. - an additional amount sufficient to meet their needs, those of their wives, their children, and the other members of their household.26Note the Chatam Sofer (Choshen Mishpat, Responsum 5), who states that the judges' needs should be generously provided for.
Both the ramp that was built from the Temple Mount to the Mount of Olives, on which the red heifer was led [to the Mount of Olives],27See Hilchot Parah Adumah 3:1-2. and the ramp on which the goat sent to Azazel was led [outside the city28Yoma 66a states that this ramp was built because the Jews from Egypt would pull the hair of the priest leading the goat to hurry him on his way. were paid for] from sheyarei halishcah.29As stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 4, the sheyarei halishcah, "the remainder within the chamber," refers to the funds that remain from the collection of shekalim after the coins were placed in the three large baskets.Similarly, [any improvements necessary for] the altar for the burnt offerings, the Temple building, or the Temple courtyards [were paid for] from the sheyarei halishcah.30The Kessef Mishneh notes that Ketubot 106a states that the funds for these improvements should come from Bedek HaBayit, the resources consecrated for the purpose of maintaining the Temple structure, and not from sheyarei halishcah. Rav Kapach, however, notes that the Shitah Mekubetzet quotes a different version of that Talmudic passage, which appears to be the source for the Rambam's ruling. The water conduit, the walls of Jerusalem, its towers, and all the needs of the city [were paid for] from the sheyarei halishcah.Should a gentile, even a resident alien,31I.e., a gentile who commits himself to observing the seven universal laws commanded to Noach and his descendants. (See Hilchot Melachim 8:10, 9:1-2.) This concept is derived from the fact that the Samaritans who volunteered to assist Zerubavel in the construction of the Second Temple were not idol worshipers (Kessef Mishneh). offer to donate money for these purposes, or to labor in these projects without charge, [his offer] should be rejected, for [Ezra 4:3] states: "It is not for you, together with us, to build [the House of our Lord," and [Nechemiah 2:20] states "And you have no portion, right, or memorial in Jerusalem."
[The funds remaining from] terumat halishcah and sheyarei halishcah should be used to purchase male animals to be sacrificed as burnt offerings. For it is a condition made by the court that all the remaining funds be used for burnt offerings.32Since the funds were given with a specific intent, they could not be used for this purpose unless such a condition was made.They are not, however, used to purchase doves for burnt offerings, for doves are never used for communal sacrifices. These burnt offerings that come from the funds remaining from the collection of the shekalim are referred to as "the dessert of the altar."33Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 4:4), which explains that the word kayitz refers to the conclusion of the summer, the days of the fig and grape harvest. In addition to the mainstay of their meals, people often eat these fruits. Similarly, these offerings are brought on the altar in addition to the sacrifices that are usually offered.
Should the [collection from the half-]shekalim not be sufficient [to purchase everything necessary] for all the communal sacrifices, the [funds for] whatever is necessary should be taken from [the articles] consecrated for Bedek HaBayit, the resources consecrated for the purpose of maintaining the Temple structure.34The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam on this point, noting that although the Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 5:4) makes a statement resembling the Rambam's ruling, it proceeds to explain that statement as referring only to a specific type of donation: a collection of used utensils. According to the Ra'avad, other resources donated to Bedek HaBayit may be used only for improvements to the Temple. The Kessef Mishneh and others justify the Rambam's ruling.[The converse, however, does not apply. When improvements are necessary, but the resources of] Bedek HaBayit are lacking, [the improvements] should not [be paid for] from funds consecrated for [sacrifices for] the altar.
From Rosh Chodesh Nisan onward, the communal offerings should be brought from the new collection [of shekalim].35The Jerusalem Talmud (Shekalim 1:1) cites a historical precedent: Just as the first communal sacrifices were brought on the altar in the desert on Rosh Chodesh Nisan, similarly, in subsequent years we renew the practice of bringing communal offerings by using funds from the new collection. In this vein, Rosh HaShanah 7a refers to Rosh Chodesh Nisan as "the Rosh HaShanah for the setting aside of the shekalim." If, however, [the funds from] the new collection have not reached [the Temple treasury], [funds from] the collection of the previous year may be used.36It is, however, as if one "forfeited a mitzvah" (Rosh HaShanah, loc. cit.).Therefore, [the following rule should be applied] if there are animals designated for the daily offerings37It was customary that there be a minimum of six lambs prepared to be offered kept in the Chamber of the Lambs (Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 1:9). This custom was also observed on the twenty-ninth of Adar. Thus, there were always four lambs left over on Rosh Chodesh Nisan (Rashi, Sh'vuot 10b). that were purchased from the collection of the previous year when Rosh Chodesh Nisan arrives: They should be redeemed38For the consecrated status of an animal or an article can never be changed without its being redeemed. and used for mundane purposes,39Avodat HaMelech asks why, concerning these animals, we do not follow the same procedure mentioned in the following halachah concerning the remainder of the incense offering - i.e., that they be redeemed and then purchased again with the funds of the new collection of shekalim.As a possible resolution, he explains that it is forbidden to use for mundane purposes a collection of spices identical to those of the incense offering (Exodus 30:38; Hilchot Klei HaMikdash 2:9). Thus, there would be no use at all for the remainder of the incense offering. For this reason, the Sages ordained that it be repurchased. Concerning the lambs, by contrast, once they are redeemed there is no difficulty in using them for mundane purposes. despite the fact that they are unblemished. The proceeds should be placed in the collection of funds from the previous year that are used to provide "dessert"40See Halachah 9 and notes. for the altar. [This is possible because the] court made a stipulation that should there be no need for any of the animals purchased for the daily offerings, it would be possible to [redeem the animals and] use them for mundane purposes.
After Rosh Chodesh Nisan arrived, the following [procedure] would be adhered to concerning the remainder of the incense offering:41Every year, 368 measures of incense were prepared, 365 corresponding to the days of a solar year, and three extra measures for the incense offering of the High Priest on Yom Kippur (Keritot 6a). Since an ordinary lunar year has either 353, 354, or 355 days, in every ordinary year there were always several portions of incense remaining. They would transfer the consecrated quality [of the incense] to [the funds designated] to be given to the artisans [who prepared it] as their wages. These funds were then used for "the dessert of the altar," and the artisans would take the remainder of the incense offering as their wages.42From the Rambam's Commentary on the Mishnah (Shekalim 4:5), it would appear that the artisans were given the extra portions of the incense at the beginning of the year, they kept the incense in their possession and it was not repurchased from them until the following year. According to either interpretation, the artisans would have to wait an entire year to receive this portion of their wages. Afterwards, they would buy back the incense from [the artisans] with money from the new collection [of shekalim]. If the funds from the new collection had not arrived, they would offer the incense [purchased with funds] from the collection of the previous year.
The End of the Laws of the Shekels
