=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
Whenever a priest who is fit to perform Temple service1This excludes a challal, a son born to a priest from a forbidden relationship, and a priest who has a disqualifying physical blemish. They are not liable for this severe punishment. drinks wine, he is forbidden2Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 73) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 152) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Note also the parallels in Hilchot Nesiat Kapayim 15:4. to enter the area of the Altar or [proceed] beyond there.3I.e., ascends the steps to the Temple building or enters that structure. See also Halachah 15 and notes. If he entered [that area]4If he entered this area while intoxicated, but did not perform service, he is only liable for lashes, as stated in Halachah 15. Similar concepts apply if he drank intoxicating beverages while in this area (Halachah 16). and performed service,5The services for which he is liable are described in Chapter 9, Halachah 2. his service is invalid and he is liable for death at the hand of heaven, as [Leviticus 10:9] states: "[Do not drink intoxicating wine...] so that you do not die."6He may, however, be punished by a mortal court with lashes and thus freed from the more severe spiritual punishment. See Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:2.The above applies provided one drinks a revi'it7A liquid measure equal to 86 cc. according to Shiurei Torah and 150 cc. according to Chazon Ish. [It is reputed that the wines of the Talmudic era were very strong and drinking even this small amount could cause intoxication.] of undiluted wine at one time, provided the wine is over 40 days old.8And thus has had time to ferment and reach an alcoholic content sufficient enough to cause intoxication. If, however, one drank less than a revi'it of wine, one drank a revi'it intermittently,9Since he paused while drinking it, its intoxicating effect will be less. one mixed it with water,10Even if one drank the entire quantity, since it was diluted, it will have a lesser effect. or one drank even more than a revi'it of wine from the vat, i.e., within 40 days of its being brought into being,11Since its alcoholic content will not be that high, one is not liable. There is, nevertheless, a prohibition against serving in the Temple even when having drunk such wine (Kessef Mishneh). he is exempt and his service is not profaned. If he drank more than a revi'it of wine, even though it was diluted and even though he drank it intermittently, he is liable for death and his service is invalidated.12The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that although serving in the Temple in such a condition is forbidden, the priest is not liable for such severe punishment, nor is his service disqualified. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer interpretations of Keritot 13b that substantiate the Rambam's position.
If a person is intoxicated from beverages other than wine, he is forbidden to enter the Temple.13One of the opinions in Keritot 13b derives this concept from the literal meaning of Leviticus 10:9, translated above as: "Do not drink intoxicating wine," i.e., it interprets the term veseicher according to its simple meaning, i.e., an alcoholic beverage other than wine. There is another opinion in that source that interprets veseicher as an adjective (which we have translated as "intoxicating") describing the manner in which one drinks wine. Apparently, the Rambam does not see the two interpretations as mutually exclusive. See Kessef Mishneh. See also Halachah 15. If he enters and performs service while intoxicated from other beverages - even if he is intoxicated from milk or figs - he is liable for lashes, but his service is valid, for one is liable for death only when drinking wine at the time of service and one does not invalidate service unless he is intoxicated from wine.
Just as a priest is forbidden to enter the Temple while intoxicated, so too, it is forbidden for any person, whether priest or Israelite, to render a halachic ruling when he is intoxicated.14See Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., where the Rambam links the two prohibitions in the same negative commandment. One is not, however, liable for death for delivering a ruling while intoxicated. Note the discussion of this matter by the Ramban and Megilat Esther in their glosses to Sefer HaMitzvot. Even if he ate dates or drank milk and his mind became somewhat confused, he should not issue a ruling, as [the above passage (ibid.:11)] continues: "And to give instruction to the children of Israel." If he gave a ruling concerning a matter that is explicitly stated in the Torah to the extent that it is known by the Sadducees, he is permitted. For example, he ruled that a sheretz15One of the eight forbidden teeming animals mentioned in Leviticus 11:29-30. A frog is not one of those animals. is impure and a frog is pure; [he ruled that] blood is forbidden, or the like.
It is permitted for a person who is intoxicated to teach Torah, even Torah law and the interpretation of verses, provided he does not deliver a ruling.16I.e., a directive for actual practice. If he was a sage who delivers rulings on a regular basis, he should not teach, for his teaching constitutes the delivery of a ruling.17Note the Shulchan Aruch (Choshen Mishpat 7:5) which quotes an opinion stating that it is permitted to rule in cases involving financial law when slightly intoxicated.
When a person drank precisely a revi'it and it was diluted with the slightest amount of water, he slept a bit, or he walked a mil,18A Talmudic measure equivalent to a kilometer. If he rode rather than walked, he must ride three mil (Eruvin 64b). the effects of the wine will have worn off and he is permitted to serve [in the Temple]. If, however, he drank more than a revi'it even if it was diluted, sleeping slightly or journeying adds to his drunkenness. Depending on how intoxicated he was, he must wait until there is no trace of his drunkenness whatsoever.
The men of the priestly watch19Who serve in the Temple that week. See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:3, 11. are permitted to drink wine at night, but not during the day, during the week [they serve in the Temple]. Even the members of the other clans20As stated in that source, on each particular day, there was a clan whose members would perform the Temple service for that day. who were not scheduled to work on a particular day [are forbidden], lest the Temple service overburden the members of the clan who serve that day and they require other members of the watch to help them.The members of the clan of a particular day are forbidden to drink both during the day and night of that day, lest they drink at night and arise to their service in the morning without the effects of the wine having worn off.21The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the intent of Ta'anit 17a (the Rambam's source) is not the night before the priests serve in the Temple, but the night afterwards. They are forbidden because it is possible that they will have to continue offering the limbs and fat-tails of the animals at night if they were not able to offer them during the day. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's interpretation, explaining that there is no need to prohibit the priests from drinking wine the entire night for this reason. It is sufficient that they be restrained until these limbs have been offered.
Whenever a priest knows the watch from which he descends and the clan from which he descends, and he knows the day on which the members of his clan were scheduled to serve [in the Temple], he is forbidden to drink wine that entire day.22Were it not for the reason mentioned at the conclusion of the halachah, this law would apply even in the present era. This is a decree, enacted lest the Temple be rebuilt and the priests be required to serve at their appointed time. If one knows from which watch he is descended, but does not know his clan, he is forbidden to drink wine the entire week during which his clan worked.If [a priest] does not know [the identity of] his watch or his clan, the law would dictate that he should never be allowed to drink wine.23Lest he be drinking on a day forbidden for him. Nevertheless, his difficulty24I.e., his lack of knowledge of his watch and clan.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam with regard to the reason why there is no decree against the priests drinking wine in the present age. He rejects the Rambam's view, because with Mashiach's coming, the lineage of the priests will be established according to the spirit of prophecy (see Hilchot Melachim 12:3) and the priests will immediately be called upon to begin their service in the Temple. Instead, the rationale is that because of the length of the exile, we do not expect that the Temple will be built instantaneously. [This is also the view of Rashi (Ta'anit 17a)]. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's view, noting that according to the Rambam, we may offer sacrifices even if the Temple is not rebuilt (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:15) and furthermore, the establishment of the priest's lineage even through the spirit of prophecy will not take only one day. leads to his solution and he is permitted to drink wine at all times, for he is not allowed to serve [in the Temple] until his clan and watch are established.
A priest who lets his hair grow long25See Halachah 11 for a definition of this term. is forbidden to enter the area of the Altar or [proceed] beyond there.26Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 163) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 149) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Note the objections of the Ramban to the inclusion of this charge as one of the mitzvot and the resolutions offered by Megilat Esther in their glosses to Sefer HaMitzvot. If he enters this area and performs service,27The law that applies if he does not perform service is explained in Halachah 15. he is liable for death at the hand of Heaven like an intoxicated [priest] who serves,28As stated in Halachah 1. as [indicated by Ezekiel 44:20-21]: "None of the priests shall drink wine. They shall not shave their heads, nor allow their hair to grow long."29The prooftext for this prohibition from the Torah (Leviticus 10:6 , "Do not let [the hair of] your heads grow long," is not sufficient, because that could be interpreted as merely granting license for Aaron's sons to conduct themselves in this manner. Other mourners must rend their garments and let their hair grow and they were not required to. The verse from Ezekiel teaches that the charge applies at all times and is not specific to that situation (Kessef Mishneh; Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit.). Just as [priests who serve] intoxicated from wine are liable to die, so too, those who allow their hair to grow long are liable to die.
[Priests who] let their hair grow long do not disqualify their service. Even though they are obligated to die, their service is valid.30I.e., the equation of their service to that of intoxicated priests is not complete.The Rambam's view is not accepted by all authorities. There are some who maintain that such a priest's service is also disqualified. See the Ramban's gloss to Sefer HaMitzvot.
Just as the priests are not warned against drinking wine except at the time they enter the Temple, so too, they are forbidden to grow their hair long only at the time they enter the Temple.31The Ra'avad differs, and from the verse in Ezekiel cited above understands that all priests are prohibited against growing their hair long and must take haircuts once in 30 days. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's position. See the following halachah and notes.To whom does the above apply? To an ordinary priest. A High Priest, by contrast, is forbidden to let his hair grow long and rend his garments forever,32See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 5:6 where the Rambam explains the restrictions incumbent on the High Priest in greater detail. As he states there, these prohibitions apply to a High Priest even outside of the Temple and even when he is not in mourning. for he should be in the Temple at all times.33See ibid. 5:7. Therefore with regard to him, [Leviticus 21:10] states: "He should not let [the hair of] his head grow long, nor should he rend his garments."
What is meant by growing one's hair long? [Leaving it uncut for] 30 days like a Nazirite, concerning whom [Numbers 6:5] states: "He shall let the mane of the hair of his head grow long" and a nazirite vow is not less than 30 days.34Hilchot Nizirut 3:2. Thus we can assume that growing one's hair long encompasses a 30 day period. Therefore an ordinary priest who serves [in the Temple] must cut his hair every 30 days.35Implied is that if a priest does not desire to serve, he is not required to cut his hair (Kessef Mishneh).
The priests of the watch [serving in the Temple that week] are forbidden to cut their hair and launder their garments during that week,36This does not refer to the priestly garments, for the priestly garments are not washed (Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 8:5). Instead, the intent is the priest's personal garments. As a mark of respect, he should ascend to the Temple in freshly laundered clothes (Yeri'ot Shlomo). so that they will not enter the Temple when they are unkempt.37Note a parallel decree in Hilchot Shivitat Yom Tov 7:19. See also Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 6:11. Instead, they should cut their hair, wash, and do their laundry before coming [to the Temple].
When a priest's watch is concluded in the midst of a festival, he is permitted to cut his hair in the midst of the festival.38Although doing so is usually forbidden, as stated in Hilchot Shivitat Yom Tov, loc. cit. Here leniency was granted, because he is considered to have been held back from cutting his hair before the festival by forces beyond his If, however, his watch concludes on the day preceding a festival, he should cut his hair only on that day.39And not during the festival.
The laws [applying to a priest who enters the Temple with] torn garments are the same as those [applying to one with] long hair, as [Leviticus 10:6] states: "Do not let [the hair on] your heads grow long or rend your garments lest you die."40Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 164) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 150) includes this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. In this instance as well, the Ramban objects to the inclusion of this charge as one of the 613 mitzvot. Thus if [a priest] served with torn garments, he is liable for death at the hand of Heaven although his service is valid and was not profaned.41This ruling appears in direct contradiction to Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 8:4 where the Rambam writes: "If [the priestly garments] were muddy, torn, longer than his appropriate measure... and a priest performed service while wearing them, his service is invalid." Among the resolutions offered is that in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash, the Rambam is speaking about clothes that remain torn (therefore, even after the fact, the service is invalid), while here he was speaking about torn garments that were mended. As the Radbaz explains, here the Rambam is speaking about a tear like the tear made when one rends his garments in mourning (which can be mended) as indicated in the following halachah, and there, he is speaking about a garment that was torn in many places.
It appears to me42This expression indicates a conclusion which the Rambam reached through the process of deduction and not derived from any specific source. that any priest who is fit to serve who enters the area of the altar or [proceeds] beyond there43The Ra'avad agrees that this law applies to a priest that ascends the altar in these unkept states, but differs with regard to a priest who proceeds further and ascend the steps of the Temple. He maintains that entering that area in these unkept states is forbidden only according to Rabbinic Law. The Kessef Mishneh offers an explanation that justifies the Rambam's ruling. while intoxicated due to wine, drunk due to other alcoholic beverages, with long hair, or with torn garments as one tears because of a person's death, he is liable for lashes, even if he did not perform service. [The rationale is that] he is fit for service and entered [the Temple] at the time of service in such an unkept manner although he was warned not to enter.
The laws that apply to someone who enters beyond the altar and the laws that apply to ones who depart from there are the same. What is implied? One drank44I.e., as a conscious transgression. a revi'it of wine between the Ulam and the altar or tore his garments there and departed, he is liable for lashes.45The Ra'avad offers a different interpretation of the Rambam's source, the Sifra to Parshat Shemini. The Kessef Mishneh and others offer support for the Rambam's interpretation. Similarly, if he performed service as he departed, he is liable for death.
Similarly, it is forbidden for any person, whether a priest or an Israelite, to enter the entire Temple area, from the Courtyard of the Israelites and onward46As explained in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, ch. 7, the other areas of the Temple Mount have a lesser degree of holiness. when he is intoxicated from wine, drunk [from other beverages], with unkept long hair or with torn garments. Although there is no explicit warning [against this in the Torah], it is not a sign of honor or reverence47See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, loc. cit., which speaks of the command to fear the Temple. to the great and holy house to enter it unkept. If, however, an Israelite48Or a Levite as will be explained. lets his hair grow until it is formed into a weave and it was not unkept, he is permitted to enter the Courtyard of the Israelites.49Rambam LeAm gives the example of the prophet Samuel who was a Nazirite and hence, allowed his hair to grow long. Nevertheless, he combed it until it was attractive and hence, he was allowed to remain in the Sanctuary of Shiloh.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The High Priest enters the Holy of Holies each year only on Yom Kippur.1As explained in Halachah 3. An ordinary priest may enter the Sanctuary for service every day.2I.e., to offer incense, kindle the menorah, or to bow.
The priests were all3According to its simple meaning, the prooftext cited below refers only to Aaron. Nevertheless, through the Biblical exegesis, the Sifra interprets it as referring to all priests (Kessef Mishneh). warned not to enter the Sanctuary or the Holy of Holies when they are not in the midst of the service,4Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 68) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 184) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam explains that this mitzvah is an expression of honor and reverence toward the Temple. as [Leviticus 16:2] states: "He shall not come to the Holy Chamber at all time" - this refers to the Holy of Holies. "...Within the curtain" - this warns [the priests against unwarranted entry] into the entire Temple.5The Kessef Mishneh questions the Rambam's interpretation of the verse, for seemingly, "within the curtain" refers to the Holy of Holies. On the surface, the opposite would be more appropriate: "The Holy Chamber" could be interpreted as referring to the entire Temple and "within the curtain" to the Holy of Holies. He explains the verse as follows: Were the verse to have mentioned "the Holy Chamber" alone, we would have thought that it refers only to the Holy of Holies and not to the Temple at large. Since, however, the verse adds "within the curtain," we understand that it refers to the Holy of Holies" and "the Holy Chamber" refers to the entire Sanctuary.There is, however, a difference in the punishments for which one is liable for the violation of the two aspects of this commandment, as the Rambam states in Halachah 4.
A priest - whether an ordinary priest or a High Priest - who enters the Holy of Holies on any of the other days of the year, or a High Priest who enters there on Yom Kippur outside the time of service, he is liable for death at the hand of heaven, as [ibid.] states: "And he shall not die."How many times does he enter on Yom Kippur? Four, as will be explained in the appropriate place.6Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim, ch. 4. If he enters a fifth time, he is liable for death at the hand of heaven.
One - whether an ordinary priest or a High priest - who enters the Sacred Chamber outside the Holy of Holies, not for the sake of service, nor prostrating oneself,7With regard to the priests' prostrating themselves, see Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 5:11. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the priests were not allowed to enter the Sanctuary to prostrate themselves at all times. Instead, they would enter only at a specific time, when the service of the morning was completed. is liable for lashes, but is not liable for death. [This is derived from the above verse which states:] "Before the covering [that is upon the Ark] so that he will not die." [Implied is that] for [unauthorized entry into] the Holy of Holies, he is liable for death, but [entering] the remainder of the Sanctuary is merely the violation of a negative commandment and is punishable by lashes.
A priest - whether an ordinary priest or a High priest - who departs from the Temple is liable for death8Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 165) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 151) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. [at the hand of heaven] only in the midst of his service,9If, however, he is not involved in the Temple service, he is not required to remain in the Temple. as [ibid 10:7] states: "From the entrance to the Tent of Meeting, you shall not depart, lest you die." Implied is that you should not abandon the service and leave hastily and in panic because of this decree.10The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam, maintaining that the prooftext the Rambam cites was directed to Aaron's sons and applied only at the time of the death of Nadav and Avihu at the dedication of the Sanctuary. In other instances, there is no prohibition for an ordinary priest to leave the Temple. The prohibition applies to the High Priest alone. The Kessef Mishneh refers to the Sifra which - as interpreted by the Ramban - serves as support for the Rambam's ruling. Similarly, the charge [issued to] the High Priest [ibid. 21:12]: "He shall not depart from the Temple," applies only in the midst of his service, i.e., that he should not abandon his service and depart.
If so, why was this warning repeated for the High Priest? [Because there is a difference between the laws that apply to him and those which apply to an ordinary priest]. When an ordinary priest was in the midst of his service in the Temple and he heard that a person for whom he is obligated to mourn has died, he should not perform sacrificial service, even though he does not leave the Temple,11The Ra'avad amplifies his difference of opinion with the Rambam, maintaining that the ordinary priest should certainly leave the Temple to participate in the funeral of a close relative. Indeed, he is forced to become impure to take part in the burial. Indeed, since he cannot complete the service, what value is there in him remaining?The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that were he to depart from the Temple, it would be demeaning to the service that he had performed. The implication would be that it was not of serious importance to him. Also, there is a practical dimension; if he would depart, there might not be anyone to see that the service is in fact completed. because he is in an acute state of mourning.12See Halachah 9 for a definition of this term. See also Hilchot Evel 4:6, 9, for particulars with regard to the state of aninut, acute mourning. if he performed service while in an acute state of mourning, he profanes his service, whether he is offering an individual sacrifice or a communal offering. A High Priest, by contrast, performs sacrificial service while he is in a state of acute mourning, as [implied by ibid.]: "From the Temple, he should not depart and not profane." Implied is that he should remain [in the Temple] and perform the service with which he was involved and it does not become profaned.
What is the source that teaches that the service of one in an acute state of mourning is invalid? [It is derived from] an inference from a less severe situation to a more severe one.13The Rambam's statements are taken from Zevachim 17b. The Talmud there offers another derivation. Significantly, in his Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit., the Rambam uses that derivation and not the one mentioned here. A priest disqualified because of a physical deformity may partake of sacrificial foods.14See Chapter 6, Halachah 12. Nevertheless, if he performs service, he profanes it.15See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:17. How much more so should one who is in acute mourning and thus forbidden to partake of sacrificial foods16See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 3:7. - as [Deuteronomy 26:14] states: "I did not eat from it in a state of acute morning" - profane his service [if he performs it].
Although a High Priest may perform service while he is in a state of acute mourning, he is forbidden to partake of sacrificial food, as [Leviticus 10:19] states: "If I had partaken of the sin-offering today, would it have found favor in God's eyes."17Aaron asked this rhetorical question to Moses after serving in the Sanctuary, but not partaking of the offerings, on the day his sons died. Similarly, he does not participate in the division of the sacrificial foods so that he could partake of the food in the evening.When a person in an acute state of mourning performs sacrificial service, he is not liable for lashes. He is permitted to touch sacrificial foods even though he did not immerse himself [in a mikveh], for this safeguard was enforced only with regard to eating. With regard to touching [objects], he is considered as pure, as will be explained in the appropriate place.18As explained in Hilchot Shaar Avot HaTuma'ah 12:15, since a person who was in a state of acute mourning was forbidden to partake of holy objects, it is possible that he diverted his attention from his hands and touched a source of impurity unknowingly. Nevertheless, this is only a safeguard and applies only with regard to partaking of food and not to touching it.[It must be emphasized that there is a difference in the versions of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 12:1). Some versions of the text follow the ruling here, but others state that it is forbidden for a person to touch sacred food.]
What is meant by a person in an acute state of mourning? One who lost one of the relatives19A person's mother, father, son, daughter, brother, and sister. One must mourn for his or her spouse according to Rabbinic Law (Hilchot Evel 2:1). for whom he is required to mourn. On the day of the person's death, he is considered in acute mourning according to Scriptural Law. And at night, he is in acute mourning according to Rabbinic Law.
When [it was necessary] to wait several days and [only] afterwards, a corpse was buried, for all those days after the day of the deceased's passing, [his relative] is considered in an acute state of mourning according to Rabbinic Law. This also [applies] with regard to the day of burial, but not the following night.Therefore if [a close relative of a priest] dies and he buries him after the day of his death, throughout the day of the burial, he may not offer or partake of sacrifices according to Rabbinic Law. He should then immerse himself and partake of sacrifices at night. The day on which a person hears a report that a relative of his died within 30 days20I.e., the person died beforehand and the priest heard the report within 30 days of his death. In that instance, he is required to observe a full week of shivah mourning (Hilchot Evel 7:1). and the day on which he gathers his bones21I.e., unearths his grave for the sake of reburying him in another place. is considered as the day of one's burial, but [the restrictions] do not apply at night. On the day of [a close relative's] death, by contrast, just as it is forbidden to partake of sacrificial foods during the day according to Scriptural Law, so too, it is forbidden for him to partake of them that night according to Rabbinic Law. [The only] exception is the Paschal sacrifice which he may eat at night, as will be explained in the appropriate place.22Hilchot Korban Pesach 6:9. There it is explained that our Sages did not wish to enforce their decree in a situation that would lead to the violation of a transgression punishable by karet.
Throughout the seven days of mourning, a mourner should not send sacrifices [to be offered in the Temple].23See Mo'ed Kattan 15b which states that this is derived from the term shelamim ("peace-offerings"). That name implies that these offerings may only be brought when a person is at peace with himself. [Indeed, he should not send] even wine, wood, or frankincense. Similarly, a person afflicted with tzara'at24A physical ailment similar to leprosy which causes one to become ritually impure. should not send his sacrifices [to be offered in the Temple]. For as long as he is not fit to enter the camp [of the Levites],25I.e., the Temple Mount; see Chapter 3, Halachah 2, which explains these concepts. he is not fit for his sacrifices to be offered. There is an unresolved question whether a person under a ban of ostracism26See Hilchot Talmud Torah, ch. 7, for a definition of this term. may send his sacrifices [to be offered] or not.27Mo'ed Kattan 15b explains this question as follows: During the 40 years between the sin of the spies and the entry of the Jews into Eretz Yisrael, they were considered as if they were under a ban of ostracism from God. Nevertheless, their sacrifices were offered. Hence one might conclude that even though a person is under a ban of ostracism, his sacrifices may be offered. That conclusion is not accepted unquestionably, however, because it is possible to make a distinction between one who is ostracized by God (as the Jews were in the desert) and one ostracized by man. It is possible that the latter situation is more severe. Hence, if they were offered on his behalf, [his obligation] is satisfied.
A person who is impure because of contact with a dead lizard or the like and an uncircumcised person may send their sacrifices28They may not, however, enter the Temple themselves to take part in the offering.The Kessef Mishneh raises a question for it is necessary to perform semichah (leaning on the sacrificial animal with all one's strength; see Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot, ch. 3) on sacrifices. Since these individuals may not enter the Temple Courtyard, because of their impurity, they cannot perform semichah. Hence, seemingly, the sacrifices should not be offered. The Kessef Mishneh states that perhaps the Rambam is speaking only of certain sacrifices where semichah is not required. and they are offered with the exception of the Paschal sacrifice. That sacrifice may not be offered for a person who is impure because of contact with a dead lizard.29Unless he has already immersed himself. See Hilchot Korban Pesach 6:1. Nor may a Paschal sacrifice be offered for an uncircumcised person, as will be explained.30For as explained in Hilchot Korban Pesach 2:3, 5-6, the Paschal sacrifice should be sacrificed only on behalf of individuals who are fit to partake of it and a person who is ritually impure and an uncircumcised person are forbidden to do so. No sacrifices at all are offered for a person who is impure because of contact with a corpse until he becomes ritually pure.31I.e., he must have the ashes of the red heifer sprinkled upon him, and he must immerse in the mikveh.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
It is a positive commandment to send all impure persons away from the Temple,1Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 31) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 362) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Numbers 5:2] states: "And they shall send away from the camp all those with tzara'at and zav2A physical affliction somewhat similar to gonorrhea that renders one ritually impure. [afflictions] and all those who are impure because of contact with a corpse.
"The camp" cited refers to "the camp of the Divine presence," i.e., from the entrance to the Courtyard of the Israelites onward.3See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:11 which states:The [encampment of the Jewish people] in the desert [was divided into] three areas:the camp of Israel... the camp of the Levites about which [Numbers 1:50] states: "They shall camp around the Sanctuary;", and the camp of the Shechinah [which included the area] beginning at the entrance to the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting inwards.Correspondingly, for [future] generations: [The area] from the entrance to Jerusalem to the Temple Mount is comparable to the camp of Israel. [The area] from the entrance to the Temple Mount until the entrance to the Temple Courtyard, the gate of Nicanor, is comparable to the camp of the Levites. And [the area] from the entrance to the Temple Courtyard inward, is comparable to the camp of the Shechinah.See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Keilim 1:8). Should one infer that a person with tzaraat or zav ailments and one impure due to contact with a corpse are all three sent to the same place? With regard to one inflicted with tzara'at, [Leviticus 13:46] states: "He shall abide alone outside the camp where he dwells." [The camp from which he is sent] refers to the camp of the Israelites which parallels the area from the entrance to Jerusalem and beyond.4The verse implies that he must abide in a place where others do not dwell. [From this we conclude,]5The Sifra understands this to be an example of the principle of Biblical exegesis: A subject (a person impure because of tzara'at) was included in a general category (impure people) and then was singled out to teach us a new law (that he must dwell separate from all others). This does not only teach us about this instance, but about the entire category (that there are distinctions in the extent people with impurity must distance themselves). just like a person who is afflicted with tzara'at, because his impurity is more severe, is sent away in a more severe manner than others,6For in no other instance is an impure person required to depart from the camp of the Israelites. See also Halachah 8. so too, any individuals whose state of impurity is more severe than others should be sent out in a more severe manner.7Thus as the Rambam proceeds to explain in the following halachot, there are differences in the extent people with various types of impurities are forced to distance themselves.Therefore a person afflicted with tzara'at is sent outside of all three camps, i.e., outside of Jerusalem. [His impurity is considered more severe,] because he causes [a house] to be considered impure when he enters it.8Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 10:12. This does not apply with regard to a zav.
Men with a zav condition,9A physical affliction somewhat similar to gonorrhea that renders one ritually impure. women with a zavah condition,10I.e., they experience vaginal bleeding at times other than their ordinary monthly cycle. This causes them to be considered ritually impure. niddot,11Women who are impure because of menstrual bleeding. and women who gave birth12This - or a miscarriage - renders a woman as ritually impure. are sent outside two camps, i.e., outside the Temple Mount.13Since there is an added dimension to the severity of their impurity, they must distance themselves in a more severe manner. [The rationale for this severity is that] they cause an entity upon which they are seated or upon which they are lying to become ritually impure,14See Hilchot Metamei Mishkav UMoshav 1:1. even if it is under a stone.15See ibid. 6:5, 7:1, which explains that even if there is a stone - which itself never contracts ritual impurity - intervening between the person's body and the entity, the entity becomes impure. [This does not apply] with regard to impurity [contracted] from a corpse.16See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 5:14.
A person who is impure because of contact with a human corpse - and even a corpse itself - is permitted to enter the Temple Mount. [This is derived from Exodus 13:19]: "And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him."17Joseph had asked the Jewish people to bring his body from Egypt to be buried in Eretz Yisrael. Moses brought his body with him from Egypt, transporting it on the entire journey through the desert. "With him" [implies] into the camp of the Levites.18For that is where Moses had his personal dwelling.
From the chayl,19The rampart surrounding the walls of the courtyard (see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:3). gentiles, those who contracted impurity from a human corpse, and those who had relations with a niddah20For through that act, the man also becomes ritually impure. are sent away.21This is a Rabbinic restriction. According to Scriptural Law, these places are not on a different rung of holiness than the other portions of the Temple Mount. This and the restrictions mentioned in the next two halachot are also found in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:16-18. A person who immersed that day may enter there, for he has already immersed.22When a person must immerse himself to ascend from ritual impurity, according to Scriptural Law, he does not achieve that status until nightfall. Nevertheless, since he has already immersed, our Sages relaxed this and several other of the prohibitions that they had placed upon such individuals.
From the Women's Courtyard,23A square courtyard outside the Temple Courtyard, as described in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:7-9. one who immersed himself that day is sent away,24For he is still impure, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 4. but not one who has not completed the purification process.25This term refers to a zav,, a zavah, a woman who gave birth or miscarried, or a convert, who even after immersing themselves in the mikveh, must bring a sacrifice before their purification process is complete. See Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 1:1. For [the day on which] a person who has not completed the purification process [immersed himself] has already passed.26The Sifri brings proof that one who has not yet completed the purification process is in a different category than a person who has immersed himself from the fact that the former is permitted to partake of terumah, while the latter is not. The prohibition against a person who has immersed himself entering [this portion of] the camp of the Levites is Rabbinic in origin.27Zevachim 32b relates that this restriction was imposed by Yehoshefat, King of Judah.
From the Courtyard of the Israelites28The first eleven cubits of the Temple Courtyard (see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:11). This area begins "the camp of the Shechinah" into which all of those who are impure may not enter according to Scriptural Law. and onward even one who has not completed his process of purification should not enter, because his process of purification is not yet consummated. [This is evident from Leviticus 12:8 which, with regard to a woman who seeks purification after childbirth,]29And from this example, we extrapolate with regard to others in that category. states: "And the priest will bring atonement for her and she will become pure." One can infer that until then, she was not pure.30Even though she had already immersed herself. Hence, she and others in the same category may not enter an area which is reserved for those who are ritually pure. This is a Scriptural restriction.
An impure person who [must be] sent away from the Temple Mount, violates a negative commandment31Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 78) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 565) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. Its violation is punishable by lashes. if he enters there, as [can be inferred from Deuteronomy 23:11 which] states: "And he shall go outside the camp" - this refers to the camp of the Shechinah - "and he shall not enter the midst of the camp" - this refers to the camp of the Levites.32Which, as mentioned above, parallels the camp of the Levites.The Kessef Mishneh notes that the Rambam's interpretation of the verse reverses the order found in Pesachim 68a and the Sifri. He suggests that perhaps the Rambam had a different version of that text. Similarly, a person afflicted by tzara'at who enters Jerusalem is liable for lashes.33Significantly, in Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:4 where the Rambam lists those who are punished by lashes, he does not mention this instance. If, however, he enters any of the other walled cities34See Hilchot Megilah 1:4 and Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel 12:15 which explain that this term applies only to a city surrounded by a wall at the time when Joshua conquered the land. Even if the wall of such a city is destroyed, the city is still placed in that category. Moreover, if a city was not walled at the time of Joshua's conquest, even if it was walled afterwards, it is not placed in this category. [in Eretz Yisrael], although he is not allowed to,35See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:13; Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 10:7. Based on Tosafot (Berachot 5b), Rabbi Akiva Eiger states that these restrictions apply only during the era when the Jubilee year was observed. as [implied by the verse]: "He shall abide alone," he is not liable for lashes.
If one afflicted with tzara'at entered the Temple Mount, he is liable for 80 lashes.36I.e., he violated two negative commandments: he entered Jerusalem and he entered the Temple Mount. Therefore he is liable for two sets of lashes. Significantly, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Keilim 1:8, based on the Tosefta to Keilim), the Rambam states these concepts slightly differently.The Kessef Mishneh adds that if the person afflicted with tzara'at enters the Temple Courtyard, he is liable for an addition set of lashes. If, however, one who is impure because of contact with a human corpse or one who immersed himself that day entered the Women's Courtyard,37As mentioned in Halachot 5-6, this constitutes the violation of a Rabbinical commandment. The Kessef Mishneh adds that if the person enters the Temple Courtyard, he is liable for 120 lashes. or one who has not completed his process of purification entered the Israelites' Courtyard,38And thus violates a positive commandment, as indicated by Halachah 1. he is not given lashes.39For he does not violate a Scriptural prohibition.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that since the person is impure, his entry into the Temple Courtyard violates a Scriptural prohibition and is punishable by karet. The Kessef Mishneh cites a passage from Zevachim 17b which appears to support the Ra'avad's objection. To resolve the Rambam's ruling, the Kessef Mishneh, however, quotes Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:14, where the Rambam distinguishes between an impure person who has immersed and one who has not done so as of yet. He also quotes other opinions in support of the distinction the Rambam makes. He is, however, given stripes for rebellious conduct.40A punishment instituted by the Rabbis for the violation of their decrees or positive commandments.
Just as there is a positive commandment to send impure persons out from the Temple, so too, if they enter, they violate a negative commandment,41Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 77) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 363) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Numbers 5:3] states: "They shall not make your camp impure." This refers to the camp of the Shechinah.42I.e., the area encompassed by the Temple Courtyard.
What source teaches that one does not violate the prohibition unless he enters [the Temple], but that he is exempt43I.e., the act is forbidden, but one is not liable for lashes or a sin-offering for its violation. if he touches the Temple Courtyard from the outside? [Leviticus 12:4] states with regard to a woman who gives birth: "She shall not enter the Sanctuary."44Implying that entry into the Temple area is what is forbidden.
When an impure person willfully enters the Temple, he is punishable by karet,45Literally, the soul's being cut off. This involves premature death in this world (before the age of 50, Mo'ed Kattan 28a) and the soul not meriting a portion in the world to come (Hilchot Teshuvah 8:1). as [Leviticus 17:16] states: "If he will not clean [his garments] or wash his flesh, he will bear his iniquity."46Har HaMoriah explains that the Rambam quotes this verse rather than Numbers 19:13-20 which is more explicit, because the latter passage speaks only about one who became impure due to contact with a human corpse and the prohibition applies even when one became impure for other reasons. [If he enters] unknowingly, he is liable for an adjustable guilt offering,47See Hilchot Shegagot 1:3 and ch. 10, which explains that there are certain transgressions for which the atonement offering required varies according to the transgressor's financial capacity. as [ibid. 5:2] states: "Or a soul that will touch any impure entity." One is liable for karet or a sacrifice only when one enters from the Israelites' Courtyard or onward or into an addition to the Courtyard that was sanctified in a consummate manner, as we explained.48See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:10-14 which describes the manner in which additions are made to the Temple Courtyard.
What are the types of impurity for which one is liable [for entering] the Temple [while impure]?a) Anyone who became impure through contact with a human corpse in a manner which would require a nazirite to shave [his head] because of them; these are explained in [Hilchot] Nizirut;49See Hilchot Nizirut 7:1-6 which describes this subject in detail. As stated in Hilchot Tumat Meit 3:3: "All ritual impurity resulting from a corpse for which a nazirite is not required to shave does not stem from Scriptural Law." Implied is that since a nazirite is forbidden to cut his hair according to Scriptural Law, when he contracts ritual impurity stemming from a human corpse that is only Rabbinic in origin, he should not cut his hair, because then the Rabbinic safeguard would lead to the violation of Scriptural Law. Note also the commentary to Hilchot Nizirut which explains that the Rambam is referring to ritual impurity that is not explicitly mentioned in the Torah, but could be considered of Scriptural origin, because it was derived through the laws of Biblical exegesis.b) one who touched a person or a utensil that became impure through those types of impurity for which a nazirite must shave [his head]; for such a person is considered as a second level of impurity to a primary object of impurity that touched a corpse;50A person or an object that touches a human corpse becomes a source of impurity that can cause other people or objects to become ritually impure (see Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 5:4-5).The Ra'avad states however that a nazirite is not obligated to shave his head if he touched a utensil or a person that became impure due to contact with a corpse. Hence, he concludes, one should not be liable for entering the Temple after having contracted impurity in this manner. The Kessef Mishneh maintains that the simple meaning of the passage in Nazir 54a appears to support the Ra'avad's understanding. Nevertheless, he cites a passage from the Jerusalem Talmud (Nazir 7:4) which could be interpreted as supporting the Rambam's ruling.c) one who became impure through contact with another primary source of impurity as mandated by Scriptural Law,51There are entities that are considered sources of impurity according to Rabbinic Law. They do not make a person impure to the extent that he is liable for entering the Temple. as will be explained in their appropriate places.52See Sefer Taharah.
The general principle is: Anyone who is required to immerse himself in water53I.e., in a mikveh. according to Scriptural Law is liable for karet for entering the Temple [while impure] even after he immersed himself until nightfall [that day].54For as stated in Halachah 6, one who has immersed himself to emerge from ritual impurity is still impure until nightfall of that day. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that such a person is not liable for karet. The Radbaz cites the Rambam's ruling in Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:14 which would seem to support the Ra'avad's ruling. It states that a person who was ritually impure, then immersed himself, and then partook of sacrificial foods before nightfall is liable for lashes, but is not liable for karet. Nevertheless, the Radbaz explains that a distinction can be made between these two situations. If, however, one became impure due to impurity stemming from a human corpse that does not require a nazirite to shave [his head], he is exempt for entering the Temple, even though his impurity lasts for seven days.55Although he is required to observe the strictures of someone who is ritually impure, he is not liable for entering the Temple.
Similarly, if one touches utensils that touched a human corpse or touches a person who is touching utensils that touch a corpse, even though he is considered as impure to the first degree with regard to terumah56In Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 5:4, the Rambam describes the impurity caused by such situations. and with regard to imparting impurity to sacrificial foods, he is exempt for entering the Temple. For these matters are laws received through the Oral Tradition.57In ibid.:5, the Rambam continues: "Even though according to the Oral Tradition [one is rendered impure for such matters], this is not Scriptural Law. For it is not explicitly stated in the Torah that one who becomes impure through contact with a human corpse becomes a source of impurity and one who touches him becomes impure to the first degree." In this instance, however, the Rambam is probably following his renown approach that any concept that is not explicitly stated in the Torah is considered as "from the Oral Tradition" even though it was also conveyed to Moses at Sinai. Although he is exempt, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.58For the Rabbis instituted decrees to insure that the prohibitions established by the Oral Tradition were observed.
A person who brings a dead teeming animal59This is speaking about a situation where he brought the dead teeming animal into the Temple without touching it, since, as stated in Hilchot Shaar Avot HaTuma'ah 4:1, a dead teeming animal imparts ritual impurity only when one touches it and not when one carries it. For if the person had touched it, he would become impure and be liable for karet entering the Temple in that state. or the like60I.e., another source of impurity that imparts impurity through touch, but not when carried. into the Temple or when he brings an impure person into the Temple, he is liable for karet, because he made God's sanctuary impure. If, however, he threw impure utensils into the Temple - even if they were utensils that touched a corpse61And thus serve as a source of impurity. - he is exempt from karet, but liable for lashes, as [implied by the prooftext cited above]: "If he will not clean [his garments]...."62The verse concludes: "He will bear his iniquity." "Clean[ing] his garments" refers to immersing them to remove their impurity. According to the Oral Tradition, [for entering the Temple without] washing his body, he is liable for karet. [For entering without] cleaning his garments, he receives 40 lashes.
It appears to me63This expression implies that there is no Talmudic source for this ruling, but instead, it was derived by deduction. that he is liable for lashes only for his clothes that are a source of ritual impurity, i.e., clothes that were touched by a person who became impure through contact with a corpse that themselves become a source for ritual impurity, as will be explained.64Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 5:2. There the Rambam states that if a person touching the corpse touches any other utensil at the same time, that utensil is considered as if it touched the corpse itself. If, by contrast, one brings a garment which is of first degree impurity65I.e., the person touched the garments after he let go of the corpse. into the Temple, he is not liable for lashes.66Since the object brought into the Temple is not a source for ritual impurity, the person is not liable for karet. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that even bringing an object that is not a source for ritual impurity into the Temple causes one to be liable for lashes. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's view, explaining that there is a logical basis for his conclusion. Since the Torah was lenient with regard to utensils (and garments), absolving one from karet even when the utensil was a source of impurity, we can conclude that leniency would also be shown with regard to lashes. He does, however, receive stripes for rebellious conduct.
Similarly, when an impure person inserts his hand [alone] into the Temple,67I.e., he stands outside the Temple Courtyard and inserts only his hand. He is not given lashes, because his entire body has not entered the Temple Courtyard. Even the Rambam would agree that he is forbidden by Rabbinic decree to insert his hand. The Ra'avad is more stringent and rules that inserting part of one's body is equivalent to entering entirely. The Kessef Mishneh supports the Rambam's ruling. he is given stripes for rebellious conduct. Similarly, anyone who purposely enters the Temple before immersing himself68The Rambam's words imply that once he immersed himself, he is not liable for stripes for rebellious conduct for entering the Temple even if night has not yet fallen. Since his impurity is only Rabbinic in origin and he has immersed himself, he is not given punishment. See Hilchot Shaar Avot HaTuma'ah 9:1. while he is impure because of contact with objects that are sources of ritual impurity by virtue of Rabbinic decree, because he ate impure foods, or because he drank impure beverages is given stripes for rebellious conduct.
When an impure person enters the Temple through the rooftops, he is exempt.69Such entry is, nevertheless, forbidden (Kessef Mishneh). [This is derived from the prooftext cited above:] "He shall not enter the Temple." [Implied is that] the Torah held him liable [only when he entered in] the way one usually enters.70I.e., on foot through the gate. The Mishneh LiMelech emphasizes that if he remains in the Temple for the amount of time for which he is liable (see Halachah 22), he is liable for karet even if he entered through the rooftops. Although he is exempt for karet, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.[This exemption applies] even if he enters in a compartment flying in the air,71For this also is not the usual way of entry. whether he entered the Temple in this compartment through the roofs or through the entrances.
In all places where one is liable for karet72I.e., in the Temple Courtyard. for a willful transgression or a sacrifice for an unknowing transgression, should an impure object be found there on the Sabbath, it should be removed.73An object for which one has no purpose is muktzeh and there is a Rabbinic prohibition against transporting it on the Sabbath. Nevertheless, Rabbinic prohibitions of this nature are not applied in the Temple (Rashi, Eruvin 104b). In other places,74I.e., in the chambers that are considered as being separate entities from the Temple Courtyard. it should be covered with a utensil until after the Sabbath.75So that it will not be touched. When it is removed, it should be removed only with flat wooden utensils which do not contract ritual impurity,76See Hilchot Keilim 1:10. See also Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:6. so that there should not be an increase in ritual impurity.77I.e., if a priest would carry it out in his garment, he would be causing his garment to become impure. Hence, it was desirable to use a flat wooden utensil even if it takes time to find such a utensil (Eruvin, loc. cit.).
Both an impure person who entered the Temple when it was pure78As stated in Halachah 12. and a pure person who entered the Temple when there was impurity within it - e.g., a corpse was lying under a shelter in the Temple and he entered under that shelter - are liable for karet. [In the latter situation,] his entrance and his impurity occur at one time.If one enters the Temple and becomes impure there after he enters, even if he purposely made himself impure,79There is an unresolved question concerning whether such a person is liable in Sh'vuot 17a. Hence, the Rambam rules leniently (Kessef Mishneh). he should hurry, and depart in the shortest way possible.80If he departs in this manner, he is not liable for karet.
It is forbidden for him to tarry, to bow, or to depart via a longer way. If he tarried or departed via a longer way even though he did not tarry, or he turned his face to the Sanctuary and bowed even if he did not tarry, he is liable for karet. If he acted unknowingly, he must bring a sacrifice.81An adjustable guilt offering.
If he did not turn his face [toward the Sanctuary], but bowed as he was departing toward the outside area, he is not liable unless he tarrys.How long a delay [creates a liability]? Enough time to read the verse:82The Rambam is citing Sh'vuot 16b which quotes the description of the people's bowing in II Chronicles 7:3. "And they bowed with their faces to the ground on the floor, prostrating themselves and giving thanks to God who is good and whose kindness is everlasting." This is the measure of the delay [for which one is liable].
What is meant by [departing] via longer way? Any way for which it is possible to depart from the Temple via a shorter way.If one departed via a shorter way, even if he did not run, but instead walked [slowly], positioning his heel by his toes,83I.e., taking very short steps. As long as he does not stop for the amount of time mentioned in the previous halachah, he is not liable. although it takes the entire day, he is exempt. If he took a longer path, even though he ran and pressed himself with all of his power and thus the amount of time it took for him to leave in this manner was less than it would take other men via the shorter way, he is liable, because he departed via the longer path.If he departed via the shorter path, but walked some, then stood, tarried some, [and continued this pattern] until all of his delays together amount to the time it takes to bow, he is not liable for lashes if he acted willfully, nor is he liable for a sacrifice if he acted unknowingly, because there is an unresolved question concerning the matter.84See Sh'vuot 17a. Hence we rule leniently. He is, however, given stripes for rebellious conduct.85See Hilchot Sanhedrin 16:3, 18:5, and notes for a definition of this punishment and the situations where it is applied.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
When an impure person serves in the Temple,1The Radbaz states that the words "in the Temple" are not an exclusion. Instead, in the era when offerings were brought on private altars, this law also applied to a priest bringing an offering on such an altar. he desecrates his service and is liable for death at the hand of heaven for [performing] this service even if he did not tarry there,2As stated in the conclusion of the last chapter, one is liable for karet for tarrying in the Temple Courtyard even if he does not perform service. Halachah 3 describes how it is possible to perform service without tarrying in the Temple Courtyard. as [indicated by Leviticus 22:2]: "so that they draw back for the sanctified objects of the children of Israel and not desecrate My holy name." This is a warning for a person who serves while ritually impure.3Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 75) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 278) include this charge as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.Further on,4In reference to terumah. [ibid.:9] states: "They will die because of it, because they desecrated it." Just as in the latter instance, desecration makes one liable for death at the hands of heaven, so too, with regard to [offering sacrifices while impure, desecration] makes one liable for death at the hand of heaven. Lashes are given for [the violation of] all negative commandments punishable by death at the hand of heaven.5See Hilchot Sanhedrin 18:1. If he receives lashes from an earthly court, he is absolved of the punishment from above.
Although one who serves in a state of impurity is liable only for lashes in court, his priestly brethren6In Hilchot Sanhedrin 18:6, the Rambam quotes the wording of Sanhedrin 81b: "The young priests would take him out...." would not bring him to the court. Instead, they would take him outside7The Radbaz relates that if the priests did not interrupt him in the middle of his service and seize him, but instead, allowed him to complete his service and leave the Temple on his own initiative, they are not allowed to administer this punishment to him. All they can do is bring him to the court. [the Temple]8I.e., beyond the Women's Courtyard and the surrounding rampart, because a corpse is not allowed in these areas according to Rabbinic Law. Alternatively, because it is only a Rabbinic stricture, it was not imposed in such an instance. and split open his brain. They would not be rebuked for this.9The Radbaz elaborates in explaining why this punishment can be given. He explains that although there is no legal license for it, there are instances (see Hilchot Sanhedrin 24:4), where he states that at times punishments are given with no legal basis. By serving in the Temple, the priests offer their tacit acquiescence to such action being taken.
How is it possible for a priest to perform service without tarrying so that he will be liable only for death at the hand of heaven and not karet? For example, he contracted impurity in the Temple Courtyard10For if he contracted impurity outside the Temple Courtyard, he is liable for karet as soon as he enters, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 12. and departed in the shortest way possible,11In which instance, he is not liable for karet, as explained at the conclusion of the previous chapter. but as he was leaving, he used a cylinder in his hand to turn over a limb [from a sacrifice] on the fire of the altar and thus hasten its consumption by the flames.12See Chapter 9, Halachah 4, for more particulars concerning this act. [The rationale is that] any contribution to the Temple service13And offering the limbs on the fire of the altar is part of the Temple service. is considered as equivalent to that service.
Similarly, if one who was impure immersed in the mikveh and then performed service before nightfall of that day,14As explained in the notes to the previous chapter, until nightfall he is still considered as impure.The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, noting that according to the Rambam, a person who entered the Temple on the day he immersed is liable for karet for the entry alone. Thus why is it necessary to speak of a second obligation for karet. He explains that it could be speaking about a person who was standing outside the Temple Courtyard and moved limbs on the Altar using a long pole. The Kessef Mishneh resolves the difficulty by distinguishing between karet and death at the hand of heaven, for karet is a more severe punishment. his service is invalid and he is liable for death at the hand of heaven, as [ibid 21:6] states: "They shall not desecrate the name of their God."15See Sanhedrin 83b for an explanation for how this prohibition is derived from this prooftext. Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 76) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 265) include this prohibition as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this is a warning to a person who [was impure, but] immersed himself that day who performs service [in the Temple], for he is still impure. [This is derived from ibid. 22:7]: "And the sun sets and he will become pure." Implied is that until then, he was not pure.16The Rambam adds this explanation to differentiate between a person who immersed in the mikveh, but must wait until sunset and one who has not completed his atonement process. The latter individuals are considered as pure, even though they may not enter the Temple. A person whose atonement process was not completed17I.e., a zav, zavah, or the like who must bring a sacrifice before becoming ritually pure. who performs service [in the Temple] is exempt [from punishment]18The Kessef Mishneh questions this ruling, noting that in Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:2, the Rambam mentions one who serves despite the fact that his atonement process is not completed as among those who are liable for death at the hand of heaven and whose offense is punishable by lashes. This is also evident from Chapter 9, Halachah 11. The Ra'avad also quotes Talmudic sources that indicate that such a person is liable. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the questions raised by the Ra'avad can be resolved, but the apparent contradiction in the Rambam's own rulings remains difficult. even though his service is invalid and it desecrates [the sacrifice].
What is the source that teaches that such service is impure? [With regard to a woman impure due to childbirth, Leviticus 12:8] states: "And the priest shall atone for her and she shall become pure." Implied is that until now, she was not pure. The same applies to all others whose atonement process is not complete.19I.e., a zav, zavah, and one afflicted with tzara'at.
[The following laws apply if] a priest performed service and afterwards, it became known that he was impure. If the source of impurity was known,20To even one person. all of the sacrifices that he offered are invalid, for his work is defiled. If, however, he became impure due to the impurity [likened to] the depths,21In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Pesachim 7:7), the Rambam explains that this term is used to refer to "a corpse that is hidden and not known about at all, to the extent that it is in the very depths." See also the gloss of Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura (Parah 3:2) which explains the term as follows: Just like mortal wisdom cannot fathom the extent of the depths, so, too, the existence of this corpse is not known to any mortal.Hilchot Nizirut 6:18 describes this impurity as stemming from contact with a human corpse, about which "no one, not even one at the end of the world, knows about." the forehead plate brings about appeasement and all the sacrifices he offered are accepted.22The Mishnah (Pesachim 80b) states this concept with regard to the Paschal sacrifice (see Hilchot Korban Pesach 4:2). The Rambam extrapolates that the law applies to all sacrifices. Even if he became aware of the fact that he was impure before the blood was sprinkled on the altar and then he sprinkled the blood, it brings about appeasement. For the forehead plate brings about appeasement for the impurity [likened to] the depths even though he [transgresses] intentionally.23The Kessef Mishneh notes that the Rambam's words imply that as an initial preference, such a priest should not sprinkle the blood. Only after the fact, it is acceptable. In Hilchot Korban Pesach 6:11, however, the Rambam rules that a person who becomes impure due to impurity [likened to] the depths may offer a sacrifice as an initial preference. The Kessef Mishneh explains that a distinction can be made between the two instances, because the Paschal sacrifice is an immediate obligation, while other sacrifices may be offered by other people at other times. Moreover, failure to offer the Paschal sacrifice is more severe, as indicated by the fact that it is punishable by karet. We have already explained the impurity [likened to] the depths in Hilchot Nizirut.
Similarly, the forehead plate brings atonement if the objects being sacrificed are impure,24I.e., the blood and the other portions of the sacrifices offered on the altar. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 1:34. as [Exodus 28:38] states: "And it shall be on the forehead of Aaron and Aaron will bear the sins of the sacred objects." It does not, however, bring about appeasement if the portions of the sacrifices that are eaten are impure or if the one [offering the sacrifice] is impure when he became impure because of a known source of impurity unless the impurity was superseded by a communal obligation,25I.e., communal sacrifices that are offered at a fixed time should be offered even if there is impurity involved, as explained in the following halachot. in which instance the forehead plate generates appeasement for it.
The forehead plate does not bring about appeasement unless it is on the High Priest's forehead,26There is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in Yoma 7b and the Rambam accepts the opinion of Rabbi Yehudah. The commentaries have noted that this could be understood as a contradiction to his ruling in Halachah 15. Nevertheless, there are other approaches to that passage which allow the two rulings to coexist. as [the above verse] continues: "It will be on his forehead at all times, for appeasement before God."
[The offering of] any sacrifice that does not have a set time does not supersede [the observance of] the Sabbath27I.e., offering a sacrifice involves the violation of certain Sabbath prohibitions. As the Rambam proceeds to state, sacrifices that must be brought at a set time may nevertheless be offered, but not those which do not have a set time. or [the laws of] ritual impurity. [The rationale is that] if it is not sacrificed today, it will be sacrificed tomorrow or afterwards. [The offering of] any sacrifice that does have a set time, whether it be a communal offering or an individual offering,28I.e., the chavitin offering of the High Priest, the bull he brings on Yom Kippur, or the Paschal sacrifices. supersedes [the observance of] the Sabbath and [the laws of] ritual impurity. It does not supersede all types of ritual impurity, however, only those stemming from contact with a human corpse.29For the fundamental concept was derived from the Biblical story (Numbers, ch. 9) concerning the people who approached Moses to offer the Paschal sacrifice and they were impure because of contact with a human corpse.
All30I.e., all of the communal sacrifices that are brought from the money collected for the communal sacrifices. There are certain atonement offerings, the bull offered when the people at large err with regard to a Scriptural prohibition, and the goat offered when they err with regard to the prohibition against idolatry. These, unlike the other communal sacrifices, are not offered at a specific time. of the communal sacrifices have a fixed time when they must be offered.31And if they are not offered at this time, they may not be offered afterwards (Kessef Mishneh). Hence [offering them] supersedes [the observance of] the Sabbath and [the laws of] ritual impurity stemming from contact with a human corpse.
All of the sacrifices that were brought in a state of ritual impurity are not eaten.32With the exception of the Paschal offering, as explained in Hilchot Korban Pesach 7:8. For the Pesach sacrifice was ordained primarily for the purpose of the people partaking of it (Pesachim 7:5). Instead, the elements of the sacrifice that are fit to be consumed by fire are offered on the fire [of the altar].33For the primary purpose of these sacrifices is for them to be offered on the altar. The remaining portions that would [ordinarily] be eaten34Pesachim 76a mentions five communal sacrifices that are ordinarily eaten: the omer offering of barley, the two breads offered on Shavuot, the showbread, the communal peace offerings, and the goat offered on Rosh Chodesh. are burnt in the same manner35Rabbi Akiva Eiger asks why a communal sacrifice would not be eaten if it was offered by an impure priest who did not touch it and did not cause it to become impure. He notes, however, that the Rambam's wording implies that such a sacrifice should not be eaten. as are other sacrifices that became impure.36See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim, ch. 19.
What is meant by saying it supersedes [the laws of] ritual impurity? If the time when that sacrifice is to be offered arrives and the majority37Half is not sufficient (Pesachim 79a). of the people offering it were impure due to contact with a human corpse,38This applies only with regard to the Paschal sacrifice, for it must be eaten by the people at large. With regard to the other communal sacrifices, it does not make any difference whether or not the people at large are impure. or the people at large were pure, but the priests offering it were impure39As indicated by Halachah 14, this refers to the priests who were present in Jerusalem at the time the sacrifices had to be offered. If there were a majority of priests who were ritually pure, but they were not present in Jerusalem at the time when the sacrifice was to be offered, they are not counted in the reckoning. due to contact with a human corpse, or both of these were pure, but the Temple utensils were impure due to contact with a human corpse, [the sacrifice] should be offered in a state of impurity. Both the impure and the pure should be involved in its offering together40I.e., with regard to the Paschal sacrifice, a person who is pure should not say: "Since I am pure, I should not share my sacrifice with those who are impure." Instead, the sacrifices should be offered and eaten together (see Radbaz; Kessef Mishneh). and enter the Temple Courtyard.41I.e., if their entry would in some way contribute to the sacrifice being offered properly (Radbaz).Those who are impure because of other reasons, zavim, zavot, women in their menstrual state, those after childbirth, those who came in contact with the corpse of a teeming animal or large animal, or the like should not be involved [in the sacrifice] and should not enter the Temple Courtyard even though sacrifices are being offered in a state of impurity. If they transgressed and took part [in the sacrifice] or entered the Temple Courtyard, they are liable for karet for entering [the Courtyard]42See Chapter 3, Halachah 12. or death [at the hand of Heaven]43As stated in Halachah 1 of this chapter. for [carrying out] the service.44They are, however, exempt from punishment if they partake of the Paschal sacrifice in this state of impurity if the majority of the people are ritually impure because of contact with a human corpse (Pesachim 95b). For only the impurity stemming from contact with a human corpse was superseded [by the obligation to offer these sacrifices].
When a Paschal sacrifice45Although this law also applies with regard to other communal sacrifices, the Paschal sacrifice is mentioned, because it is the only instance when there would be a large throng of people in the Temple Courtyard. is offered in a state of impurity and those who were impure due to contact with a human corpse pressed on and entered the Sanctuary, they are exempt even though they were only permitted to enter the Temple Courtyard.46Needless to say, they are forbidden to do so (Radbaz), for the activities involved in the offering of the Paschal sacrifice are carried out only in the Temple Courtyard and not in the Sanctuary itself. Since the charge [Numbers 5:3]: "Send them beyond the camp" does not apply to them, they are exempt.47There is a question concerning this issue in Pesachim 95b. Hence, an earthly court may not punish them with lashes. The question of whether they would be liable for death at the hand of Heaven is also not resolved on this plane. Since the judgments of the heavenly court are dependent on the judgments of the earthly courts, it is possible to say that the judgment is held in abeyance there as well.
If a portion of the priests of the clan scheduled to serve in the Temple that day48See Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 4:11 for a definition of this term. were impure and a portion were pure, even if the majority were impure due to contact with a human corpse, only those who are pure should offer the sacrifices.49As long as it is possible to offer the sacrifices in a state of purity, we do not offer them while impure. If all the priests of that clan were impure, the priests of another clan should be brought [to serve].50For the reason stated in the following halachah. If all the priests of that watch were impure due to contact with a human corpse, we look for [those of] another watch. If most of the priests who entered Jerusalem at a given time were impure, [the appropriate sacrifice] should be offered in a state of impurity.
Why do we search for a priest who is pure from another clan?51And even from another watch (Kessef Mishneh). Because [the prohibition against serving while] impure was not released entirely [in order to offer] the communal [sacrifices]. Instead, the prohibition is still standing, it is merely superseded temporarily, because of the pressing situation.52The Rambam is explaining a difference of opinion between the Sages in Yoma 6b. One Sage maintains that the prohibition against ritual impurity is hutra, released entirely, with regard to communal sacrifices. The other opinion is that the prohibition is dichuya, i.e., as the Rambam explains, the prohibition continues to exist and must be respected to the fullest degree possible. Similar concepts also apply with regard to the Sabbath prohibitions being overridden by questions of life and death. See the Kessef Mishneh to Hilchot Shabbat 2:1. We do not override any prohibitions that may be superseded except in a situation where there is no alternative. For this reason, the forehead plate is required to bring about appeasement.53As stated in Halachah 7.
What is the source that teaches that [the prohibitions against] ritual impurity are superseded [to bring] communal [offerings]? [Numbers 9:6] speaks of: "Men who were impure because of a [deceased] human soul."54The passage relates that after Moses communicated the command to offer the Paschal sacrifice, several individuals who were impure because of contact with a corpse came to him and asked for an opportunity to offer the Paschal sacrifice. Moses relayed their question to God Who answered that they - and all other individuals who are impure at the time the Paschal sacrifice must be offered may bring such a sacrifice a month later on Pesach Sheni. Implicit in that command is, as the Rambam proceeds to explain, that the license to offer a sacrifice on Pesach Sheni was granted only to individuals. If the majority of the Jewish people become impure, they must offer the Paschal sacrifice on the first Pesach in a state of impurity. According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught: Particular individuals are deferred to Pesach Sheni if they were impure. If, however, the community at large is impure due to contact with a human corpse, it is not deferred.55See Hilchot Korban Pesach 7:12. Instead, [the prohibition against] ritual impurity is superseded and the Paschal sacrifice should be offered in a state of impurity. The same applies to every sacrifice that has a fixed time like the Paschal sacrifice:56Pesachim 77a explains the derivation of this concept as follows: With regard to the Pesach sacrifice, Numbers 9:2 states that it should be offered "at its appointed time," which our Sages interpret as meaning ...at its appointed time,' even on the Sabbath, even in a state of ritual impurity." Now since Numbers 29:39 uses the term "in their appointed time" in reference to other communal sacrifices, we understand that the same concepts apply to them as well. [the obligation to offer it] supersedes [the prohibition against] ritual impurity.
This concept is explicitly stated in Scripture [II Chronicles 30:17-18]: "For a multitude of the congregation had not sanctified themselves and the Levites presided over the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice for all who were not pure....57King Chizkiya assumed the throne after the rule of Achaz, an idolatrous sinner. After years when the people had been led astray, Chizkiya inspired them to repent. He invited all the people to offer the Paschal sacrifice. Unfortunately, a sufficient number of priests had not purified themselves and also, the people were somewhat slow in responding. To enable the Paschal sacrifice to be offered by as many people as possible, he had a leap year declared, so as to give them an extra month. For many of the people, many from Ephraim, Menasheh, Issachar, and Zevulon had not purified themselves."What then is meant by the statement (ibid.): "They partook of the Paschal sacrifice not in accordance with what was written"?58I.e., one should not infer that the error was that they partook of the sacrifice while ritually impure (Kessef Mishneh). Because they made that year a leap year because of ritual impurity, as [ibid.:2-3] states: "And the king, his officers, and all the congregation in Jerusalem had conferred [and decided] to offer the Pesach... in the second month,59I.e., they delayed its offering by a month, by declaring a leap year. because they were not able to offer it at its time because there were not enough priests who had sanctified themselves."60Despite the addition of this month, the majority of the people who came to Jerusalem were ritually impure. Hence, the prohibitions against impurity had to be overridden (see Rav Yosef Corcus). As we explained already in Hilchot Kiddush HaChodeh,61Chapter 4, Halachah 6. as an initial preference, we do not declare a leap year because of ritual impurity.62For the preference is to offer the sacrifices in a state of ritual impurity.
There was another [difficulty] that year. King Chizkiya made the year a leap year on the thirtieth day of Adar which was fit to be Rosh Chodesh Nissan. Instead, he made it the thirtieth of Adar. The Sages did not agree with him, for a leap year should not be declared on this day, as we explained in [Hilchot] Kiddush HaChodesh.63Chapter 4, Halachah 14. Instead, the leap year should be declared earlier, indeed, preferably months before.Because of these two matters which were not done as prescribed by Jewish Law, it was said: "They partook of the Paschal sacrifice not in accordance with what was written."[ Chizkiya] entreated for mercy for himself and for the Sages who concurred with his actions,64I.e., the minority who did, for the majority did not, as stated above (Kessef Mishneh). as [ibid.:18] states: "For Yichezkiyahu prayed for them, saying: 'May God Who is good atone for those....' [ibid.:20] states: 'God heeded Yichezkiyahu and healed the people.'[ Implied is that] their sacrifice was accepted.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
It is a positive commandment for a priest1The Rambam emphasizes that this mitzvah applies to a priest, because an animal offered as a sacrifice may be slaughtered by a non-priest. Such a person need not sanctify his hands and feet. This explanation is reinforced by some of the versions of Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 24) which state "A priest alone is obligated...," i.e., a priest and not a non-priest. who serves [in the Temple] to sanctify his hands and feet2Through washing them from the basin in the Temple Courtyard, as the Rambam proceeds to explain. and afterwards perform service,3Sefer HaMitzvot (ibid.) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 106) consider this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Exodus 30:19] states: "And Aaron and his sons will wash their hands and their feet from it." A priest who serves4If he does not perform service in the Temple Courtyard, he is not liable even if he enters without sanctifying his hands and feet (Rav Yosef Corcus). without having sanctified his hands and feet in the morning5With the latter addition, the Rambam excludes the extra sanctifications performed by the High Priest on Yom Kippur before and after the changes of his garments. If he does not sanctify his hands and feet at this time, he does not invalidate his service, as stated in Halachah 7. is liable for death at the hand of heaven,6Nevertheless, as explained in Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:3, he is not liable for lashes, because he has only violated a positive commandment, not a negative commandment. as [ibid.:20] states: "They shall wash with water and not die." Their service - whether that of a High Priest or an ordinary priest - is invalid.
Which source teaches that his service is invalid? [Ibid.:21] states: "It will be an eternal statute for him and his generations," and with regard to the Priestly garments [ibid. 25:43] also uses the expression: "An eternal statute."7The text of the Mishneh Torah does not quote the verse exactly. Just as [a priest] who is lacking the priestly garments invalidates his service, as we explained,8Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 10:4. so, too, one who did not wash his hands invalidates his service.
A priest does not have to sanctify [himself] between every service [that he performs]. Instead, he consecrates [his hands and feet] once in the morning and may continue serving throughout the day and [the subsequent] night,9On the following day, he must sanctify his hands and feet again, even if he did not sleep at night, as stated in Halachah 8. provided he does not: a) depart from the Temple;10See Halachah 5. b) sleep;11The Kessef Mishneh explains that this requirement is derived from the obligation to sanctify one's hands and feet if one diverts attention, for it is likely that while sleeping, one did divert his attention. c) urinate;12See Halachah 5 with regard to defecation. or divert his attention [from his hands and feet]. If he does any of the above, he must sanctify his hands and feet again.
If a priest departed from the Temple, returned and then performed service without sanctifying [his hands and feet], his service is acceptable13There is an unresolved question concerning this point in Zevachim 20b. Hence, the Rambam rules leniently (Kessef Mishneh). if he did not divert his attention.14In the other three instances mentioned above, if he serves without sanctifying his hands and feet, his service is invalid (Kessef Mishneh). This general principle was followed in the Temple: No person would enter the Temple Courtyard to perform service15There is a difference of opinion among the commentaries if a ritually pure person who enters the Temple Courtyard without intending to perform service is obligated to immerse himself or not. unless he immersed [in the mikveh] even though he was ritually pure.
Anyone who defecates must immerse himself [in a mikveh].16See the conclusion of Halachah 6. Anyone who urinates must sanctify his hands and feet.[The following rules apply when] one goes outside the walls of the Temple Courtyard. If he departed [with the intent of] staying outside for an extended time, he must immerse [in a mikveh].17Even if he actually remained outside for a short time. If [his intent] was to return immediately, when he returns, all that is necessary is that he sanctify his hands and feet. If he did not immerse, nor sanctified his hands and feet and carried out [sacrificial] service, his service is acceptable18There is an unresolved question concerning this point in Zevachim 20b. Hence, the Rambam rules leniently (Kessef Mishneh). since he did not divert his attention, nor did he defecate or urinate. If he merely placed his hands outside the Temple Courtyard, he is not required to sanctify them again.
If [only] a person's hands become ritually impure,19This refers, not to ritual impurity prescribed by Scriptural Law, but instead, to certain states of ritual impurity ordained by our Sages that affect the hands alone. See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah, ch. 8. he may immerse them and they are ritually pure. He need not sanctify them again.If his body became impure because he partook of impure foods or drank impure beverages and immersed himself, even though he does not have to wait until nightfall [to become ritually pure],20See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 9:9. he must sanctify [his hands and feet] after immersing himself, for everyone who immerses himself must sanctify his hands and feet [before] serving. If he did not sanctify [his hands and feet], his service is not desecrated since he did not divert his attention.
When a High Priest does not immerse himself nor sanctify his hands and feet between his changes of clothes and between his different services on Yom Kippur21See Hilchot Avodat Yom HaKippurim 2:2 for a description of these changes of clothing, immersions, and sanctifications. and [continues] serving, his service is acceptable.22He does, however, violate a positive commandment, because he does not perform the Yom Kippur service as prescribed (Yoma 30b). [The rationale is that] since those immersions and sanctifications are not applicable equally to Aaron and his sons,23They are obligations of the High Priest (Aaron), but not an ordinary priest (his sons). as [Exodus 30:19] states: "And Aaron and his sons will wash from it." Only an obligation that is equally applicable to all the priests is an indispensable obligation, i.e., the first sanctification of one's hands.
If a person sanctified his hands on one day, he must sanctify them again on the following day even though he did not sleep at all that night, for the hands are disqualified because of the passage of the night. [Even] if he sanctified his hands at night and offered fats on [the altar's pyre] the entire night,24I.e., he was continually involved in the Temple service. he must go back and sanctify [his hands] on the next day25At daybreak. for that day's service.
If a priest sanctified his hands and his feet for the removal of the altar's ashes,26Which is carried out at dawn (Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 2:11-12). even though he sanctifies them before sunrise,27Halachically, depending on the different opinions, dawn is between 72 minutes and two hours before sunrise. Sunrise is the time when the priest should sanctify his hands. Nevertheless, in this instance, he has no alternative, since he is sanctifying them for that day's service and that service is performed before dawn. he does not have to sanctify them again after daybreak, because he sanctified them at the beginning of the day's service.
It is a mitzvah to sanctify [one's hands and feet] from the basin.28See the description of this utensil in the conclusion of ch. 4 of Hilchot Beit HaBechirah. If, however, one sanctifies them from a sacred utensil, the sanctification is effective. Sanctification may not, however, be performed with an ordinary utensil.29I.e., one that is not consecrated. If one sanctified [his hands and feet] with a sacred utensil outside the Temple30The sanctification must be performed within the Temple Courtyard, for that is where the basin is located. Even though the sanctification need not be performed with water from the basin, it must be performed in the area where it is located (Zevachim 22a). or did so with an ordinary utensil within the Temple and then performed service, his service is disqualified. One does not sanctify his hands and feet inside the basin or a sacred utensil, but from them, as [implied by the verse]: "Aaron and his son's will wash from it;" ["from it"] and not "inside of it." If one sanctified [his hands and feet] in such a utensil and performed service, he did not desecrate it.
If one immerses his hands and feet in the waters of a mikveh31There were several mikvaot on the Temple Mount. or even a spring, this is not considered as sanctification. One must wash them from a utensil. One may sanctify them using any sacred utensil whether or not it contains a revi'it.3286 cc. according to Shiurei Torah; 150 cc. according to Chazon Ish. The Ra'avad states - and the Kessef Mishneh explains that this is also the Rambam's intent - that if one uses a small utensil, he must take the water originally from the basin.
All water is acceptable for the sanctification, whether water from a spring or water from a mikveh, provided its appearance has not changed and it is [thus] acceptable for immersion.33As stated in Hilchot Mikvaot 7:1, if the appearance of water has changed, e.g., one poured wine or juice into it and changed its color, it is not acceptable for immersion. Mud that can be poured, from which a cow would drink,34Since a cow will drink it, it is considered as water and not as earth. Compare to ibid. 7:3, 8:9. 11:2. can be used to fill the measure of the basin. This is the general rule: Any water that can be used to make up the measure of a mikveh can be used to make up the measure of the basin.35A mikveh must be 40 se'ah in volume.
How much water must there be in the basin? At least enough for four priests to sanctify [their hands and feet] from it, as [indicated by Exodus 30:19 which] mentions "Aaron and his sons." Together with him, there were Elazar, Itamar, and Pinchas, a total of four.36Zevachim 21b cites Exodus 40:32 which states "And Moses, Aaron, and his sons will wash from it." "His sons" is plural indicating at least two, thus reaching a total of four. The Rambam, here and in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim 2) substitutes Pinchas for Moses. The Kessef Mishneh questions that explanation on two counts: Firstly, at the time, the basin was first used, Aaron's older sons, Nadav and Avihu, were still alive. Moreover, the priesthood had not been granted to Pinchas as of yet. Rav Yosef Corcus tries to support the Rambam's understanding, explaining that according to certain views, Moses did not serve as a priest when Aaron did, only in the seven days of preparation.
The water in the basin is disqualified if left [in it] overnight, as we explained.37Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 3:18. What would be done [to prevent the water from being disqualified]? The basin would be submerged in a mikveh38In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Tamid 1:4), the Rambam explains that each night the basin would be submerged in a muchani, a large container which held a reservoir of water. This container was not a sacred utensil and hence the water it contained was not disqualified overnight. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, loc. cit., for a description of this container. or a spring and on the following day, it would be raised or it would be filled each day in the morning.
The "sea" fashioned by Solomon39See I Kings 7:23-26. This was a circular copper tank, ten cubits in diameter and five cubits deep. had the status of a mikveh,40As II Chronicles 4:6 states, the priests would use it as a mikveh. because a channel of water from the Spring of Aitem41A mountain spring slightly south of Jerusalem. It was 32 cubits higher than the Temple Mount. Hence the water would naturally flow through a conduit built from it to the Temple. would pass through it.42Usually, water contained in a utensil is not acceptable for immersion. Nevertheless, since water from a flowing spring passed through this tank, its water was acceptable [the Jerusalem Talmud (Yoma 3:8)]. Therefore,43I.e., because it was connected to a flowing spring. its waters were not disqualified with the passage of night like the water of the basin and [indeed,] the basin was filled from it.
How is the mitzvah of sanctification performed? [A priest would] put his right hand on his right foot and his left hand on his left foot and bend over and sanctify them.44I.e., a colleague would pour water over them; alternatively, he would stand under a tap.See Hilchot Nesiat Kapayim 15:5 which states that one would wash until the wrist. All the substances that are considered as intervening with regard to immersion,45As explained in Hilchot Mikvaot, ch. 2, no significant substance may intervene between the flesh of the person immersing and the waters of the mikveh. That chapter details those substances that are considered as significant and hence, as intervening, and those which are not. are intervening with regard to the sanctification of hands.One may not sanctify his hands while sitting, because [the sanctification] is comparable to the Temple service and the Temple service may be performed only when standing, as [Deuteronomy 18:5] states: "To stand and to serve."46In the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Zevachim, loc. cit.), he offers another rationale: that one is not allowed to sit in the Temple.
Anyone who performs service while he is seated, desecrates his service and disqualifies it. He does not receive lashes, because the warning against doing so stems from a positive commandment.47And lashes are given only when a negative commandment is violated.Similarly, anyone involved with one of the Temple services must be standing on the floor.48Zevachim 24a relates that since both the Temple utensils and the ground of the Temple Courtyard have been sanctified, an equation is established between them. Just as there can be no intervening substance between a priest's hand and a sacred utensil, so too, there may be no intervening substance between his feet and the Temple Courtyard. If there was anything intervening between himself and the ground,49I.e., the stones of the Temple or the Temple Courtyard. e.g., he was standing on a utensil, an animal, or a colleague's foot, [his service] is invalid. Similarly, if there was anything intervening between his hand and the utensil with which he was performing the service, it is invalid.50This is derived from Leviticus 4:5: "And the priest shall take." Implied is that the taking must be performed by the priest's body without any intermediary (Zevachim, loc. cit.).
The Temple service may be performed only with one's right hand.51Indeed, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.), the Rambam writes that "Whenever the word "hand" is mentioned [with regard to the Temple service], the intent is the right hand."The above is referring to a right-handed person. A left-handed priest is disqualified from serving in the Temple, as stated in Chapter 8, Halachah 11. If one performed service with his left hand, it is invalid. He is not liable for lashes.52For there is no explicit prohibition that he violates. Instead, it is an extension of a positive commandment (Kessef Mishneh).[The following laws apply when] one of [a priest's] feet are on a utensil and one is on the floor, one is on a stone [that was not embedded in the floor] and one was on the floor. We evaluate [the situation]. Whenever he would be able to stand on his one foot if the utensil or the stone were taken away, his service is acceptable.53For then, the support provided by the second foot is not of consequence. If not, his service is invalid.54For then it is significant.If he received [blood from a sacrifice] with his right hand and his left hand is supporting it, his service is acceptable, because we do not pay attention to [something that is] a [mere] support.55This is a general principle, applying in other situations as well (see Shabbat 93b).
When one of the stones of the Temple Courtyard has become loosened, one should not stand upon it during one's Temple service until it is affixed in the ground.56As long as it is not fixed in the ground, the stone can be considered as a separate entity and therefore, it could be considered as an intervening substance between the priest and the earth. If he performed service, his service is acceptable,57There is an unresolved question concerning this issue in Zevachim 24a. Hence, the Rambam does not rule stringently. See also the commentaries to Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 1:10. since it is located in its place.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
Any priest who has a physical blemish - whether a permanent blemish or a temporary blemish1From the repetition of verses in Leviticus concerning this issue, the Sifra derives that the prohibition encompasses both types of blemishes. - should not enter the area of the altar and beyond in the Temple, as [Leviticus 21:21-23] states: "[Any man from among the descendants of Aaron the priest who has a blemish...] shall not come near the curtain,2The curtain separating between the Sanctuary and the Holy of Holies. nor may he approach the altar. If he transgresses and enters [this area],3Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 69) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 277) consider this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. In his gloss to Sefer HaMitzvot, the Ramban differs. He maintains that although there is a prohibition against a blemished priest serving in the Temple as the Rambam continues to explain, there is no Scriptural prohibition against merely entering this portion of the Temple area. The Megilat Esther supports the Rambam's view.The Kessef Mishneh notes that from Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:4, it appears that lashes are given only if the priest enters the building of the Temple, not this portion of the courtyard. he is liable for lashes even if he did not perform any service.If he performs service in the Temple, he invalidates and desecrates his service. He is worthy of lashes for the service as well,4Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 70) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 275) consider also this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. As indicated by the following halachah, according to the Rambam, this prohibition refers to a priest with a permanent blemish. as [ibid.:17] states: "One who has a blemish shall not draw near [to offer...]."5Although the prooftext refers specifically to the daily offering, the Sifra explains that the repetition of verses indicates that the prohibition encompasses all sacrifices. According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that this warning means that he shall not draw near to the Temple service.
Similarly, a person with a temporary blemish who performs service in the Temple invalidates [his service] and is liable for lashes,6Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 71) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 276) consider also this as one of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. The Ramban differs and maintains that there is only one negative commandment against a priest with a blemish serving in the Temple and it includes both instances, a permanent blemish and a temporary blemish. as [ibid.:18] states: "Any man who has a blemish shall not draw close...." According to the Oral Tradition, we have learned that this is a warning against [a priest] with a temporary blemish [serving]. [A priest] with a blemish who serves is not liable for death, only for lashes.
All physical blemishes - whether the priest had them from birth or acquired them afterwards, whether they will heal or they will not heal - disqualify [him] until they heal.
A permanent blemish is a broken leg or a broken arm.7See Leviticus 21:19. A temporary blemish is a dry skin eruption or a moist skin eruption also known as a chazizit.8Ibid.:20. Not only the blemishes mentioned in the Torah,9Ibid.:18-21. but any apparent bodily blemish disqualifies the priests, as [ibid.:21] states: "Any man who has a blemish," i.e., any type. Those mentioned by the Torah are merely examples.10In his commentary to the Torah, the Ramban takes a slightly different approach, maintaining that those blemishes mentioned in the Torah outline the general categories of blemishes.
There are three types of blemishes [involving humans]:11There are also blemishes that disqualify an animal, but do not disqualify a human, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach, ch. 2. See the gloss of the Radbaz there which explains that it appears that the Rambam's intent is not that if these conditions are found in men, they do not disqualify a priest. Instead, the intent is that it is extremely uncommon to find such a condition in a human. Hence they are "not appropriate to be found in a human." Nevertheless, if a priest does have such a condition, it is considered as a blemish and he is disqualified.a) blemishes that disqualify a priest from serving and an animal from being offered [as a sacrifice];12These are described in Chapter 7.b) blemishes that only prevent a man from serving;13These are described in Chapter 8.c) blemishes that do not disqualify a priest, but because of the impression that would be created,14See the conclusion of ch. 8. [our Sages] stated that every priest who has such a blemish should not serve.
Whenever [a priest] who has a blemish that disqualifies both a person and animal serves, whether inadvertently or intentionally, his service is invalid. If he served intentionally, he is liable for lashes. Whenever [a priest] who has a blemish that disqualifies only a person serves, even though he is liable for lashes,15If he serves intentionally. his service is valid.16The commentaries note that there appears to be a contradiction between this statement and the Torah's explicit statements. The Torah mentions exceptionally long eye-brows and crushed testicles as blemishes. These blemishes apply to a human and not to an animal. Nevertheless, it appears that they are also included by the statement (ibid.:23): "He shall not desecrate My sacred offerings." If he has one of the blemishes that disqualify him because of the impression that could be created, he is not liable for lashes and his service is valid.
Only blemishes that are apparent17Even blemishes that are ordinarily covered by a person's clothes are considered as apparent. disqualify a person. Blemishes that are within the cavity of the body, e.g., a person's kidney or his spleen was removed or his intestines were perforated, even though he becomes a treifah,18A person who will not live more than 12 months. his service is acceptable. [This is derived from the mention, Leviticus 21:19, of] "a broken leg or a broken arm." Just as these are apparent, all [disqualifying blemishes] must be apparent.
An uncircumcised person19This applies even when there was no transgression in the priest remaining uncircumcised, e.g., an instance when two of his brothers died because of circumcision (Rashi, Sanhedrin 83a). is like a foreigner [as Ezekiel 44:9] states: "Any foreigner20This term also has the connotation of an idolater. with an uncircumcised heart and uncircumcised flesh." Therefore if an uncircumcised [priest] serves, he disqualifies his service and is liable for lashes21Rashi (ibid. 84a) states that since the warning is dependent on a verse from the Prophets and not from the Torah itself, the person is not liable for lashes. The Rambam's view is based on Zevachim 18b which maintains that the prohibition was taught by the Oral Tradition. Ezekiel merely provided a support. The Rambam, however, mentions the verse from Ezekiel because of the connection to the non-priest so that there will be a link to an explicit prohibition from the Torah. like a non-priest22See Chapter 9, Halachah 1. who serves. He is not, however, liable for death.23As a non-priest is (ibid.).
A priest who married women sinfully24E.g., he married a divorcee or another woman forbidden to the priesthood. See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, chs. 17-19 where these prohibitions are detailed. may not serve25These laws have parallels in the present era as well. Such a priest may not recite the Priestly Blessing [Shulchan Aruch (Orach Chayim 128:40)]. until he is compelled by the court to take a vow dependent on the discretion of other people so that it cannot be nullified26Since the vow is not being taken dependent on his own discretion, but on that of other people, it cannot be nullified. See Hilchot Sh'vuot 6:8. that he will not continue to sin. He may then perform the service, descend [from the altar], and divorce her. Similarly, if he would become impure due to contact with a human corpse,27Which is forbidden to a priest, as stated in Hilchot Evel, ch. 1. he is disqualified until he makes a resolution in court not to contract such impurity. If he transgressed and performed service before taking such a vow or making such a resolution, he does not disqualify his service even though he remains married in sin.28For this prohibition is merely a Rabbinic safeguard.
When a priest performed service and afterwards, his [genealogy] was checked and it was discovered that he was a challal,29A challal is a priest conceived in relations forbidden to a priest or the son of a challal. None of the mitzvot of the priesthood apply to him. his previous service is acceptable, but he may not serve in the future. If, however, he does [continue] to serve, he does not desecrate the service. [This is derived from Deuteronomy 33:11]: "May God bless His legion and find acceptable the work of his hand." [implied is that] He will find acceptable even the desecrated among them.30Challal, "desecrated," and chayl, "legion," share two of the same root letters. Hence the above concept can be derived (Kiddushin 66b).
The High Court would sit in the Chamber of Hewn Stone.31The presence of the Sanhedrin in this chamber is discussed in Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:17 and Hilchot Sanhedrin 14:11-12. Their primary ongoing activity was sitting and judging the priests, e.g., examining the lineage of the priests32See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 20:2. and inspecting their blemishes. Whenever a disqualifying factor was found in the lineage of a priest, he would put on black clothes and wrap himself in black and leave the Temple Courtyard. Whoever is found to be bodily sound and of acceptable lineage puts on white garments and enters and serves with his priestly brethren.
[A priest] who is discovered to be of acceptable lineage, but was discovered to have a physical blemish should sit in the Chamber of Wood33Located in the Women's Courtyard; see Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 5:8. and [removes] worm-eaten wood for the [Altar's] pyre.34For worm-eaten wood is undesirable. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 6:2. He should be included in the division of the sacrifices with the members of his clan and may partake [of the sacrifices],35See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:17. as [Leviticus 21:22] states: "He may partake of the food of his God from [the sacrifices of] the most holy order and of the sacred foods."

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
There are a sum total of 50 physical blemishes that disqualify both humans and animals. In particular, they are:
Five involving the ear: a) one whose ear lobe has been blemished1I.e., its substance has been diminished. to the extent that one's nail would become held back by the blemish.2I.e., if one would run his nail over the lobe of this person's ear, like one runs his nail over a ritual slaughterer's knife, the progress of his nail would be held back by the blemish. See Rashi, Bechorot 37b. There is, however, no concept of a blemish with regard to the skin which surrounds the lobe of the ear, whether it is perforated, marred, or cracked.
b) one whose ear has cracked to the slightest extent even though its substance has not diminished;c) one whose [ear] lobe has been perforated, [leaving a hole] the size of a carshinah bean.3A small bean about the size of a lentil (ibid.). Whether the hole is round or long, if its area is the size of a carshinah bean, it is considered a blemish.d) one whose ear has dried to the extent that if it was perforated, it would not bleed;e) one whose ear was double.4I.e., it appears as if he has two ears, one inside the other. [This applies] even to a goat kid whose ears are often extended and appear double, provided it has two lobes. If, however, it has only one lobe and it appears like one entity that is double-sized, it is acceptable.5Although the Rambam's version of the source for this ruling, Bechorot 6:9 differs from the standard printed text of the Mishnah, the interpretation of both versions is the same.
There are three involving the eye-lashes:a) one whose eye-lids are perforated even to the slightest extent;b) one whose eye-lids are cracked even to the slightest extent;c) one whose eye-lids are blemished6I.e., its substance has been diminished. even to the slightest extent.These three blemishes are included in the term cherutz mentioned in the Torah.7Leviticus 22:22.
There are eight involving the eye:a) one who is blind,8As explicitly mentioned in Leviticus 21:18. whether in one eye or in both eyes;b) one who cannot see from both of his eyes or one of them, even though there is no apparent change in them, because he has water continuously descending into his eyes;c) one who cannot see with both or one of his eyes clearly, because he has continuous nerve deterioration;9Our translation is based on Rav Kapach's version of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 6:3).d) one who has a mound like a grape in his eye,10Due to a retinal infection (ibid.:2). even though he can still see;e) one who has cataracts11This refers to the term chilazon nachash mentioned in the Mishnah (ibid.). in his eyes which cover some of the pupil of the eye;f) one who has the white of his eyes extended slightly into the pupil until the pupil is interrupted by the white of the eye. This is the meaning of the term tivlul mentioned in the Torah.12Leviticus 21:20. If, however, the pupil is extended and enters the white of the eye, it is not considered a blemish, for there are no blemishes in the white of the eye;g) one who has a white point in the midst of his pupil. This is the meaning of the term dak mentioned in the Torah.13Due to a retinal infection (ibid.:2). [The above applies] provided it appears floating on the pupil. If, however, it is not floating, or if it is submerged in the pupil, it is not a blemish. Similarly, if there was a black mark in the midst of the white, even if it appeared to be floating, it is not considered a blemish, for there are no blemishes in the white. If there was a black mark sunk in the pupil, it is also included in the blemish called dak. If, however, it appears to be floating, since it is black within black, it is not considered as a blemish.
There are three involving the nose:a) One whose nose is perforated, even from only one side;14If, however, the cartilage between the nostrils is perforated and it is not visible externally, it is not considered as a blemish [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 6:4)].b) one whose nose is split;c) one whose nose is blemished.
There are six involving the mouth:a) One whose lip is perforated; this applies even if only one is perforated;b) one whose lip is blemished;c) one whose lip is cracked, provided the surface of the lip is split into two sides;d) one whose lower jawbone extends even the slightest measure further than his upper jawbone;e) one whose mouth is swollen congenitally, as part of the structure of his body. If, however, it is swollen because of the wind,15Because the swelling comes from an external factor. it is not considered a blemish;f) one from whom the majority of the free portion of the tongue16Our translation is taken from Rashi's commentary (Bechorot 40a). was removed.
There are twelve involving the reproductive organs:a-d) one whose member is crushed,17This is the meaning of the term miruach eshef in Leviticus 21:20. mashed, severed, or cut off;e-h) one whose testicles - or testicle - is crushed, mashed, severed, or cut off;i) one who has only one testicle even though he has two sacs;18This refers to the inner sacs within the larger scrotum.j) one whose two testicles are in one sac;k) a person whose sexual organ is covered by flesh and his gender cannot be determined;j) a hermaphrodite.19More details regarding the individuals in the latter two categories are found in Hilchot Ishut 2:25-26; Hilchot Nizirut 2:11; et al. See also Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:3.
There are six involving the hands and the feet:a) one who limps;20As explicitly mentioned in Leviticus 21:18. b) one whose hip has been displaced. This is the meaning of the term serua used by the Torah;21Leviticus 21:18; 22:23. The Rambam's interpretation is based on the Sifra. Rashi in his commentary to the Torah explains the term differently.c) one who has one hip attached at a higher place than the other;d) one whose arm-bone is broken,22As explicitly mentioned in Leviticus 21:19. provided it is apparent;e) one whose leg-bone is broken,23As explicitly mentioned in Leviticus 21:19. provided it is apparent. Even if it is not apparent when he stands, if it is apparent when he walks, it is a blemish;f) one whose legs are swollen congenitally, as part of the structure of his body. If, however, they are swollen because of the wind, it is not considered a blemish.
There are four [types of blemishes] that may occur in any place in the body. They are:a) one who has a dry skin eruption of even the slightest size. This is the meaning of the term gerev mentioned in the Torah;21Leviticus 21:20; 22:22; Leviticus 21:20. b) a growth that has a bone. This is the meaning of the term yabelet mentioned in the Torah;22Leviticus 22:22. c) one who has an Egyptian boil23A moist skin eruption reminiscent of the boils visited upon the Egyptians in the Ten Plagues. Its external layer is moist, but its internal layer is dry and it is also very distasteful in appearance. of the slightest size. It is a type of boil which is firm and of distasteful appearance. This is the meaning of the term yalefet mentioned in the Torah.24Leviticus 21:20.
d) Whenever there is a groove made in any bone that is apparent,28E.g., an arm or a leg (Bechorot 40b). it is considered a blemish. It is included in the category charutz mentioned in the Torah.29Leviticus 22:22. The ribs are not considered as bones that are apparent.
There are also three other types of blemishes:30The laws pertaining to animals with these three blemishes are slightly different than those pertaining to animals with other blemishes. See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 2:6.a) an elderly man who has reached the stage that he quivers and trembles when he stands;b) a person who is sick and trembles because of his illness and the weakening of his strength.A treifah31A man or an animal that has a physical infirmity that will cause him to die within twelve months. See Chapter 6, Halachah 7. is acceptable among humans, but is disqualified among animals.32See Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 3:1. Similarly, one born through Caesarian section is acceptable among humans, but is disqualified among animals.33See ibid.:4.
c) One who is foul-smelling. A priest who has a foul-smelling odor because of sweat may wash and rub perfume on his flesh and serve. If he has a foul odor emanating from his mouth, he may put pepper, ginger, or the like in his mouth and serve. If, however, he serves while his body is foul-smelling due to sweat or he had bad breath, he desecrates his service like one who has any of the other blemishes.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
There are a total of 90 physical blemishes that [disqualify] humans alone. In particular, they are: There are eight involving the head:a) one who has the center of his forehead depressed below as if it was pushed down with one's hand;b) one who has the center of his forehead raised up above, like an egg;1The Ra'avad (and this is also Rashi's interpretation of Bechorot 43a) differs with the Rambam's interpretation of this disqualifying factor. The Kessef Mishneh maintains that the Rambam had a different version of that Talmudic passage.c) one who has the sides of his head emerge toward his face like a hammer;d) one whose head projects outward abnormally from his neck;e) one whose head is abnormally large to the extent that it sits on his neck like a turnip on top of its leaves;2The accompanying drawing is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 7:1). Similarly, all of the disqualifying factors mentioned here are discussed there and in the following mishnah.f) one who is bald and has no hair whatsoever on his head. If, however, he has a row of hair extending across the back of his head from ear to ear, it is acceptable.g) a person's whose hair extends from ear to ear on the front of his head, but he is bald on the remainder of his head, he is unacceptable;h) a person whose hair extends around his entire head from the front and the back, but he has no hair on the top of his head. He also is deemed bald and is unacceptable.
There are two involving the neck. They are:a) one whose neck is sunk [into his trunk] so much that it appears to be placed on his shoulders;b) one whose neck is so long that it appears unconnected with his shoulders.
There are four involving the ears. They are:a) one whose two ears are very small;b) one whose two ears are very swollen like sponges;c) one whose ears hang down low;d) one who has one ear differ from another in appearance.3In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 7:3), the Rambam explains that when a person has a pair of organs, it is expected that they be identical and a deviation is considered a blemish.
There are five involving the eyebrows. They are:a) one who does not have any hair at all on his eyebrows. This is the meaning of the term gibein mentioned in the Torah; 4Leviticus 21:20. The Rambam chooses the first interpretation of this term offered by Bechorot 7:2. Rashi follows the second interpretation, overly long eyebrows. In his Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam states that the two opinions both agree that these two conditions are blemishes, the difference of opinion between them concerns only the definition of the term gibein in the Torah.b) one whose eyebrows hang low;5Reaching his eyelids [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.)].c) one who has only one eyebrow;6Some interpret this simply. Others understand it as meaning that the person's two eyebrows are connected above his nose so that they appear as one long eyebrow.d) one who has more than two eyebrows;e) one who has one eyebrow that is different in appearance than the other, whether the hair on one is long and on the other, short, or the hair on one is black and, on the other, white or red, since there is a difference in appearance, he is unacceptable.
There are four involving the eyelids. They are:a) one who does not have any hair at all on his eyelids;b) one who has very thick hair on his eyelids;c) one who has an eyelid whose hair is different from that of the other eyelid, e.g., one is black and the other white, one is thin and the other is thick;d) one whose eyelids are closed slightly and do not open wide like those of other people.
There are eleven involving the eyes. They are:a) one whose two eyes are positioned above their appropriate place, close to his forehead;b) one whose two eyes are positioned below their appropriate place;c) one whose two eyes are round and are not extended slightly as other eyes are;d) one whose eyes pop out like the eyes of a tiger and like the eyes of a person who looks at someone when he is very angry;e) one whose eyes are very large, like those of a calf;f) one whose eyes are small, like those of a duck;g) one who is continuously tearing;h) one who has fluid [continuously]7The bracketed addition is made on the basis of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 7:3). dripping from the tip of his eyes near his nose or the ends of his eyes near his temples;i) one who contracts his eyelids and squints slightly when he sees light or when he wishes to look at something carefully;j) a person who is cross-eyed to the extent that he sees two storeys of the same building as one.8I.e., while focusing on one storey, he will see the other. This defect can be noticed when such a person is speaking with one person and it appears that he is speaking with another;k) one who has one eye that is different than the other, whether in place, in appearance, e.g., one is black and the other is of mixed color, or one is small and one is large. Since there is a difference between them, he is unacceptable.
There are six involving the nose. They are:a) one whose bridge of the nose is sunken, even [if it is not sunken] to the extent that he can apply ointment to both of his eyes at once.9I.e., for most people, the bridge of the nose interposes between one eye and the other and it is impossible to apply ointment to them both in one motion. There are certain individuals whose bridge of the nose is so sunk that they can do so.Bechorot 7:3 defines charum as having a bridge of the nose sunk to the extent that the above is possible. Nevertheless, in the Talmud, another opinion is cited which states that as long as the bridge is sunken more than what is ordinary, it is considered a blemish even if it does not reach such an extreme state. The Rambam accepts this view, because it appears to be favored by the Talmud (Kessef Mishneh). This is the meaning of the term charum mentioned in the Torah;10Leviticus 21:18.b) one whose middle of the nose projects upward;c) one whose tip of the nose points downward;d) one whose tip of the nose is crooked;e) one whose nose is disproportionately large;f) one whose nose is disproportionately small. How is this measured? With one's pinky. If one's nose is larger or smaller than his pinky, it is considered a blemish.
There are three involving the lips. They are:a) one whose upper lip extends beyond his lower lip;b) one whose lower lip extends beyond his upper lip;c) one whose mouth [hangs] loosely and [hence,] spittle is continually descending from his mouth.
There are three involving the belly. They are:a) one whose belly is swollen;b) one whose navel projects outward, rather that being concave like that of other people;c) one whose breasts are extended and lie on his stomach like the breasts of a woman.
There are three involving the back. They are:a) one whose spine is crooked;b) one who has a vertebra that slipped out of the spinal column, regardless of whether it projected outward, penetrated inward, or slipped to the side. This is included in the term baal chatoteret11This term is used by the Mishnah (Bechorot 7: 1). Although the term is generally interpreted as meaning a hunchback in contemporary Hebrew, the implication above is also included in the Talmudic term.;c) a person with a hunchback. Even though a vertebra has not slipped from its place, this is still considered a blemish.
There are six involving the hands. They are:a) one who has an extra finger on his hands, even if he has six on each hand.12And thus the two hands appear the same. If he cuts the extra finger off, he is acceptable. If, however, it had a bone, he is unacceptable, even if he cuts it off;b) one who is lacking one of the fingers of his hand;c) one who has two fingers webbed and connected until below the joint.13I.e., to the end of one's fingers. If he cut and separated them to the joint, he is acceptable. Which joint is implied? The first joint that is next to the palm of one's hand;d) one whose fingers are bent over each other;e) one who has a projection emerging from his thumb;f) a left-handed person. If he is ambidextrous, he is acceptable.
There are four involving the reproductive organs. They are:a) one who has a very large and long scrotum that reaches his knees;b) one whose organ is so long it reaches his knees;c) one whose membranes surrounding his testicles were crushed;d) one whose membranes surrounding his testicles are inflated. This is the meaning of the term miruach ashech mentioned in the Torah;14Leviticus 21:20.
There are fifteen involving the thighs and the legs. They are:a) one who is bow-legged to the extent that even when he stands with his feet together, his knees will not touch each other;b) one whose ankle-bone projects outward. The ankle bone is the round bone that is above the heel, toward the inside of the body. It resembles the weaving needle with which women weave;c) one whose heel juts outward to the extent that his shin appears to be in the center of his foot;d) some whose feet are wide like a duck's even though they are not webbed like a duck's;e) one who has a projection emerging from his large toe;15The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this point. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's view.f) one who has an extra toe on his feet, even if he has six on each foot. If he cuts the extra toe off, he is acceptable, provided it does not have a bone;g) one who is lacking one of the toes of his foot;h) one whose toes are bent over each other;j) one whose toes are webbed until below the joint. If they were connected and he cut and separated them, he is acceptable;k) one whose foot is entirely straight; i.e., the width of his forefoot and his toes is the same as the width of his heels, and they appear as one straight unit;l) one whose foot is curved so that his forefoot and toes and his heel appears as the two ends of a bow;m) one whose foot is hollow; i.e., his mid-foot is upraised above the earth and it is as if he is standing on his heel and his toes;n) one whose ankles click with each other when he walks;o) one whose knees click with each other when he walks;p) one who is left-footed.
There are four that involve the entire body:a) one whose trunk is disproportionately larger than his limbs;b) one whose trunk is disproportionately smaller than his limbs;c) one who is extremely tall;16Bechorot 45b explains that although a tall person is considered attractive, if he is exceptionally tall, people consider it objectionable.d) a dwarf, i.e., one who is extremely short, so that they are distinguished from people at large.
There are eight involving the skin. They are:a) a Kushite;b) an albino whose skin is white like cheese;c) one who is red-skinned like scarlet;d) one who has pure blotches on his skin,17I.e., blotches that are not associated with the impurity resulting from tzara'at. i.e., [the appearance of] the skin changed because of an internal factor, like a bohak;18See Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 1:1 for a definition of this term.e) [the appearance of] the skin changed because of an external factor, like the scarring of a burn; this is also one of the distinguishing marks that are pure [with regard to tzara'at];19With regard to the impurity of tzara'at. See ibid. 6:4.f) one who has a facial mole that has hair, even if it is not the size of an isar,20An isar is a Roman coin that the Talmud mentions in various halachic contexts (Kiddushin 2a, Bava Metzia 51b, Mikvaot 9:5, et al.). The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 34:2) quotes Rashba as stating that in his (medieval) times the size of an isar was already not known. More recently, Middos VeShiurei Torah, p. 169, gives the diameter of an isar as 23 mm. Thus its area would be slightly more than 3.6 cm. but rather of the smallest size;21Since it has hair, it is considered objectionable, regardless of its size.g) one who has a facial mole the size of an isar or more;22If it smaller, it is not that noticeable, and hence, it is not considered a blemish. h) one afflicted with warts, [when] a person's flesh or skin should distend or the fluids in the skin should distend to any part throughout the body, this is a blemish.
There are four other blemishes possible for a human:a) one who is deaf;b) one who is intellectually or emotionally unstable;c) an epileptic, even if his seizures come at far intervals;d) one who suffers from severe depression,23In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Bechorot 7:5), the Rambam describes this condition as severe melancholia to the extent that the person's physical functioning is impaired. whether on a consistent basis or from time to time.
Thus there are a total of 140 blemishes that may disqualify a priest.24I.e., the total of those mentioned in this and the previous chapter. They are: eight involving the head, two involving the neck, nine involving the ears, five involving the eyebrows, seven involving the eyelids, nineteen involving the eyes, nine involving the nose, nine involving the mouth, three involving the belly, three involving the back, seven involving the hands, sixteen involving the reproductive organs, twenty involving the legs, eight involving the entire body, eight involving the skin, seven involving the body's strength and odor. They have all been outlined one by one.The following disqualify [a priest] because of the impression they may create:25See Chapter 6, Halachot 5-6.a) one who has lost the hair of his eyelids even though the roots remain;b) one whose teeth have been removed.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
When a non-priest serves in the Temple, his service is invalid and he is liable for death at the hand of heaven, as [Numbers 18:7] states: "A non-priest who draws close will die." According to the Oral Tradition, we have learned that one does not become liable unless he draws close to perform service.1I.e., and it does not forbid merely entering the Temple or ascending the Altar. Where is the warning concerning this?2I.e., where is stated the prohibition for which this punishment is given? (Sifri) [Ibid.:4] states: "A non-priest shall not draw close to you."3Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 74) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 390) include this prohibition among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.What is meant by a non-priest? Anyone who is not a male descendant of Aaron, as [Leviticus 1:8] states: "And the sons of Aaron shall arrange" and [Leviticus 3:8] states: "And the sons of Aaron shall set afire." [These service are performed by] "the sons of Aaron" and not the daughters of Aaron.4Thus restricting the priestly service to males and excluding females. The Radbaz questions why two verses are necessary to exclude the women of the priestly family. He explains that since they are permitted to partake of terumah and certain sacrificial foods, they are not entirely similar to Israelites. Hence, a second verse is necessary.
Although non-priests are warned not to perform any of the services associated with offering sacrifices, they are liable for death [at the hand of Heaven] only for performing "complete service,"5Service which is the final stage in a sacrifice being brought to the altar (Yoma 24a). not on service that is followed by other service.6E.g., receiving the blood, carrying the blood or the limbs to the altar. [Thus] a non-priest is liable for death only for four services: a) sprinkling;7See Halachah 3. b) setting afire [sacrifices on the altar];8See Halachah 4. c) pouring water [on the altar] on Sukkot, and d) pouring wine on the altar at all times.
How is one liable for sprinkling? Whether he dashed [blood] inside [the Temple building]9As performed by the High Priest on Yom Kippur and also when offering certain atonement offerings. or outside, [in the Temple Courtyard],10The sprinkling or dashing of blood on the external altar. performed one of the sprinklings of blood or performed one of the sprinklings of the sacrifices brought by a person afflicted with tzara'at,11See Hilchot Mechusrei Kapparah 4:2 where these sprinklings are mentioned. Rav Yosef Corcus questions why the water libations and the wine libations are considered as separate categories and the sprinkling of blood and oil are not. He explains that the two different libations stem from entirely different commandments. The sprinkling of the oil, by contrast, is not a commandment in its own right, but an ancillary element to the offering of a sacrifice and that sacrifice also involves sprinkling blood. Hence, the two are included in the mitzvah. he is liable for death.
How is one liable for setting afire [sacrifices on the altar]? Whether he set afire limbs [of animal sacrifices], a handful of flour, or of frankincense12I.e., entities that are usually set afire on the altar. on the altar - or even if he turned over limbs that had not been consumed by fire and hastened their being burnt,13As Sh'vuot 17b states, this applies even if the entity would have ultimately been consumed by fire without his activity, but his act hastens its consumption. he is liable for death, provided he set afire an olive-sized portion of these entities. Similarly, if one sets afire incense on the golden altar, when he sets afire an olive-sized portion,14For one to be liable, a portion of this minimum size is necessary, for an incense offering may not be smaller, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 5:2. Hence, if he sets afire less, he is not performing service. Even though a larger amount of incense is offered each day, that is a Rabbinic enactment and not a Scriptural requirement (Radbaz). he is liable. In contrast, one who sets fire to incense on Yom Kippur in the Holy of Holies is not liable for death for this until he sets fire to a handful, for that is the measure explicitly [required] by the Torah.15Leviticus 16:12; Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 5:26. If he sets fire to a lesser amount, he is not performing service. Hence, he is not liable.
[A non-priest] who arranges two logs of wood on the altar's pyre is considered comparable to one who set [sacrificial] limbs afire and he is liable for death [at the hand of heaven for doing so]. For the wood is also considered as a sacrifice.16See Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 14:1. Arranging these two logs is the final stage in the arrangement of wood on the altar. Hence a non-priest is liable (Radbaz).In contrast, [a non-priest] who pours [oil onto the flour offerings], one who mixes [the flour offerings with oil],17Rabbi Akiva Eiger cites Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 12:23 which states that the preliminary stages of the offering of a meal offering may be performed by a non-priest. one who breaks [the wafers of meal offerings] into pieces, one who salts [the sacrifices], one who waves [the sacrifices], one who brings [a meal offering] close to the altar, one who arranges the showbread or the bowls of incense on the [golden] table, one who prepares the lamps [of the Menorah],18See Halachah 7. one who kindles light on the altar, one who takes a fistful [of flour or incense], and one who receives the blood [of a sacrifice], even though he disqualifies his service, he is warned against doing so and is liable for lashes for doing so, he is not liable for death at the hand [of Heaven]. [The rationale is that] all of these services are followed by another service and they do not represent the completion of the offering [of a given sacrifice].
The slaughter of sacrificial animals is acceptable if performed by non-priests.19See also Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 5:1; Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 1:1. [This applies even to] sacrifices of the most holy order, both individual sacrifices and communal sacrifices, as [Leviticus 1:5] states: "And he shall slaughter the bull before God and the sons of Aaron shall offer it." Implied is that from receiving [the blood], the mitzvah belongs to the priesthood. Similarly, skinning an animal, cutting it up, and bringing wood to the altar are acceptable when performed by non-priests, for with regard to the limbs, [ibid.:9] states: "And the priest shall set afire everything on the altar," this refers to bringing limbs [from sacrificial animals] to the [altar's] ramp. [We may infer that] bringing such limbs requires a priest, but not bringing wood.
Similarly, the kindling of the lamps [of the Menorah] is acceptable20Even as an initial preference (Radbaz). The Ra'avad differs and maintains that, after the fact, if a non-priest kindled the lamps, it is valid, but as an initial preference, he is not allowed to kindle them. The Radbaz brings support for the Rambam's position from Yoma 24b which states that kindling the lamps of the Menorah is not an act of service. Since it is not an act of service, asks the Radbaz, why should a non-priest be restricted from performing it? How is it different from the slaughter of an animal?The Minchat Chinuch (mitzvah 98) reinforces the Ra'avad's question, asking how is it possible for the Menorah to be lit outside its proper place? The Rambam LeAm explains that the mitzvah is not lighting the lamps, but rather putting the lamps in their place. if performed by a non-priest. Therefore, if a priest cleaned the lamps and brought them outside,21I.e., out from the Temple building to a place in the courtyard where a non-priest is allowed to stand. Note the discussion of the meaning of the term hatavah in Hilchot Temidim UMusafim 3:12 and notes. a non-priest is permitted to kindle them.
The removal of the ashes [from the altar] must be performed by a priest,22See ibid. 2:10. as [Leviticus 6:3] states: "And the priest will put on his linen fit tunic...." If an Israelite removes [the ash], he is liable for lashes.He is not liable for death [at the hand of Heaven] even though this is a service that is not followed by another service.23See Halachah 2. [This is derived as follows. The verse that speaks of the punishment of death at the hand of Heaven, Numbers 18:7,] speaks of "work of giving."24I.e., the verse has two connotations: a) that the priestly service is a gift to the priests, b) (and this is the focus here), that the priestly service involves giving: offering sacrificial substances on the altar. [Implied is that] the work of giving must be performed by a priest alone. If a non-priest offered [a sacrifice], he is liable for death. The service of removal25I.e., the removal of the ashes. does not make a non-priest liable for death. Similarly, if a non-priest cleaned the inner altar or the Menorah, he is not liable for death.
[If a non-priest] arranged the wood on the altar, the arrangement should be taken apart and rearranged by a priest, because the [initial] arrangement is unacceptable.26Because arranging the wood is considered sacrificial service (Radbaz). The Kessef Mishneh points out that from Yoma 27-28a, one might conclude that it is permitted for a non-priest to arrange the wood of the altar. Nevertheless, according to the Rambam that passage only absolves a non-priest from the punishment of death. It does not grant him permission to arrange the wood.
An impure [priest], one with a disqualifying physical blemish, and one who did not wash his hands or feet27The commentaries question why the Rambam omits a priest who does not wear the priestly garments. Rav Yosef Corcus explains that it is not necessary to mention such a person because in Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 10:4, the Rambam stated that a priest who does not wear the priestly garments is considered as a non-priest. are not liable28I.e., each one is liable according to the punishment appropriate for him. An impure priest and one who did not wash his hands and feet are liable for death and one who is physically blemished is liable for lashes (Kessef Mishneh). except for services that a non-priest is liable for death.29I.e., services that are not followed by other services which involve giving. For other services, he [violates merely] a warning.
A priest who immersed that day30And must wait until the evening before performing service. who is lacking atonement,31E.g., a person afflicted with tzara'at who must bring an atonement offering before serving. who became impure,32With another type of impurity. who did not wash his hands and feet and yet served [in the Temple] is liable for each transgression.33Since he violated many prohibitions with one act of service, he is liable for a sacrifice for each violation.The Ra'avad cites a Tosefta that does not accept the Rambam's ruling on this point and instead, maintains that he is liable for only one sacrifice. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, support the Rambam's ruling, explaining that each of the prohibitions expands the scope of the obligation. See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 7:2 and Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 8:6 which discusses the ground rules for these concepts. If he was a non-priest,34Even if he also possessed all the other disqualifying factors. he is liable for lashes only for serving as a non-priest.35For all of the other prohibitions were given only to a priest. They do not apply to a non-priest (Kessef Mishneh).
When a non-priest performs [Temple] service on the Sabbath, he is liable for violating the Sabbath laws36For the Temple services involve performance of forbidden labors. These prohibitions are superseded by the obligation to offer the sacrifices, but since a non-priest's service is not valid, he is considered as liable for these prohibited acts. and for serving as a non-priest.37Here also although a single act is performed, since two different prohibitions are involved, he is liable for both of them. We do not follow the principle: One prohibition does not fall on another prohibition, because the prohibition against performing the Sabbath labors is greater in scope, encompassing other acts besides the Temple service. Similarly, when a priest with a physical blemish serves while ritually impure, he is liable [both] for [serving] while impure and for serving with a blemish.38For the ritual impurity increases the scope of his liability, making him liable also for entering the Temple and partaking of sacrifices. Since it is of a greater scope, we do not follow the principle, one prohibition does not fall on another (Radbaz).
Any priest who served a false deity, whether willingly or inadvertently - even if he repented completely - may never serve in the Temple,39A parallel also exists with regard to the recitation of the priestly blessing. See Hilchot Nesiat Kapayim 15:3. There the Rambam also excludes a priest who was compelled to serve idols and he cites a different prooftext, II Kings 23:9. as [Ezekiel 44:13] states: "They40The priests who "who distanced themselves from Me during Israel's straying, when they strayed after false deities" (Ezekiel 44:10 . shall not draw near to Me, to serve Me." [This prohibition applies] whether [a priest] serves the false deity in its rites, e.g., he became a priest to the false deity, he bowed down to it, or acknowledged its [divinity] and accepted it as god. [In all these instances,] he is disqualified [to serve in the Temple] forever.If [such a priest] transgressed and performed service, his sacrifice is not considered as a pleasing fragrance41I.e., though it is not disqualified, it is not considered as desirable. even if he acted inadvertently when he served, bowed down to, or acknowledged [the false deity]. If, by contrast, one slaughtered an animal for a false deity inadvertently and then transgressed and offered a sacrifice [in the Temple], the sacrifice is considered a pleasing fragrance and is accepted, for he did not perform service for the false deity or become its priest; all he did was slaughter an animal for it42Note a parallel in Hilchot Shechitah 2:15. and that was performed inadvertently. Nevertheless, as an initial preference, he should not perform service [in the Temple].
If one transgressed and built a shrine outside the Temple and offered a sacrifice to God there,43The Rambam is not speaking about a mere hypothetical situation. As he relates in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Menachot 13:10), Chonio, the son of Shimon the Just entered into a power struggle with his brother Shimi to inherit his father's position as High Priest. Chonio incurred the people's wrath, because he brought about a very deprecating situation in the Temple. He fled to Alexandria where he established a following, constructed a temple to God resembling the Temple in Jerusalem, and offered sacrifices there just like those offered in Jerusalem. Needless to say, our Sages shunned Chonio's shrine, because its sacrificial worship violated the prohibition against offering sacrifices outside the Temple. Indeed, the majority of those who worshiped there were non-Jewish Egyptians whom Chonio had attracted to God's service. it is not considered as a Temple to a false deity. Nevertheless, any priest who serves in such a shrine should never serve in the Temple. Similarly, utensils that were used there should never be used in the Temple. Instead, they should be entombed. It appears to me44This represents a conclusion reached by the Rambam on the basis of deduction without a prior Rabbinic source. that if a priest who served in such [a shrine] performs service in the Temple, it does not invalidate it.45Since they were disqualified by Rabbinic decree, after the fact, their service is acceptable (Kessef Mishneh).
Thus there are eighteen factors that disqualify [a person] from serving [in the Temple]. They are: a) one who served a false deity;46Halachah 13. b) a non-priest;47Halachah 1. c) one with a disqualifying physical blemish;48Chapter 6, Halachot 1-2. d) one who is uncircumcised;49Ibid.:8. e) one who is impure;50Chapter 4, Halachah 1. f) one who immersed that day [and must wait until nightfall to become pure];51Ibid.:4. g) one who is lacking atonement;52Ibid.:5. h) one who is in a state of acute mourning;53Chapter 2, Halachah 7. i) one who is intoxicated;54Chapter 1, Halachah 1. j) one who is lacking the priestly garments;55Hilchot K'lei HaMikdash 10:4. k) one who is wearing extra garments;56Ibid.:5. l) one whose garments were torn;57Chapter 1, Halachah 14. m) one whose hair has grown long;58Ibid.:8-9. n) one who did not wash his hands and feet;59Chapter 5, Halachah 1. o) one who sits;60Ibid.:17. p) one who had an entity intervening between his hand and the sacred utensil [he is using];61Ibid. q) one who had an entity intervening between his foot and the earth;62Ibid. r) one who served with his left hand.63Ibid.:18.All of the above are disqualified from serving and if they serve, they invalidate their service with the exception of those with long hair, those with torn garments, and one who slaughtered for a false deity inadvertently. If these individuals serve, their service is acceptable.
