=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
מבוי – which is not wide sixteen cubits, even though it is open from its two points into the public domain; alternatively, it is sixteen cubits wide but it is not open, but one head is open to the public domain and the other head is closed, but from the Torah, it is permitted to carry in it without any repair, but the Rabbis made a decree against it, lest they come to carry in full public domain and they permitted with an establishment of a stake fastened in the ground (by the side of a wall, serving as a mark or as a fictitious partition for the purpose of enabling those who live in an ally to move objects on the Sabbath) or a beam/post so that it will have recognition/a sign. But if he placed the beam above twenty cubits high, he should lower it, meaning to say, he should lower the beam so that it will be lower than twenty cubits high, for higher than twenty cubits, it is not discernible to the eye/the eye is attracted, and if [his] beam has a ceiling (see Talmud Eruvin 3a – for different opinions of the meaning of his word), which means drawings/embroidery and is open even higher than twenty cubits, he does not have to lower it, for through these drawings/embroidery, it is discernible to the eye/the eye is attracted.
רבי יהודה אומר א"צ – for the reason of the beam is not because of recognition but because of a partition since we said, the mouth of the ceiling goes down and closes up, and since his is the case, what difference does it make within twenty [cubits] and/or higher than twenty [cubits], but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
והרחב מעשר אמות ימעט – for more than ten cubits, it is not called an opening, but rather a breach, and we require an opening. Therefore, he should reduce the width of the entrance and reduce it to ten [cubits] or less.
ואם יש לו צורת פתח – in every place where the Sages stated “a form of a doorway” (in width), even if his a reed from here and a reed from there ten handbreadths high or more, and a reed on top of them, even though it doesn’t touch them and even though it is higher than them more than three handbreadths. And all of the cubits that are taught in this Mishnah and in all of [Tractates] Eruvin, and Sukkah and Kilayim, a cubit is six handbreadths and each handbreadth is four fingers with the thumb, but sometimes one needs to measure a “sorrowful” (pressed together) handbreadth (i.e., four fingers closely joined), meaning to say, that one should not make a space in the fingers with the thumb between one to the other, but rather, they would be pressed against each other and touching each other, and sometimes, one must make a space between each digit so that they do not touch each other and this is called the liberal (or smiling) handbreadth. How is this the case? At the time when the measurement Is with the “sorrowful” (pressed together) handbreadth, it is stringent such as an alley entrance which is higher than twenty cubits, he should lower it, and a Sukkah which higher than twenty cubits is invalid, we measure with a “sorrowful” handbreadth, but at the time when the measurement is with a liberal (or “smiling”) handbreadth which is stringent, such as an alleyway entrance, its height cannot be less than ten handbreadths; a Sukkah which is higher than ten handbreadths, we measure with the liberal handbreadth.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
עושים פסין לביראות – [watering stations (especially in the land of Israel for Temple pilgrims)] that are in the public domain because these watering stations/wells are the private domain, for they are deep ten [handbreadths] and one cannot fill up from them and take it out in to the public domain and they make boards that will make [an empty space] around the cistern which is the private domain and he will fill up and take out and leave there, and his animal can go in completely, or its head and most of its body and gave it to drink.
דיומדין – two pillars where each pillar from these four appears as two. "דיו" in the Greek language is “two.” But when one inserts the pillars that is made like two for the southwestern corner, it is found that one wall inclines towards the east, and one wall to the north and the second to the northwestern corner leans one side to the east and the other side to the south, and when you place all four of them in the four corners, it is found that direction is two cubits – one wall corresponding to a cubit and the space between them.
וארבעה פשוטים – in the middle, he places in each direction a board that is a cubit wide, and at the time when there isn’t between each board from these four corner-pieces made of rectangularly joined or of a block dug out In the shape of a trough, four of which corner-pieces form, in legal fiction, an enclosure of wells (see Talmud Eruvin 19a), but rather ten cubs or less, Rabbi Meir admits that there is no need for these plain boards, but if there is more than thirteen and one-third cubits between them, Rabbi Yehuda admits that they need plain boards; they do not dispute other than from ten until thirteen and one-third cubits as Rabbi Meir states that they require plain boards and Rabbi Yehuda states that they don’t, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
שתי רבקות של שלש שלש בקר – for the width of each cattle is two cubits minus one-third, it is found that that the width of six cattle is ten cubits and that is the space that one can place between each and every board, according to Rabbi Meir. But if the width is greater than this, he needs to increase the number of plain boards.
רבקות – from the language (I Samuel 28:24): “[The woman had] a stall-fed calf [in the house].”
ר"י אומר של ארבע ארבע – they are thirteen and one-third cubits.
קשורות אבל לא מותרות – that you should not say that they are sort of tied and not actually tied, for that reason it was taught in the Mishnah, “"אבל לא מותרות/but not slack or loosely to be stringent and to reduce the space that is between them.
אחת נכנסת ואחת יוצאה – one team of cattle entering and one team leaving and there is greater width than if both of them would have been going out or both of them leaving and this is a leniency since we don’t require to be so squeezed in.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
בכל מערבין – the joining of borders/עירובי תחומין (i.e., placing a small amount of food somewhere within the two-thousand cubit limit, establishing that location as one’s residence for Shabbat, and the two thousand cubits are measured from there), whereas the joining of courtyards/עירובי חצרות – is not made other than with bread (i.e., all the inhabitants of a serious of homes sharing a common courtyard place food in one place before Shabbat, they are considered as an extended household and one may carry within the courtyard), and this "בכל"/”with any” that is taught in our Mishnah , is not exact, as we state in the Gemara (Tractate Eruvin 27a): “one may not derive anything from the general statement, not even when an exception is stated (as there may be other exceptions),” for surely here it is taught in our Mishnah: “With any [food] do they prepare the Eruv… except for water and salt,” and there are also a kind of mushroom and truffles that we don’t make Eruvin and merging [of alleyways] with them (i.e., if several courtyards open into a common alleyway, it is prohibited for the inhabitants of the houses in the courtyards to carry within the alleyway unless he inhabitants of each house place food in one place for the duration of Shabbat together with the placement of a side pole placed at the entrance to the alleyway or a cross-beam placed over it to mark the entrance to the alleyway and that it is prohibited to carry outside the alleyway), and these are not food, like water and salt.
ומשתתפים – merging of alleyways.
הכל נלקח בכסף מעשר – as it is written (Deuteronomy 14:26): “and spend the money on anything you want – [cattle, sheep, wine, or other intoxicant or anything you may desire].”
חוץ מן המים ומן המלח – for it is not fruit from fruit.
הנודר מן המזון – not that he said: “that nourishment should be forbidden to me,” for it is not called “nourishment”/מזון – other than from five species that nourishes and satisfies (see Talmud Eruvin 30a), but rather, as for example, that he said, all that feed me – I take a vow of abstinence (as a substitute for the word “sacrifice”/קרבן ), and all words of support/nourishing and we impose an oath by hours, except from water and salt.
מערבין לנזיר ביין – and even though it is not proper for him (as Nazirites are forbidden to partake of wine as part of their vow), it is proper for others.
ולישראל בתרומה – for this (i.e., heave-offering) is appropriate [only] for Kohanim.
סומכוס אומר חולי – fo we require something that is appropriate to him, and regarding wine for a Nazirite, Sumchos does not dispute, because it is possible that the Nazirite will come before a scholar for absolution from his vow and the wine will [then] be permitted to him on that Shabbat, but Terumah/heave-offering, it is impossible that it will be appropriate for an Israelite (as Terumah is only for a Kohen), for even an Israelite who separates the heave-offering upon it, and behold it will be as if it had not been lifted up, for behold, it returns to eatables that are forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts, and it is forbidden to eat from it until he returns and separates another heave-offering, for we don’t separate heave-offering on Shabbat, even at twilight; therefore, it is not appropriate for him. But the Halakha is not according to Sumchos.
ולכהן בבית הפרס – it is taught anonymously and is not Sumchos who said it.
בית הפרס – it is field in which a grave was ploughed, it is permitted for a Kohen to enter there when he is breathing and walking by, and sees that he doesn’t touch a bone the size of a barley-corn, and because of this, it is permitted to place his Eruv there, for he is able to enter in the place where he placed his Eruv, but he and his Eruv are in another place.
לחוץ – to make a partition between himself and the grave so that it would not cause Levitical uncleanness arising from being under the same shelter with, or forming a shelter over, a corpse, such, for example that he would enter there with a chest, ark, and/or a turret. So we see that is appropriate for him but the dispute of Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis we establish in the Gemara (Tractate Eruvin 30b-31a) that even regarding an Israelite, the Rabbis dispute upon that of Rabbi Yehudah, and they state that we don’t place the joining of borders (i.e., by placing a enough food for a small meal somewhere within one’s two thousand cubit limit, one establishes that location as one’s residence for Shabbat) in a cemetery but the Mishnah did not mention the Kohen, other to inform us of the strength of Rabbi Yehuda’s [opinion], for even a Kohen they permitted, and in this, they dispute, for Rabbi Yehuda holds that even though it is prohibited to benefit and to use the cemetery, it is permitted to place the Eruv there, for we don’t make a joining of borders other than for a matter of a commandment, but the commandments were not given to benefit from them but even though the Eruv guards after its acquisition , for at twilight it acquires and already the commandment has been performed and it guards there the entire Shabbat, Rabbi Yehuda holds that a person is not strict regarding his Eruv if he lost it or it was stolen after he acquired it, but the Rabbis hold that a person is strict regarding his Eruv after he acquired it and desires that it not be stolen; therefore, when the Eruv is guarded in the cemetery all of Shabbat after he acquired it at twilight and the commandment was completed, it was found that he is using something that is forbidden for benefit, and that the graves are forbidden for benefit and therefore, a person should not leave his Eruv in the cemetery and the Halakha is according to the Sages.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
מי שהוציאוהו עובדי כוכבים – to force him [to go] outside the [Sabbath] limit/the marked off area around a town within which it is permitted to move on the Sabbath – based upon Exodus 16:29 – two thousand cubits in every direction.
או רוח רעה – a demon entered in him and confused his mind and he went outside the [Sabbath] limit and he returned to his sanity and behold he was outside the [Sabbath] limit.
החזירוהו לתוך התחום כאילו לא יצא – for behold the entire city is like four hundred cubits to him as it was at the outset and two-thousand cubits in every direction when they carried him out and returned him against his will, but if he left under his own power even though he was returned against his will or he was carried out against his will and returned under his own power, he has nothing ought four cubits.
הוליכוהו לעיר אחרת – and behold it is surrounded by partitions or that they placed him in a pen or in a stable which are surrounded and their enclosing fence is large.
מהלך את כולה – for since it is surrounded by partitions, it is like four cubits.
ר' יהושע ור' עקיבא אומרים אין לו אלא ארעב אמות – for since he did not make Shabbat in the empty space with partitions while it was still daylight, the partitions have no effect for him. But my teachers/rabbis explained that since they decreed that a pen or a stable is on account of an unguarded field, which has no partitions and in an unguarded field, all the world admits that he doesn’t have anything other than four cubits.
מפרנדיסין – name of a place.
והפליגה – when it becomes distant from the shoreline and enters into the middle of it (i.e., the ocean), it is called separation on the language of (Psalms 1:3): “[He is like a tree planted] beside streams of water.”
הלכו את כולה – they were walking throughout the ship and even though the ship traveled on the Sabbath and went outside of the [Sabbath] limit, it is like someone who went outside of the [Sabbath] limit and was placed in a pen or a stable for the ship is surrounded by partitions.
שרצו להחמיר על עצמן – that for them, they decreed that a pen or a stable is on account of an unguarded field on the ship; all the while that it is traveling, it is permitted to walk throughout it and furthermore, since they made the Sabbath in the empty space with partitions while it was still daylight, but they wanted to be stringent. But the Halakha is according to Rabban Gamaliel and Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
כיצד מעברין (how do they extend the city limits -for defining the Sabbath limit) – the language of a pregnant woman whose belly protrudes. And this is what he said, how does she have the extension of the city limits? If one house enters, and another house leaves, etc. And when he comes to put up a marker as a sign of the boundary of the city and he comes to measure two-thousand [cubits] outside it. But if hits wall was not part of it but rather the near-by houses and they were connected, and there is a house that enters into the city more than its neighbor, and its entrance appears defective, and there is house that protrudes and goes out side more than its neighbor.
או פגום נכנס פגום יוצא – there are towers protrude in the wall, sometimes they protrude inwards and sometimes outwards.
או שהיו שם – at one of the corners of the city.
גדודיות גבוהות (ruins/debris – ten handbreadths high) – broken parts of the wall of the destroyed homes, and there are within seventy cubits and remnants of the city.
או נפשות (structure next to or over a tomb) – a building that they make on the grave, and it has within them a dwelling house.
מוציאין את המדה כנגדן – if these protrusions are near the northeastern corner, we see as if there is another protrusion corresponding to it on the southwestern corner, and a chord is stretched from one to the other and measures from the chord and outward, in order that the [Sabbath] limit is equivalent to the two corners, and it won’t be long here and short there.
ועושין אותן – the [Sabbath] limits square, so that there should be two-thousand [cubits] to the sides like there is in the middle. But not round, so that there will be two-thousand [cubits] in the middle, and on the sides, they are reduced in the manner of something round.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
הדר. מי שאינו מודה בערוב – a Cuthean or a Sadducee.
הרי זה אוסר עליו – to carry from his house to the courtyard until he would rent permission from him that he has in his courtyard.
לעולם אינו אוסר עד שיהיו שני ישראלים – whether the first Tanna/teacher [of our Mishnah], whether Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov – the residence of an idolater is not called a residence, and by law, it should not prohibit, but the Rabbis decreed this in order that a Jew should not live with an idolater and that he should not learn from his actions. The first Tanna/teacher [of our Mishnah] holds that even though the idolater is suspected of being a murderer and it is prohibited for a Jew to be alone with him, sometimes it happens that a Jew resides with an idolater and the Rabbis state that an Eruv has no effect in the place of an idolater and the nullification of one’s domain has no effect in in the place of an idolater until he leases, for the idolater will not lease because he is suspected of witchcraft and because of this, a Jew will not come to dwell with an idolater and will not learn from his actions. But Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov holds that since the idolater is suspected of being a murderer, there are two [things] that are found present in residing that the Rabbis decreed concerning them: One – that it is not frequent a resident is forbidden to be alone with him, the Rabbis did not make a decree. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov and we rent from the idolater, even for less than a penny/Perutah, and even on Shabbat and even though the idolater does not resign his possession until a Jew will rent from him, he can resign his possession and even on Shabbat, for he would say to his fellow, that since my domain was not included in the Eruv, my possession is resigned to you (for Sabbath purposes – see Talmud Eruvin 69b), and he would be prohibited from carrying in the courtyard while his fellow (i.e., the idolater) is permitted, and if they wish after his fellow had completed carrying what he needed for himself, his fellow could go back and annul his possession and he would be permitted while his fellow would be prohibited.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
חלון. בתוך י' – that it is a part of it and even a minimum amount within ten [handbreadths] nearest the ground.
מערבין שנים – two Eruvin, these to themselves and those to themselves and they are prohibited one with the other. .
ואם רצו מערבין א' – one Eruv that they will their Eruv in the other one and make their Eruv with them and it will be one/united [for both].
פחות מד' – it is not an opening/door and it is not appropriate to pass from this one to that one, and above ten [handbreadths] it is not satisfactory; therefore, we don’t make one Eruv, and specifically in a courtyard that is not its source, but in the original house, even if it is above ten [handbreadths] we make one Eruv in the manner to place benches and chests around the house and it is usage is satisfactory.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
כיצד. לכל מי שילך לבית האבל וכו' – that these are matters [pertaining to] a Mitzvah, and we hold that one does not make a joining of borders/עירובי תחומין other than for a Mitzvah.
וכל מי שקבל עליו – to rely upon this Eruv, it is permitted.
ומשחשיכה אסור – and these words [apply] when they didn’t inform him while it was still daylight [on Friday before Shabbat], but if he informed him while it was still daylight [on Friday], even if he hadn’t accepted upon himself to rely upon this Eruv for certain, other than once it became dark, it is permitted.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
כל גגות העיר רשות אחד – and even though that the inhabitants below are divided into two [kinds of] people, nevertheless, the roofs whose usage is not frequent, they do not have the division of the domain and utensils that were kept for the Sabbath on this roof, it is permitted to reove them to the other [roof].
ובלבד שלא יהא גג גבוה מחבירו י' -that if it is divided from them at the height of ten [handbreadths] it is forbidden to carry from it to the [other] roofs, as a decree because of a mound/hill that is ten [handbreadths] high and four [handbreadths] wide in the public thoroughfare [which is the private domain] that they would not come to carry upon him.
כל אחד רשות לעצמו – if the inhabitants who are below did not make an Eruv, it is prohibited to carry from this [roof] to that [roof].
ר' שמעון – is more lenient than all of them, and he states, that roofs and courtyards and outside areas [of seventy cubits added to city limits for purposes of Sabbath distances] which ae not more than a field requiring one Seah of seed since for all of hem their usage is not unique and frequent, they are one domain, and we carry from one to the other without an Eruv, and evn if there roofs that were higher than ten [handbreadths] or much lower than ten [handbreadths], for Rabbi Shimon does not hold by [the concept] of עירובי חצרות/borders of courtyards except because of the utensils of the house.
כלים ששבתו בתוכן – utensils that were spending Shabbat/made their Sabbath camp in one oft hem, we remove them one to the other.
ולא לכלים ששבת בתוך הבית – and he brought them out to the courtyard through the members of the courtyard making an Eruv, it is prohibited to remove them from this courtyard to another courtyard if they didn’t make an Eruv for the two courtyards together. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Shimon.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
המוצא תפילין – in a field in a place where they (i.e., the Tefillin) are not guarded.
זוג זוג – one for the head and another for the arm, in the manner that one dons them on weekdays, and that is as a pair, and then he always returns them and brings them in pair by pair until he brings in all of them, as he (i.e., the anonymous Tanna of our Mishnah) holds that Shabbat is a time for Tefillin, but the Sages made a decree upon them lest a strap breaks and he brings them with his hand, and if he were to don more than one pair, there is [the problem] of “not adding [to the commandment]” and this prohibition of “not adding” compares them upon him as a burden. But Rabban Gamaliel holds that Shabbat is not a time for Tefillin and that is the reason why the Rabbis permit saving them because it is adornment; hence, we bring them in two pairs at a time. For two pairs are an adornment since we taught that where there is on the head a place to wear two Tefillin, and all the while that they are an adornment, it is permitted, but because of [the prohibition of]“not adding” doesn’t apply here, for there is no commandment of Tefillin here at all, other than the rest of mere clothing. But the Halakha is not according to Rabban Gamaliel.
בישנות – where the knot is recognized (i.e., in old Tefillin) that they are definitely Tefillin and they have sanctity, and it is prohibited to place them in a contemptable location, but new Tefillin, we do not desecrate the Sabbath for them to bring them in for perhaps there are a mere amulet, and there is no sanctity other when they are made according to Jewish law for their purpose [of being Tefillin].
צבותים – each pair of Tefillin is tied to itself.
כרוכים – many pairs [of Tefillin are tied] together.
מחשיך עליהן – he sits and guards them until it becomes dark, and once it becomes dark, he brings all of them in together as in the case when they are many. For if he were to bring them pair by pair, he would not complete his bringing them in prior to the night, and if they are in a manner that he would complete bringing them in to the house before the night, he brings them in pair by pair as we stated.
ובסכנה – when they decreed religious persecution [against the Jewish religion] to not wear Tefillin, and our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: when is this said, in the danger of religious persecution, but if he fears to delay there because of robbers, he carries them less than four cubits.
