=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
בשלשה מקומות הכהנים שומרים – not because of fear of robbers and/or thieves, but that of the honor and splendor for the Temple, that it should not be without guards, and this guarding, its commandment is the entire night. And these three places that the Kohanim guard correspond to what is written in the Torah (Numbers 3:38): “Those who were to camp before the Tabernacle, in front – [before the Tent of Meeting, on the east – were Moses and Aaron and his sons,] attending to the duties of the sanctuary, as a duty on behalf of the Israelites,” as a hint to three watches in three places. For just as that in the Tabernacle, Aaron and his two sons were guarding in three places, even so in the Temple as well.
בית אבטינס ובית הניצוץ – two upper chambers were built on the side of the gates of the Temple courtyard, but the House of the Hearth was not upon it, but rather an arch , ARKVELT in the foreign tongue, which was made in the land, such was explained at the beginning of the Tractate Tamid (1:1).
והלוים בעשרים ואחד מקום – that in twenty-four places they would need to guard the Temple, as it is written in [First] Chronicles [26:17-18): “At the east – six Levites; at the north – four daily; at the south – four daily; at the vestibule – two by two; at the colonnade on the west – four at the causeway and two at the colonnade,” that makes here twenty-four divisions of duty/watches, three of them were Kohanim as we stated in the opening clause [of the Mishnah], and twenty-one of them were Levites. But even though that Scripture did not state anything other than Levites, Kohanim are also called Levites , as it is written (Ezekiel 44:15): “But the Levitical priests descended from Zadok [who maintained the service of My Sanctuary when the people of Israel went astray from Me – they shall approach Me to minister to Me.”
חמשה – guards at the five gates of the Temple Mount.

מתוכו – from inside to the walls of the Temple Mount.
על חמשה שערי עזרה – this Tanna/teacher holds that there are only five gates for the Temple courtyards But even according to the one who states further on (see Tractate Middot, Chapter 1, Mishnah and Tractate Tamid 27a), he admits that there wasn’t a division of duty/guard other than on five [gates of the Temple courtyard – that the House of the Flame and the House of the Hearlth were watched by Kohanim or that the gates that were in the middle of the north and the south didn’t require special guarding, as they were guarded by those at the first and third gates].
על ארבע פנותיה מבחוץ – because there is no sitting in the Temple courtyard other than for only the kings of the House of David, and it was not possible for a guard to watch while standing all the night, therefore, the guards were in the corners of the Temple courtyard, and similarly, the guards in the gates of the Temple courtyard would guard from outside, in order that they would be permitted while sitting, and the Scriptural verse (First Chronicles 26:18) esd used as a support (i.e., they leaned their enactment against a Biblical text) – as it is written: “two at the colonnade,” towards the outside, meaning to say, outside the wall of the Temple courtyard.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The Temple Mount was five hundred cubits. It was enclosed by a wall
The greater part of it was on the south; next to that on the east. Meaning, the distance from the wall of the Temple Mount to the wall of the [Temple] Courtyard on the southern side was greater than the distance between those [walls] on the eastern side. And the distance between those [walls] on the eastern side was greater than the distance between them on the northern side. And the northern [side] was greater than the south[ern side].

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
המזבח היה שלשים ושתים אמה על שלשים ושתים אמה – he would bring a square frame made from four boards, each board is thirty-two cubits long and the board is one cubit wide, and it is the height of the frame, and he fills it with stones, lime and pitch/tar and molten lead, and it is made into one piece of thirty-two cubits by thirty-two cubits, one cubit high. And this is the foundation/base of the altar.
עלה אמה וכנס אמה (it rose by a cubit and drew in by a cubit – on every side) – after the foundation rose to the height of a cubit, he brings another frame whose length is the entire board is thirty cubits and a width of the board, that is the height of this frame is five cubits, and places it on the foundation/base, and fills it with stones, and lime and pitch/tar and lead like the first, and it is attached to the base and becomes one piece of thirty [cubits] by thirty cubits standing on the base/foundation. This is called the סובב/a sort of gallery around the altar for the priest to walk on. It is five cubits higher from the foundation. That is to say, he draws it in by a cubit, which he shortens from the base/foundation a cubit in each direction, and he goes back and a third frame, which is twenty-eight cubits by twenty-eight cubits, three cubits high, and places it in on the SOVEV, and fills it like the first, and this is the place of he the pile of wood on the altar of the Temple which is at the top of the altar. It is found the foundation/base protrudes and goes out from the SOVEV a cubit on each side, and the SOVEV protrudes from the place of the pile of wood on the altar of the Temple one cubit to each side. And afterwards, he brings a frame of one cubit by one cubit which is one cubit high and places it on the corner of the altar and fills it, and this is the corner of the altar, and similarly for the four corners.
מקום הילוך רגלי הכהנים – so that the Kohanim would not have to walk between the corners, but we leave one cubit free from the place of the corners and inwards for the walking of the feet of the Kohanim.
מתחילה – in the days of [King] Solomon.
לא היה אלא עשרים ושמונה על עשרים ושמונה – and they drew it in [by a cubit] and it rose [by a cubit] of he foundation/base and the SOVEV and the place of the corners and the place of the walking of the feet of the Kohanim until there remained the place of the pile of wood on the altar twenty [cubits] by twenty [cubits].
וכשעלו בני הגולה והוסיפו ד' אמות וכו' – it is found that its foundation/base is thirty-two [cubits] by thirty-two [cubits], and the place of its pile of wood on the altar is twenty-four [cubits] by twenty-four [cubits].
ארבע אמות מן הדרום וארבע אמות מן המערב – we have the reading. And this is what I brought in [Tractate] Zevakhim in the Chapter קדשי קדשים/The Holy of Holies (Chapter 6, Mishnah 1 and Tosafot Tractate Zevakhim 61b s.v. ארבע אמות מן הדורם וארבע אמות מן המערב ).
כמין גמא – a Greek Gimmel which is similar to our inverted [letter] Nun. But there (i.e., Talmud Zevakhim 61b) it explains that because of the שיתין /a pit by the side of the altar into which the remainder of the libations was poured, which are the holds where the libations go down, they added to draw the altar to the south and to the west. For initially, during the days of [King] Solomon, they expounded, “[Make for me] an altar of earth [and sacrifice on it your burnt offerings and your sacrifices of well-being]” (Exodus 20:21), filled up with earth, so that it will not be an empty cavity, and when they would offer libations on the Altar in the southwest corner of the altar, the libations would descend from the altar to the floor and flow gently to the pit that was dug there near the the southwestern corner near the altar, and there was not within the altar. But the members of the Exiles added to the building of the altar util there was that same pit/cistern intercepting/absorbing within the altar. And they opened perforations to the top of the altar opposite it so that the libations could descend there. For they would say that drinking is is like eating, for just as eating is consuming in the altar, that is, the burned sacrifices on the altar, so too the drink, that is, the libations would be absorbed by the altar. And the Biblical verse of “an altar of earth” (Exodus 20:21), is expounded that it would be attached to the ground, so that they would not build it on top of rocks nor on top of cavities/caves.
שנאמר והאריאל – this verse is in Ezekiel [Chapter 43, Verse 16] and he would prophesy on the measurements of the Second Temple and for the future times to come.
ואריאל שתים עשרה – measurement of the place of the pile of wood in the altar is stated as twelve.
אל ארבעת רבעיו (in the four quarters thereof) – it teaches that from its middle, he measures twelve cubits in each direction, which are twenty four [cubits] by twenty-four [cubits].
וחוט הסיקרא חוגרו באמצע (and a red line goes around it in the middle) – the red thread was made around the altar in its middle at the end of five cubits of its heigh, which is one cubit below the top part of the SOVEV.
להבדיל בין דמים העליונים – the sin offering of cattle and the burnt offering of fowl whose blood is sprinkled above from the red thread.
לדמים התחתונים – for all of the rest of the sacrifices whose blood is sprinkled below from the thread.
ואוכל בדרום אמה אחת ובמזרח אמה אות – the entire altar was in the portion of Benjamin, except for one cubit on the surface of the length of the east that he would take hold of from the portion of Judah, but rather that there wasn’t a cubit that was in the east on the surface of all of the east, for when that would reach the northeastern corne, it would end within a cubit of the corner, and similarly, the consumption of the southern cubit would not go over the entire face of the south, for when it would reach the southwester corner, it would end a cubit near the corner. And it was found that three corners of the altar were in the portion of Benjamin, and the only the southeastern corner was in the portion of Judah. And because when Jacob blessed Benjamin (Genesis 49:27): “Benjamin is a ravenous wolf; In the morning he consumes the foe, [And in the evening he divides the spoil],” and we translate into Aramaic: “And in his lodging the Holy [Temple] will dwell,” something that is sanctified monetarily will not be other than in the portion of Benjamin, therefore, they did not make the foundation to the altar in the southeastern corner, because that of a tearer was not in his portion (see Talmud Zevakhim 53b), and money, and money would not be given to the tribe in that corner. But when they made the square framework for the base to fill it with stones, and lime and pitch/tar and lead as we stated, they would put wood or every kind of thing in that southeastern corner so that the corner would not fill up, and afterwards they would detach the wood and this corner would remain empty without a foundation. And because of this, it is called, the middle of the Altar SOVEV, because it surrounds and goes around all of the corners, which is not the case with the foundation/base.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
פתחו של היכל. שתים בפנים – in the thickness of the wall that is towards the inside.
ושתים בחוץ – in the thickness towards the outside, for the thickness of the wall of the hall leading to the golden altar (Hekhal) was six cubts, and at the end of the outer cubit of the thickness of the wall, there were the outer doors, one to the right of the opening and one to the left, each of these doors was five cubits wide, and when they were locked, the would touch each other and close the width of the cavity of the opening whose width was ten cubits, and when they were opened towards the inside, they cover five cubits of the thickness of the walls. But two other doors were like these measurements which were fixed at the end of the thickness of the walls towards the inner side, and when they were opened, they cover five cubits from here and five cubits from there from the width of the wall of the sanctuary/Heikhal inside, and there was no wall plastered with gold like in the rest of the Temple, because it was not visible.
אצטברמיטה (pivots, pins at top and bottom of a door turning in sockets) – boards of joints attached on the handles of the links and they are opened, and when he desires, they are bent and folded one on top of the other. Such were all of these doors, whether towards the inside or towards the outside, which were attached through these links, and at the end, one-half a cubit of the thickness of the wall they were fixed, between the doors that are inside and those that are outside, and five cubits of the thickness of the wall interrupt between the outer doors to the inner doors. But each door was five cubits attached from the two boards; each board was two-and one-half cubits, and when the outer door opened towards the inside, its half was bent and folded one on top of the other, and covers from the thickness of the wall two-and half cubits, and similarly, the door that is fixed on the inside, when it is opened to the outer side, it also was bent and folded and covers the two-and -one-half cubits that remained from the thickness of the wall.
שנאמר ושתים דלתות לדלתות שתים – so we see that each and every door was divided into two.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
כל העזרה – all the circumference of the Temple courtyard , that is within that circumference that the Temple was built to its western side and the courtyard and the and the altar on its eastern side.
ארוך מאה ושמונים ושבע – from the east to the west.
על רוחב מאה ושלשים וחמש – from the north to the south.
מקום דריסת רגלי ישראל – and it was called the Courtyard of the Israelites, and the place of the treading of the feet of Kohanim was called the Courtyard of the Kohanim.
המזבח שתים ושלשים – this is explained at the beginning of chapter three (Mishnah 1).
ההיכל מאה אמה – the thickness of the wall of the hallway leading to the interior of the Temple, and the vacant space of the hall, and the thickness of the wall of the Hekhal and empty/vacant space, and the cubit of the Traksin, and the empty space of the House of the Holy of Holies and the wall of the Hekhal to the west, and the compartment and wall of the compartment, all of it is one-hundred cubits as was explained in the chapter above (see Tractate Middot, Chapter 4, Mishnayot 6 and 7).
ואחת עשרה אמה אחורי בית הכפורת – from the outer wall of the Hekhal to the western side until the western wall of the Temple courtyard there was eleven cubits of empty space with the thickness of the wall, which is called the back wall of the innermost of the Temple/the Holy of Holies.
