=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
שנים טמאים במת אחד טמא טומאת שבעה -the entire Mishnah is explained further on.
אדם הנוגע במת, טמא טומאת שבעה – as it is written (Numbers 19:11): “He who touches the corpse of any human being shall be impure for seven days.” Because he has become a primary source of Levitical uncleanness/ritual impurity, as the corpse is a progenitor of the primary sources of ritual impurity/אבי אבות הטומאה.
אדם הנוגע בו טמא טומאת ערב – as it is written (Numbers 19:22): “[Whatever that impure person touches shall be impure] and the person who touches him shall be impure until evening.” Because he became a secondary source of impurity/ולד הטומאה, has only has ritual impurity until nightfall/טומאת ערב. But the Sages decreed on a person who has contact with a טמא מת/one made unclean through a corpse while he is still connected to the corpse, that he will be ritually impure seven [days] (see Talmud Avodah Zarah 37b).

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
אלו מטמאין באוהל, המת וכזית מן המת -and if this is difficult, an olive’s bulk of a corpse defiles, from that which is defiled from contact with the dead, all the more so, this matter is resolved in the Gemara in [Tractate] Nazir [50a, it is needed only for [the case of] a premature/non-viable birth whose limbs were not connected with sinews as it lacks an olive’s bulk of flesh.
נצל (decayed matter – liquid and coagulated portions of a corpse) – the flesh of a corpse that swelled up like a kind of ill-smelling secretion.
מלוא תרוד (A tarvad/spoon-full of dust) – a spoon, and its measurement is two handfuls.
רקב – the body of a corpse when its moisture has departed and it becomes like a kind of dust. But a handful of a a mass of earth from a grave containing parts of a decaying human body doesn’t defile other than from a corpse that was buried naked in a coffin/bier of marble and covered with a covering of marble, until it is known with certainty that there is combination of decayed matter of cloth or wood or other dirt. But a corpse that was buried in its covering or in a wooden ark or in dust, has no decayed matter. And similarly, a corpse that was buried missing a limb has no decayed matter.

אבר מן המת ואבר מן החי – as it is written (Numbers 19:16): “[And in the open, anyone who touches a person who was killed or who died naturally,” a limb that the sword separated from the living is like the corpse.
ורובע עצמות – one quarter of a Kab (i.e., 24 egg-bulks) of bones.
מרוב המנין או מרוב הבנין – My Rabbis/Teachers explained, that they are small/minute from having in them the majority of the number [of bones] and/or the majority of the frame, for even though that they don’t have the majority of the number [of bones] nor the majority of the frame, they defile.
ורוב בנינו ורוב מנינו (the greater portion of a corpse as to the size of limbs and the greater number of joints/limbs)– the majority of the frame of the body, or the majority of the number of the bones even though it is not the majority of the frame of the body, they defile, and even though there isn’t a quarter [of a Kab] in them. And the majority of the frame, such as the legs and the thighs/haunches, and the ribs [and the spine]. And the greater number of joints/limbs, such as the tops of the fingers of the hands and the feet, and similar kinds of things to them, and provided that there will be one-hundred and twenty-five limbs, they defile.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
כל מטמאין באוהל – that are stated above at the beginning of chapter two [Mishnah 1].
שנחלקו – their measurements [were divided] in half.

לתוך הבית – that is within one tent.
רבי דוסא בן הרכינס מטהר – for he holds that they do not combine to make up according to the measurement.
הנוגע בכשני חצאי זיתים מן הנבילה – at the opening of the tent, and separates them from the carrion, to state to you, that just as that Rabbi Dosa holds that they don’t combine for defilement through the overshadowing of the tent, here also he holds that they don’t combine for defilement of contact and for carrying, whether regarding a corpse or whether regarding a carrion.
הנוגע בחצי זית ומאהיל על חצי זית (he who touches half an olive’s bulk and overshadows over half an olive’s bulk) – that the person who overshadows over corpse, is impure as if he was with the corpse in the tent. And in the Gemara [Tractate Hullin, chapter 9] in the chapter העור והרוטב/The Hide and the Broth [of the Meat], folio 125b, it maintains that the overshadowing of the tent in the first clause [of the Mishnah] are pressed ritual impurity (I.e., a corpse or part of a corpse located beneath a roof or a covering imparts ritual impurity only to objects beneath that covering; anything above the covering remains ritually pure if there is a handbreadth between the corpse and the roof or covering), for there isn’t between the defiling agent/defilement less than a handbreadth, and because of this the Sages declare it impure, for all of it is touching/contact. But the concluding clause [of the Mishnah] that stated: “But a person who is in contact with half an olive’s bulk and another thing overshadows him”/אבל הנוגע בכחצי זית ודבר אחר מאהיל עליו וכ' -that the Rabbis agree that it is pure, we are speaking of when there is an opening of a handbreadth between the defilement and between the tent. And in this the Rabbis agree that they do not combine, for touching and the tent are two categories, and those things that are from two categories do not combine. But Rabbi Dosa holds that even with pressed ritual impurity/טומאה רצוצה they don’t combine, and not even for contact [with one half of an olive’s bulk] and the contact of the tent [with one half of an olive’s bulk]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Dosa.
אמר ר' מאיר אף בזו ר' דוסא מטהר וחכמים מטמאין – Rabbi Meir disputes with the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] who stated that when there is an opening between the defilement and the tent of a handbreadth, the Sages admit that it is pure, and that they don’t combine, but he himself said, that even in this the Rabbis dispute with Rabbi Dosa who state that the contact/touching and the tent are one category, hence they combine to make up the measurement and they defile But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.
חוץ מן המגע עם המשא – as for example, that he touched half of the olive’s bulk and he moved a half an olive’s bulk.
והמשא עם האוהל- that he moved half an olive’s bulk and overshadowed with a tent over half an olive’s bulk.
משם אחד – as for example, touching and touching, carrying and carrying, tent and tent.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
מגדל העומד באויר (a tower/cupboard standing isolated) – a wooden turret that has walls but the walls themselves have a cavity in their thickness, such as perforated holes that are open to the inside and the outside but they lack an opening of a handbreadth, and it is customary to hide there needles and hooks/curved pins and small vessels.
שהוא עומד באויר—underneath the airspace of the sky, such as that it stands in the courtyard.
טומאה בתוכו – in the cavity of the turret itself.
כלים שבעוביו – in the thickness of the cavity of the walls.
מחצה למחצה – from its half of the thickness of the cupboard/turret and towards the inside is like the inside, from its half [of the thickness] towards the outside is like the outside. Whether the defilement is in the turret/cupboard and the vessels are in its thickness, or whether the defilement is in its thickness and the vessels are in the turret/cupboard. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
טומאה בתוכו – within the turret/cupboard.
הבית טמא – even though that its doors are sealed. As it (i.e., the Mishnah) explains the reason that the manner of the defilement/uncleanness is to depart from there to the house.
טומאה בבית מה שבתוך המגדל – this is with its doors sealed. For if they are opened, it is no worse than a window that is between the two houses. For the reason that what is within the turret/cupboard is ritually pure, is that there is no path for the defilement that is in the house to enter into the turret/cupboard.
אם יש שם פותח טפח – between the rims of the turret/cupboard and the ground or between the wall of the turret/cupboard to the wall or between the roof the turret to the ceiling of the house.
טמאים – on account of the defilement that is in the house. But if there isn’t there [an opening] of a handbreadth, the turret/cupboard is like a לבוד/joined (i.e., that two solid surfaces are considered to be joined if there is a gap less than three handbreadths between them). And the defilement of the house does not enter there.
טומאה שם הבית טמא – if there was defilement between the rims of the turret/cupboard to the ground of the house. Or [there was defilement] between the roof of the turret to the roof of the house or between the walls of the turret to the walls of the house, even though there isn’t between them an opening of a handbreadth. הבית טמא – for the turret/cupboard does not protect regarding the defilement that is below it within the house so that it doesn’t defile all that is in the house.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
תנור שהוא עומד בתוך הבית – the incision that is made in the oven that the smoke leaves from it is placed outside of the house.
והאהילו עליו נושאי המת – when they would carry the corpse to bury it, the corpse overshadowed over the “eye” (i.e., fire-place] [which is outside the house.
בית שמאי אומרים הכל טמא – for they (i.e., the House of Shammai) hold that the defilement enters into the oven through its “eye (i.e., fire place) and departs through its mouth into the house.
התנור טמא והבית טהור – the oven which overshadowed the corpse on part of it is impure, but the house is ritually pure, for the defilement does not go out through its mouth [according to the School of Hillel].
ר' עקיבא אומר אף התנור טהור – for since it (i.e., the corpse) did not overshadow over the oven but only on the “eye” (i.e., fire-place) that comes out from it, the oven is not impure. But the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
אדם וכלים עשויין אהלים לטמא – a tent that is supported by means of a person or through vessels is considered a tent to defile vessels that are underneath it, even if does not correspond to the defilement, as if they are placed in the tent of the corpse.
אבל לא לטמא – for they are not considered a tent outside in the presence of the defilement.
נדבך (a course of stones) – a large and wide stone. It is the language of (Ezra 6:4): נדבכין די-אבן גלל/”With a course of timber for each three courses of hewn stones.”
כלים שעל גביו טמאין – that it doesn’t interpose and it is like the one who doesn’t hold this opinion, for a tent is not made to make pure.
כלים שתחתיו טמאים – for tents are made to defile.
ורבי אליעזר מטהר – in both, for he holds that a tent is made to purify and it interposes in the face of defilement. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
נתון על ארבעה כלים – if the course of stones/נדבך was placed upon the four vessels even a vessel of dung that are not susceptible to receive ritual impurity.
נתון על ארבעה אבנים – which are not vessels, it is considered as a tent to the outside in the face of the defilement.
דבר שיש בו רוח חיים – except for a human.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
הטומאה. שעל גבה -that are on top of the wall.
טמאות – for the wall serves them, and the heads of he beams of the upper room are inserted/stuck in the wall and he wall is high and it is a partition for all of the upper rooms for this one is higher than that one. And especially when the place of defilement is a handbreadth by a handbreadth, for all of the wall is considered like a sealed grave and it brings the defilement to all of the upper rooms. But the wall is not judged half by half because it doesn’t have even a chip/split to the side of the upper room.
עליה אחת בנויה על גבי שני בתים – [that this wall forms a partition between the two houses] and he upper room is built on top of both of them (i.e., the houses).
היא טמאה – the first upper room, that this wall reaches until the concrete of stone chippings covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as a flooring for the upper story but the defilement bursts forth and ascends in it.
וכל העליות שעל גבה טהורות – for the concrete of stone chippings covering the ceiling of the lower story and serving as flooring for the upper story/מעזיבה that is upon it interposes.
כותל השונית – a wall that is built in the place that sea reaches at the time that it continually stirs up.
טומאה בוקעת ועולה – if there is defilement underneath it, this wall does not defile all of its surroundings, because there is no cavity of a handbreadth.
נפש אטומה (a solid tomb-structure – to which there is no access) -a marker that they build on the grave to indicate the neighborhood of an unclean place, and that which is filled up is built upon the defilement itself but the corpse is not buried in bier in order that there will have a cavity of a handbreadth.
כקבר סתום – that defiles all of its surroundings through contact.
סמך לה סוכות – it refers to the solid tomb-structure/נפש אטומה referred to above, that we state that a person who comes in contact with it from the sides is ritually pure, but if he made for this marking put up to indicate the neighborhood of an unclean place Sukkot similar to a lintel, this Sukkah is impure, because it is similar to the tent of a corpse.
ור' יהודה מטהר – since it is from the sides. Bu the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
יש מביאין את הטומאה – that if they overshadowed over the defilement and humans and/or vessels bring the defilement on a person and on the vessels, and even though they didn’t come in contact/touch the defilement.
וחוצצים – if the defilement is below them, they protect persons and vessels that are upon them. Because they do not interpose in the face of the defilement. And similarly if the defilement is upon them from the outside, it protects vessels that are underneath them.
שידה (chest) a large wooden box like a kind of ark.
תיבה – small similar to tables.
מגדל (turret/cupboard) – of wood made for storage.
כוורת הקש – large baskets made from straw or from willow or branches of palm trees.
כוורת הקנים – like baskets that are made from reeds.
ובור ספינה אלכסנדרית (tank of sweet water in a ship of Alexandrian merchantmen) – the large ships that they go to sea on the large ocean (i.e., Mediterranean Sea), they make within it a large wooden vessel like a cistern that the place in it sweet water that is appropriate for drinking.
והן מחזיקין ארבעים סאה כלה – for since they are large in this measure, they furthermore are not susceptible to receive defilement, and they interpose in the face of defilement.
סקורטיא (a leather bed-sheet) – a hide that the tanners wear at the time of their work.
קטבליא (hide used as a spread) - a hid that they spread over the bed and lie upon it, and we call it NETA in Arabic.
שהן עשויין אהלים – hanging over similar to a tent. And the leather-bed sheet/סקורטיא and the קטבליא/hide used as a spread and the sheet and the matting and the mat are vessels and susceptible to receive ritual defilement, anyway when they are hanging over like tents they interpose before the defilement, for a tent even though it receives defilement interposes in front of the defilement.
ועדר בהמות – when they are standing and not walking and the head of this one is between the legs of that one.
ומכונות חיה ועוף – nests of wildlife and birds. It is the language of (Exodus 15:27): “The place You made to dwell in.”
והעוף ששכן – that was tied on the wall or on the tree.
והעושה מקום לבינה בשבלים – that cover the ears of corn/spike (i.e., the sheaves), a place that is similar to a house.
האירוס והקיסום ודלעת יונית וירקת חמורים (the lily with an aromatic root, the ivy, the Greek gourd and the ass-herbs) – all these are kinds of vegetables whose leaves are wide.
חוץ מן העיגול של דבילה – because that underneath the shade of the pressed cake of figs, they would regularly sit more than the rest of the foods. And this is taught in the Tosefta (Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 9, Halakha 5). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
כוורת – that it has rims [at the bottom] and holds forty Se’ah in wet which are two KOR in dry, that it is susceptible to receive ritual defilement, and reclines on its side within the opening and part of it is outside and part of it is in the house.
ופיה לחוץ – and its rim is inside.
כזית מן המת נתון תחתיה – from outside.
כל שהוא כנגד הזית – if the olive’s bulk [of the corpse] is underneath it and vessels are on top of it opposite it, or the olive’s bulk [of the corpse] is upon it and vessels are underneath it opposite it.
תחתיה וגבה טמא – but what is within it is ritually pure. For even though the hive protects over what is within it, it does not protect on what is underneath it or on top of it opposite the olive’s bulk of defilement, for on what is within it, it is the law that it protects, for even if it is placed in the tent of a corpse it protects with a tightly-sealed cover/airtight lid, since it is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, but what is underneath it and on its back it does not protect since it is a vessel, as is taught in the Mishnah above in Chapter 6 {Mishnah 1]: “Humans and vessels are made into tents to defile, but not to purify.”
וכל שאינו כנגד הזית תוכה והבית טהור – this is what he said: vessels that are underneath it and on top of it that are not opposite the olive’s bulk of defilement, and within it, meaning to say, vessels that are within it and even if hey are opposite the olive’s bulk [of defilement], and vessels also that are in the house, everything is ritually pure.
בבית אין טמא אלא הבית – if the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is in the house, there is nothing ritually impure other than the house, but the vessels that within the hive are pure, for its mouth is towards the outside.
בתוכה הכל טמא – if the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is within the hive, everything is ritually defiled, for we are dealing with a hive which is perforated from the walls with an opening of a handbreadth, as we are required to state further on [Mishnah 3] but rather that the incisions/holes are stopped up with straw, but the closing is not fastened, and it is the manner of the holes/incisions that the defilement goes out to the house since they are not fastened, and even vessels that are under it and on top of from the outside are ritually impure, for since the olive’s bulk [of defilement] we see it as is if it is filled with defilement, and a vessel cannot protect what is underneath it or on top of it. But when the defilement is in the house, we stated above [in this Mishnah] that there is no defilement other than the house, for the defilement does not enter in the hive through the incisions/holes even though they have an opening of a handbreadth, for since they are stuffed up, but it (i.e., the defilement) does not enter through its mouth for its mouth is towards the outside.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
ארובה שהיא בתוך הבית (a hatchway which is in the midst of the house) - and it is uncovered to the airspace, for there is no upper chamber roof from above.
כנגד ארובה טהור (that which is opposite the hatchway) – vessels that are placed below on the ground opposite the hatchway and they see the face of the sky are ritually pure.
מלמעלן (from above) – on the garret window in the wall projecting above the flat roof.
עירב את הטומאה (he combined the defilement) – and everything is impure. The house is impure and the person who places his foot in it is also impure.
וכנגד הטומאה טמא – that the olive’s bulk [of defilement] is stretched to here and to there.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
הבית שנסדק – the roof of the house that was divided on the face of all of it to two parts.
טומאה בחוץ – to the outer side where the opening is.
כלים שבפנים טהורים – for it is not the manner of defilement to enter but only to leave.
ובית הלל אומרים כל שהוא – In the Tosefta (see Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 12, Halakha 1) that “any amount” which is the opinion of the School of Hillel is like the [breadth of the] plumb-line. And the Halakha is according to the School of Hillel.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
נסר שהוא נתון על פי תנור חדש – that was not heated/kindled, that is not susceptible to receive ritual defilement, And we are speaking of an oven that stands in the courtyard or in the garden.
בפותח טפח – that the board is wide and extends outward from the oven a handbreadth around it from all its sides.
שעל גביו – on top of the board.
טהורים – for since the oven is pure, the vessels are protected, and similarly, if defilement is on top of the board and the vessels are underneath the board.
ובישן – as for example, that the oven was heated that is susceptible to receive ritual defilement.
טמא – the oven [is impure]. The board does not protect it. And all the more so, thew vessels that are under the board and that are on the board. And the reason of our Mishnah is that vessels become tents to defile but not to purify, therefore, a new [oven] which is not a vessel protects. An old [oven] which is a vessel does not protect.
ור' יוחנן בן נורי – specifically with an oven. But regarding vessels, he (i.e., Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri) agrees that they are impure. And this is brought in the Tosefta (Tractate Ohalot, Chapter 13, Halakha 1).
נתון על פי שני תנורים – the head of the board on this oven and the other head of the board on the other oven and there is defilement between the two ovens, and we are speaking of old ovens. But the Rabbis go according to their reasoning and Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri according to his reasoning. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
העושה מאור ((he who leaves a light-hole/opening – in the wall – from the start – when building) – a window that is made for its light.
בתחילה – because they need to need the concluding clause: "שיירי המאור"/”remnants of the light,” it teaches in the first clause, “from the start”/"בתחילה".
מקדח גדול של לשכה (the full capacity of a large borer/drill of the chamber) – It is like the Italian Dupondium and like the Neronian Sela and it has the full capacity of a hole of a yoke/pole. If it has in the window like this measure, it brings the defilement to the other side.
שיירי המאור – if thee remains from the window that is not concealed.
חררוהו מים- that the cave was not made at the hand of a person but rather through the running water.
או שרצים – as for example the mole/weasel and the mouse.
או שאכלתו מלחת (or formed through corrosion produced by saline corrosion) – that the land is filled with saline corrosion and it burst forth on its own.
מלא אגרוף – the fist of Ben Battiah (see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 17, Mishnah 12 – Ben Battiah is the nephew of Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai, one of the leaders of the terrorists during the siege of Jerusalem by the Romans) – a large person whose fist was like the large head of all people.
חישב עליו לתשמיש – a window that that the running waters or the reptiles made, that he gave thought to use it and to leave there his belongings.
למאור – to bring in light.
הסריגות (the lattice In the windows) – the partitions which are like net-work in zig-zag that they make in widows of storehouses.
והרפפות (loose lattice work with wide meshes – used for sheds) – partitions that are zig-zag that they make in windows of summer houses where they sit there to cool off.
מצטרפות כמלוא מקדח – the airspace that is between the lattice in the windows, even though there isn’t in one place like the breadth of a hole of a borer/drill, they combine amongst all of them to the size of a borer.
להביא את הטומאה ולהוציא את הטומאה – this is not referring to the dispute between the School of Shammai and the School of Hillel, but it refers to the measurements of the first clause of the Mishnah. And this is what he said: The size of the hole of the large drill/borer and the size of the fist [of Ben Battiah] and the opening of a handbreadth that we stated, all of these measurements, whether to bring in the defilement into the house or whether to remove the defilement from the house. But Rabbi Shimon disputes this, and holds, whether to bring in or whether to remove, for all of them their measurement is the opening of a handbreadth, and Shimon does not have the measurement of the size of the hole of the borer or the size of the fist at all. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
הזיז שפניו למטה (the projection from the door frame serving as a shed over the entrance, or a molding projecting from a window-sill serving as a bracket --- the finished side of which faces the ground) – like a tablet/board that projects out from the wall outward and its head is bent to the land to side of the opening. Therefore, its tent combines with the opening and brings the defilement in any amount and it is considered as if it has an opening of a handbreadth, but if the defilement is underneath it, the house is impure, that we see its head bent downward as if it reached the ground and it brings defilement to the side of the house.
וגיזרה – that it faces upward. Its head is bent upward and its tent does not combine with the opening, therefore, it requires an opening of a handbreadth.
וגבלית (a Giblean balcony) – The Tosefta (Tosefta Ohalot, Chapter 14, Halakha 9) explains that it is vessel which sucks from (is girded to the wall on) both sides and left alone (without support) in the middle.
שנים עשר טפחים – for the measurement each נדבך/course of stones or tier/layer is four handbreadths, and a נדבך is a row of the stones of the building.
והעטרות (cornice, molding, wreaths -above the entrance) – stones arranged in a circle that protrude from the wall above from the opening similar to an archway for beauty.
והפתוחים (and the engravings -above the entrance)- that they make from stone on the opening or on the window for beauty, and sometimes they protrude from the window or from the opening a handbreadth or more.

=== 15 | chapter 15 ===
סגוס עבה (a thick coarse woolen blanket) – This Mishnah was explained above (i.e., Chapter 11) in the chapter "הבית שנסדק"/The house that was split [Mishnah 3]. And since it is necessary to teach about boards/planks, it is taught once again here.
ואם היו של שיש – even if the larger one was a handbreadth above the ground, it is not considered a tent to bring the defilement, since the lower one reduces the airspace because they are considered like the ground. But boards/planks of wood are not considered like the ground at the time when the upper one is a handbreadth higher than the ground, even though the lower one reduces the airspace, the upper one brings the defilement.

=== 16 | chapter 16 ===
כל המיטלטלין מביאין את הטומאה – because of the tent. For if it overshadows its one head over the corpse and other head over the vessels, it brings the defilement.
כעובי המרדע (as thick as an ox-goad) – even if it lacks the width of a handbreadth but rather that it has in its circumference a handbreadth. For a thread of a handbreadth surrounds it, for they (i.e., the Rabbis) decreed on its circumference because of is thickness.
אקפח את בני (May I bury my children -an oath frequently used by Rabbi Tarfon) – I will bury them. [The word] קיפוח/deprivation – is the language of mutilation/excision or cutting. And it is an oath, “may I bury my children if this thing is not true” that this Halakha is forced/prevented, defected/lopped and cut piece-meal. For we require an opening of a handbreadth.
ששמע השומע – when the question was asked through an actual event/incident in the Bet Midrash/academy and he heard that they defiled and he did not know for what reason they defied it. They defiled the ox-goad because of the utensils that overshadow over the corpse, that the vessel itself that overshadows the corpse is impure regardless of the amount, for we don’t require an opening of a handbreadth other than to bring the defilement under its second head, and they defiled the farmer either because of either for the reason of connections or because he had vessels that touched the corpse and a person [who came in contact] with vessels and is impure for a period of seven days. But the listener erred to state that they defiled him for the reason that the ox-goad brings upon him defilement from the law of the tent.
שיהו דברי חכמים מקויימים (that the words of the Sages may endure) – that they say that the ox-goad brings the defilement.
על האדם הנושאן – there are times when a person who carries them does not have upon him anything other than defilement for one night, for his clothing interrupts between his shoulder and the ox-goat and it is for him “that he will offer with that he will offer to that he will offer,” (see Leviticus 21:17, 18 and 22:3) that a person who sees that they defile him a defilement of an evening will err to state that it is because of the tent that they defiled him, because it has a circumference of a handbreadth, and it comes to inform us that the defilement of a tent has naught other than the defilement of an evening. Therefore, they (i.e., the Sages) decreed upon him “like the thickness of an ox-goad” to defile for a period of seven days according to their words (i.e., of the Rabbis) because of the tent.
ועל עצמן בכל שהוא – for a vessel that overshadows over a corpse is impure, even of any amount.
ועל שאר אדם וכלים – that is underneath the ox-goad.
בפותח טפח – because they don’t defilement at all, it doesn’t belong to defile on its circumference because of its thickness.

=== 17 | chapter 17 ===
החורש. בית הפרס – a place where the defilement is separated and flattened/straightened there. But my Rabbis explained that [the word] פרס is "דבר פרוס ושבור" (see also the Bartenura commentary to Tractate Niddah, Chapter 7, Mishnah 5 where the same phrase appears) something that is broken and injured, that the bones of the corpse were broken/divided there. And from the mouth of others I heard that as a result that the feet of human beings are prevented from walking there because of the defilement.
מלא מענה (a furrow’s length) – of a plough. From the place of he grave that he began to plow until one-hundred cubits along the length of the field by one-hundred [cubits] in width, we are concerned lest the plough carries from him a [piece of human] bone the size of a barleycorn. But if he would continue ploughing outside of the one-hundred cubits, from one-hundred cubits and outward, it is ritually pure, for the plough does not carry bones of a grave other than up until one-hundred cubits.
בית ארבעה סאין (a space of four Se’ah) – one-hundred cubits in length by one-hundred cubits in width is the place of seeding four Se’ah. For the courtyard of the Tabernacle that was one-hundred by fifty is Bet Se’atayim, as we state in [Tractate] Eruvin [23b], it is found that one-hundred cubits by one-hundred cubits is a Bet Arbah Se’ah.
רבי יוסי אומר בית חמש – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
ובמורד (and in descent) - meaning to say, this measure that we stated to the first Tanna/teacher [of the Mishnah] and to Rabbi Yossi, to him as he holds and to the other (i.e., Rabbi Yossi) as he holds, these words [refer to] when the plough carries in descent, that it [looks like he] is rolling it from afar, and the same law applies when the land is on a plain level. But in an ascent, when he plows and ascends, according to the words of the first Tanna/teacher, he gives a quarter of a Kab of vetches on the knee-shaped pole of the plough- as far as the knee of the plough enters the soil, which is a bent wooden cavity made like a knee that the plough is affixed to, and it makes in its rim/bottom of the vessel a small incision like the measure that went out from it one globule/stone or kernel of a stone fruit, nut from the globules of the vetches, and it brings the plough and the globules fall off bit by bit, and in a place where the vetches have run out, not much falls from them together other than three globules each one by the side of the other and there was completed the Bet HaPras (i.e., the place declared - unclean on account of crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave).
רבי יוסי אומר במורד ולא במעלה – they did not say the law of the Bet HaPras other than in descent, but when the plough ascends to at a height where there is no Bet HaPras at all, for immediately the hand of the plough is emptied and if there is a bone there it falls. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.


=== 18 | chapter 18 ===
כיצד בוצרים בית הפרס (how do they cut grapes in an area in which uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or a corpse or crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave)- so that the grapes that grew in it would be ritually pure.
מזין על האדם ועל הכלים – on the third day [they would sprinkle].
ושונין – on the seventh day [they repeat it].
ומוציאין חוץ לבית הפרס – and even though that one cuts grapes for the vat for wine-pressing are fit for receiving Levitical uncleanness and this is one of eighteen matters that they decreed on the day [that Rabban Gamaliel was deposed as head of the Sanhedrin (see Tractate Berakhot 28a)], these words [refer to] defilement according to the Torah, but concerning the defilement of the a field where uncertainty exists concerning the location of a grave or corpse or crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave is Rabbinic, and we don’t consider it a fitness to become unclean. And because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took [the term] and taught: “they sprinkle on the man and on the vessels [and repeat the process],” in order that they would be pure from defilement according the Torah (see Numbers 19:19, and even though they go back and become defiled in the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave at the time of the harvesting of grapes, further, the grapes are not defiled through their contract because of the defilement of the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave all the while that they did not have a complete fitness to become unclean.
ואחרים – who did not enter into the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave.
מקבלין – from those who cut/harvest the grapes.
ומוליכין לגת – in other vessels. But those who cut/harvest the grapes do not bring them to the vat for wine-pressing, because the vat is filled with liquids and they are pronounced fit [for Levitical uncleanness] for a complete fitness.
ואם נגעו אלו באלו – those who cut/harvest the grapes came in contact with/touched the others who receive [the grapes]. טמאים – those who receive [the grapes] and they all of the grapes. For a person that is defiled in a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave become a primary source of ritual defilement/ אב הטומאהand it defiles people and vessels [according to the School of Hillel]
. בית שמאי אומרים אוחז את המגל – that they (i.e., the School of Shammai) holds that the person who harvests [grapes] in the vat becomes fit for Levitical uncleanness even for the defilement of a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave, and because of this, he must hold on to a sickle wrapped in a fibrous substance/bast of a palm tree when he harvests that does not receive defilement.
או בוצר בצור (or he harvests with a flint) – and it is a sharp stone that is not a vessel.
ונותן לתוך הכפישה (places it into an inverted vessel/a vessel divided into two compartments by the bottom between) – a large vessel that one harvests olives in, that it doesn’t receive ritual defilement.
ומוליך לגת – even he himself. For since he is careful and he has recognition that he places it in an inverted vessel and hasn’t touched it.
במה דברים אמורים כברם הנעשה בית הפרס – that the vines and trees were planted in it prior to it becoming a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave. But a person who touches it ab initio in the field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave [should sell them in the market]. ימכר לשוק – that we fine him, because he should not have planted in a field declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over from a ploughed grave. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
