=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
הכל ממירין – All persons can cause the seizure of the substitute in holiness together with the original by exchanging a consecrated animal, that seizes the holiness of the exchange of an unconsecrated animal, if he said, “this is place of that one of something consecrated,” whether by the mouth of men or by the mouth of women, as for example, if woman exchanged/substituted it, it seizes the sanctity of exchange by her mouth. And the word "והכל" /”All” that is taught here includes someone who inherits that if he substituted/exchanged a sacrifice that someone bequeathed to him during his lifetime, his substitution is a substitution.
לא שאדם רשאי להמיר – because it is written (Leviticus 27:10): “[One may not exchange] or substitute another for it.”
מומר – holiness was seized upon it and both of them (i.e., the formerly designated animal that was consecrated and the formerly unconsecrated animal that has just been substituted) are holy.
וסופג את הארבעים – he is flogged [for transgressing] the negative commandment (Leviticus 27:10): “or substitute another for it,” and even though it is a negative commandment/prohibition that does not involve an action/לאו שאין בו מעשה. For we hold that any negative commandment/prohibition that does not involve an action we don’t flog that person except for false conspiring witnesses and [someone who] substitutes an animal for another or someone who curses another (or himself) using the name of God. But if you should say that this is a prohibition that after its violation is transformed into a positive commandment [לאו הניתק לעשה](unless there is no possibility of fulfilling this positive commandment), as it is written (Leviticus 27:33): “[If he does make substitution for it,’ then it and its substitute shall both be holy,” but we don’t flog a person or a prohibition that after its violation is transformed into a positive commandment. One can say, that it is different here, as the negative commandment includes more than the positive commandment within it, for everyone who says the word/speaks is whipped, but not every person who says the word does a substitution, for partners and the community do not do substitutions, for since the positive commandment is not equivalent to the negative commandment, it is not called a prohibition that after its violation is transformed into a positive commandment.
הכהנים ממרימין את שלן – sacrifices that the Kohen set aside to offer for himself, but if he Kohen substituted for it, it causes the seizure of the substitute/exchange of the animal [to be holy].
לא בחטאת ולא באשם – that the Israelite gave him that he sacrifice/offer for him, but if the Kohen substituted another, he doesn’t do that substitution on his own, for he has no portion in it, but rather from the time of the offering of those sacrifices on the altar and onwards, he (i.e., the Kohen) is worthy of the flesh [of the animal], but a person does not cause the seizure of something which is not his (Tractate Temurah 9a).
ולא בבכור – that an Israelite gave him.
וכי מפני מה אין הכהנין ממירים בבכור – for doesn’t all of it belong to the Kohen and while it is alive, we give it to him, and the Israelite cannot gain atonement through it.
מה חטאת ואשם אין ממירין – because it is clearly obvious to us that he Kohanim do not take possession of them other than from offering up of the portions of the sacrifices offered on the altar and beyond.
מה לי אינו ממיר בחטאת ואשם – that is to say, it is the law that the Kohanim do not make a substitution with the sin-offering and the guilt-offering, etc.
והיה הוא ותמורתו – there is an analogy between substitution to something consecrated itself.
היכן קדושה חלה – on that which is dedicated to the Temple, in the house of the owners.
אף תמורה – does not take effect other than in the house of the owners, but in the home of the Kohen it does not take effect completely, therefore, a Kohen cannot substitute for a firstling. But an Israelites, if he made a substitution for it, it is seized in holiness, for it was in domain that sanctification occurs with the firstling. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
יש בקרבנות היחיד. וקרבנות הצבור אין נוהגים אלא בזכרים – for most of them are burnt-offerings and the burnt-offering is a male, but they don’t bring peace-offerings other than the sheep for Atzeret/Shemini Atzeret which are males, and their sin offering is also written in all of them (Numbers 29:38): “and one goat for a purification offering [ - in addition to the regular burnt offering, its grain offering and libation],” (though this expression is also found in verses 22, 28, 31 and 34 as well as Numbers 28:22).
קרבנות היחיד חייבין באחריותן (for offerings of individuals are they liable to be answerable [replacing animals set aside for he individual if said animals are lost]) – that is to say, there are from those whose time has been fixed, that even after their appropriate time has passed, one is obligated to offer them, such as, for example, the burnt offering of a woman who gave birth and the sacrifices of a leper, if his eighth day passed, he is obligated to offer them after the [appropriate] time. Bu the sacrifices of the community that have a [designated] time, if their time had passed their sacrifice is nullified.
משקרב הזבח – that if the sacrifice was offered in its [designated] time, but did not offer its libations with it, they are obligated to offer them, even from here until ten days. As it is written in the [Torah] portion of Pinhas in all of them (Numbers 29:18,21 24,27, 30, 33 – in slightly different forms): “the grain offerings and libations for the bulls, [rams, and lambs, in the quantities prescribed],” to tell you that the grain offerings and libations of community sacrifices were offered even at night, and even on the next day, if they made the offering at its proper time but they didn’t come to offering the meal offerings and drink-offerings/libations, they would offer them when they had the opportunity even after several days.
חביתי כהן גדול (see Tractate Zevakhim, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5)– which supersede the Sabbath and ritual purity, as it is written regarding them (Leviticus 6:13): “[a tenth of an ephah of choice flour] as a regular grain offering,” it is for you like the meal- offering of the regular offerings that supersede the Sabbath and ritual impurity. But regarding the daily offering, it is written (Numbers 28:2): “[Be punctilious in presenting to Me] at stated times/במועדו ,” and we state “at stated times,” even on Shabbat, even in ritual impurity, for if most of the Kohanim are ritually impure, we perform it while [they are] impure [from ritual contact with the dead].
ופר יוה"כ – the bullock of the High Priest.
אלא שזמנן קבוע – meaning to say, that the reason is not dependent upon other than the fixed time, for every sacrifice whose time is fixed, if the time passed [for offering the sacrifice], he has no indemnity/payment, it supersedes the Sabbath and ritual impurity (but not the community sacrifices or those sacrifices whose time was not fixed). And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Meir.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
אלו קדשים. וולד ולדן עד סוף העולם – in the Gemara (Tractate Temurah 17b), the objection is raised, since it taught [in the Mishnah], “their offspring” (i.e., their offspring and the substitute’s offspring), why do I need, “the offspring of their offspring to infinity?” Because our teacher/Tanna heard Rabbi Eliezer who said further on [in this Mishnah] that the offspring of peace-offerings are not offered as peace-offerings, because of this, the Tanna taught, “the offspring of their offspring to infinity,” meaning to say, not only with their offspring do I not agree with you, (since for him, the young has the law of the mother), but even “to infinity,” I do not agree with you (since even then, the young has the law of the mother).
ולד שלמים לא יקרב שלמים – but rather he brings it in to the vaulted chamber (i.e., closing the barn door without food until they died) and it dies [there]. According to the Rabbis, because of a decree, if you had said the offspring of peace-offerings have a remedy, one would come to delay to the mother until she would give birth and raise a herd from the the offspring, and they would come to have shearing and work.
לא נחלקו על ולד ולד שלמים – the Sages agree with Rabbi Eliezer that the offspring of offspring of peace-offerings that it should not be offered, for his intention was known from his actions that he needed to raise a herd/flock. But the legal decision is according to the first Tanna/teacher that the offspring of their offspring until eternity, they are like peace-offerings.
העיד רבי יהושע וכו' – and not according to Rabbi Eliezer. And this testimony is true and [the] Halakha.
ואכלנו ולדה שלמים בחג – it is stated on the holiday of Shavuot, for if he would wait and look forward to the holiday of Sukkot (which is the normal meaning of the word, חג when used without a modifier), it is found that he would violate a positive commandment (Deuteronomy 12:5-6): “there you are to go, and here you are to bring [your burnt offerings and other sacrifices],” that implies that on the first Festival that you go there, bring all of the votive offerings that are upon you. However, regarding the negative commandment (Deuteronomy 23:22): “[When you make a vow to the LORD your God,] do not put off fulfilling it, [for the LORD your God will require it of you, and you will have incurrent guilt],” you do not violate until there has passed over you three Festivals.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
ולד חטאת שעברה שנתה – it is not appropriate to sacrifice it as a sin-offering, for it is written (Numbers 15:27): “[In case it is an individual who has sinned unwittingly, he shall offer a she-goat] in its first year as a purification offering (i.e., sin-offering).” However, because of this disqualification alone it does not die, but rather, it should be sent out to pasture until it develops a blemish until there are two causes for suspicion/unfavorable conditions, that one year passed and it was lost, or that it was lost and it was found with a blemish. And this is how the Mishnah is resolved in the Gemara (Tractate Temura 22a), and that which was lost, as it is taught, counts both here, and there. And this is what it means: that its year had passed (i.e., the animal now being older than one-year) and that which was lost and when it was found there was a blemish in it.
אם משכיפרו הבעלים – if after this (i.e., animal) was found, the owners effected atonement with another.
תמות – and even according to the Rabbis who dispute Rabbi [Judah the Prince] further on in our chapter (see the concluding clause of Mishnah 3), who states, that the sin-offering did not die, but rather that it was found after the owners effected atonement, in this they admit, for since there are two causes for unfavorable conditions, that its [first] year had passed and that it was lost, or that it was lost, and it was found to have a blemish. But if it was only lost, since it was found prior to atonement, even though after it was found, the owners had effected atonement with another [animal], it does not die but rather is put out to pasture.
לא נהנים – according to the Rabbis.
ולא מועלין – if they benefitted from them, they are exempt from the sacrifice of misappropriation (or religious sacrilege), for since neither it nor its monetary value is offered [as a sacrifice], its holiness departs [from it].
ואם עד שלא כיפרו הבעלים – and they did not want to be atoned with another [animal].
תרעה עד שתסתאב – this refers to and its year had passed (i.e., it was now older than a year), for that where it was lost and it was found with a blemish, it is sold immediately and he purchases another with its monetary value.
ועושה תמורה – for since its monetary value stands to be offered, for something that stands in order that it should sent out to pasture and develop a blemish makes for an exchange/substitution.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
כיצד מערימין על הבכור – to cancel the obligation/release it (i.e., the firstling) from the Kohen and to sacrifice it for his own obligation.
ילדה זכר יקרב עולה – for a firstling is not holy other than in the womb, and since ab initio, it takes effect in another holiness, furthermore, the holiness of its being a firstling no long takes effect with it.
ואם נקבה זבחי שלמים – we are not speaking about a female beast, for the female is not holy with the firstling that one needs to make a deception on it. But the sanctified beast, that if it is sin-offering and she became pregnant and one wants to make a deception so that it will not go to die, for the offspring of a sin-offering goes to its death, one can change it it to another sanctity. [And this comes to inform us] that the offspring of Holy Things, while they are born holy and not in the wombs of their mother, for since they had not yet been sanctified with the holiness of their mothers, one is able to engraft upon them another holiness, so that when they are born, they will not be a sin-offering.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
כל האסורים לגבי מזבח (all [animals] which are prohibited for the altar – that they are invalid for offering as a sacrifice. And you consider them and further.
אסורין בכל שהן (prohibit in any number at all [animals among which they are confused]) – and even if they were combined one in one-thousand, all of them are forbidden to the altar, if it was not known. And all of them are found that they are not known, except for the torn animal which is not found and is not known other that, as for example, the lion or the wolf attacked that are mixed with the vital organ perforated by a thorn.
הרובע והנרבע והמוקצה והנעבד – they are ineligible for the altar. As it states in Scripture (Leviticus 22:25): “for they are mutilated, they have a defect,” and it is taught in a Baraitha, every place where it states, “they are mutilated,” is none other than unchastity and idolatry. Unchastity, as it is written (Genesis 6:12): “for all flesh had corrupted its ways on earth.” Idolatry, as it is written (Deuteronomy 4:16): “not to act wickedly and make for yourselves a sculptured image [in any likeness whatever: the form of a man or a woman].” The one (i.e., animal) that has sexual relations with a human being and the one (i.e., animal) with whom a human being has sexual relations that is taught in our Mishnah, as for example that he had sex or has sexual relations with an animal with one witness or by the owners, and is not stoned in this, but they are disqualified from being a sacrifice.
מוקצה – an animal that was set aside for idolatry. And it is not disqualified for being offed up until they should do with it an act for the purposes of idolatry, as for example, that the [non-Jewish] priests served it if it was a bull or sheared it if it was a sheep.
ונעבד – it is not prohibited to derive benefit even though he worshipped it, for living creatures are not prohibited to derive benefit when we serve them, but they are disqualified to the altar.
ואתנן ומחיר (and the harlot’s hire and the price of a dog) – Scripture specifically disqualifies them (Deuteronomy 23:19): “You shall not bring the fee of a whore or the pay of a dog [into the house of the LORD your God in fulfillment of any vow, for both are abhorrent to the LORD your God].”
וכלאים – a he-goat that comes upon a ewe.
והטריפה – as it is written regarding tithes (Leviticus 27:32): “[All tithes of the herd or the flock] – of all that passes under the shepherd’s staff,” excluding the torn animal that does not pass [under the shepherd’s staff] and the sacrifice of the altar is derived from the tithe of cattle.
ויוצא דופן – that its mother was torn and they removed the fetus through the caesarian section, and we exclude it from Scripture as it is written (Leviticus 22:27): “[When an ox or a sheep or a goat] is born”, excluding through caesarian section.
הוא אסור – for the altar.
ומה שעליו מותר – for that is not worshipped.
הוא ומה שעליו אסור – it is prohibited for the altar, but is permitted even for eating, as it will be mentioned nearby. But what is upon it, the jewelry that is upon it are prohibited from deriving benefit for they were worshipped and they have on them the grasp of a human hand.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
יש בקדשי מזבח. שקדשי מזבח עושים תמורה – and specifically animals of the Holy Things of the Altar. But fowl and meal-offerings we don’t make substitutions/exchanges. And the Holy Things consecrated for Temple maintenance, we don’t make substitutions, above at the end of the first chapter [of Tractate Temurah, Mishnah 6], we exclude from Holy Things consecrated for Temple maintenance from Biblical verses and we don’t make/produce substitutions.
משום פגול ונותר וטמא – all of them are written with regard to peace-offerings, and peace-offerings were included within all of the Holy Things, and why were they excluded, to make an analogy with them, to tell you, just as peace-offerings are special Holy Things of the Altar, so too are all Holy Things of the Altar.
ולדן וחלבן אסור לאחר פדיונן (see Tractate Hullin, Chapter 10, Mishnah 2) – their milk, as it is written (Deuteronomy 12:15): “[you may slaughter and eat] meat/בשר [in any of your settlements,]” but not milk. And their offspring, such as if she became pregnant before their redemption but gave birth after their redemption, for they don’t have a remedy to offer them as a sacrifice, for out of the power of holiness that is superseded/suspended, it comes, to remove them, the matter is not strong enough to have their redemption occur. But if they became pregnant after their redemption, they are like the offspring of a deer and a ram and are permitted. But regarding the Holy Things for Temple maintenance, even if it (i.e., the animal) became pregnant before their redemption, they are permitted, for they were not sanctified other than for their monetary value and their sanctification is not so much.
אין נותנים מהם – from the Holy Things of the Altar.
לאומנים (see Tractate Shekalim, Chapter 4, Mishnayot 5-6) – that build at the Temple.
בשכרן – that they take salary from the Holy Things for Temple maintenance, for the All-Merciful stated (Exodus 25:8): “And let them make Me a sanctuary [that I may dwell among them],” "לי"/for Me, from what is Mine, which is from the Holy Things for Temple Maintenance.
