=== 1 | Some Answered Questions ===
SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS


SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

COLLECTED   AND   TKANSLATED    FROM  THE   PERSIAN

OF


'ABDITL-BAHA


BY


LAURA   CLIFFORD   BARNEY


LONDON

KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.    LTD.

DRYDEN   HOUSE,   GERRARD  STREET,  W.

1908

All  rights  reservtd


Edinburgh  :  T.  and  A.  CONSTABLE,  Printers  to  His  Majesty


INTEODUCTION

'I  HAVE  given  to  you  my  tired  moments/  were  the
words  of  'Abdu'1-Baha l  as  he  rose  from  table  after
answering  one  of  my  questions.

As  it  was  on  this  day,  so  it  continued ;  between  the
hours  of  work,  his  fatigue  would  find  relief  in  renewed
activity ;  occasionally  he  was  able  to  speak  at  length ;
but  often,  even  though  the  subject  might  require
more  time,  he  would  be  called  away  after  a  few
moments ;  again,  days  and  even  weeks  would  pass,  in
which  he  had  no  opportunity  of  instructing  me.  But
I  could  well  be  patient,  for  I  had  always  before  me
the  greater  lesson — the  lesson  of  his  personal  life.

During  my  several  visits  to  Acca,  these  answers
were  written  down  in  Persian  while  'Abdu'1-Baha  spoke,
not  with  a  view  to  publication,  but  simply  that  I
might  have  them  for  future  study.  At  first  they
had  to  be  adapted  to  the  verbal  translation  of  the
interpreter;  and  later,  when  I  had  acquired  a  slight
knowledge  of  Persian,  to  my  limited  vocabulary.  This
accounts  for  repetition  of  figures  and  phrases,  for  no

1  'Abdu'1-Baha  is  the  great  teacher  of  Bahaism.  He  is  also  known,
and  especially  in  Syria,  under  the  name  of  Abbas  Efendi.  For  further
information  see  article  on  Bahaism,  page  vii.


vi  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

one  has  a  more  extensive  command  of  felicitous  ex-
pressions than  'Abdu'1-Baha.  In  these  lessons  he  is
the  teacher  adapting  himself  to  his  pupil,  and  not  the
orator  or  poet.

This  book  presents  only  certain  aspects  of  Bahaism,
which  is  universal  in  its  message,  and  has  for  each
questioner  the  answer  suited  to  his  especial  develop-
ment and  needs.

In  my  case  the  teachings  were  made  simple,  to
correspond  to  my  rudimentary  knowledge,  and  are
therefore  in  no  way  complete  and  exhaustive,  as  the
Table  of  Contents  may  suggest — the  Table  of  Contents
having  been  added  merely  to  indicate  the  subjects
treated  of.  But  I  believe  that  what  has  been  so
valuable  to  me  may  be  of  use  to  others,  since  all
men,  notwithstanding  their  differences,  are  united  in
their  search  for  reality;  and  I  have  therefore  asked
'Abdu'l-Baha's  permission  to  publish  these  talks.

Originally  they  were  not  given  in  any  special  order,
but  have  now  been  roughly  classified  for  the  con-
venience of  the  reader.  The  Persian  text  has  been
closely  followed,  at  times  even  to  the  detriment  of
the  English,  a  few  alterations  being  made  in  the
translation  merely  where  the  literal  rendering  seemed
too  involved  and  obscure ;  and  the  interpolated  words,
required  to  make  the  meaning  clearer,  have  not  been
indicated  in  any  way  in  order  to  avoid  the  too  frequent
interruption  of  the  thought  by  technical  or  explanatory
signs.  Also  many  of  the  Persian  and  Arabic  names


INTRODUCTION  vii

have  been  written  in  their  simplest  form  without
strictly  adhering  to  a  scientific  system  which  would
be  confusing  to  the  average  reader.  Only  the  unavoid-
able notes  have  been  given  in  this  first  edition,  in  order
that  the  demand  for  publication  may  be  satisfied
without  further  delay.1

LAURA  CLIFFORD  BARNEY.
May  1907.

1  The  Persian  text  of  'Some  Answered  Questions,'  under  the  title
of  An-Nuru'l-'Abha  fl  Mufdwadat  'Abdu'l-Bahd,  will  be  published
shortly  by  Kegan  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner  &  Co.,  Ltd.

A  French  translation  by  M.  Hippolyte  Dreyfus,  under  the  title  of
Les  Lemons  de  Saint- Jean-d' Acre,  is  published  by  Ernest  Leroux,
28  Rue  Bonaparte,  Paris.


For  the  information  of  those  who  know  little  or  nothing  of
Bahaism,  I  give  the  following  account  translated  from  the  Encyclo-
paedia of  Larousse : —

' Bahaism:  the  religion  of  the  disciples  of  Baha'u'llah,  an  outcome
of  Babism. — Mirza  Husain  'Ali  Nuri  Baha'u'llah  was  born  at  Tihran
in  1817  A.D.  From  1844  he  was  one  of  the  first  adherents  of  the
Bab,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  pacific  propagation  of  his  doctrine
in  Persia.  After  the  death  of  the  Bab  he  was,  with  the  principal
Babis,  exiled  to  Baghdad,  and  later  to  Constantinople  and  Adrianople,
under  the  surveillance  of  the  Ottoman  Government.  It  was  in  the
latter  city  that  he  openly  declared  his  mission.  He  was  "He  whom
God  would  make  manifest,"  whom  the  Bab  had  announced  in  his
writings,  the  great  Manifestation  of  God,  promised  for  the  last  days  ;
and  in  his  letters  to  the  principal  Rulers  of  the  States  of  Europe  he
invited  them  to  join  him  in  establishing  religion  and  universal  peace.
From  this  time,  the  Babis  who  acknowledged  him  became  Bahais.
The  Sultan  then  exiled  him  (1868  A.D.)  to  Acca  in  Palestine,  where
he  composed  the  greater  part  of  his  doctrinal  works,  and  where  he
died  in  1892  A.D.  (May  29).  He  had  confided  to  his  son,  'Abbas
Efendi  'Abdu'l  Baha,  the  work  of  spreading  the  religion  and  con-
tinuing the  connection  between  the  Bahais  of  all  parts  of  the  world.


viii          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

In  point  of  fact,  there  are  Bahais  everywhere,  not  only  in  Muham-
madan  countries,  but  also  in  all  the  countries  of  Europe,  as  well  as
in  the  United  States,  Canada,  Japan,  India,  etc.  This  is  because
Baha'u'llah  has  known  how  to  transform  Babism  into  a  universal
religion,  which  is  presented  as  the  fulfilment  and  completion  of  all
the  ancient  faiths.  The  Jews  await  the  Messiah,  the  Christians  the
return  of  Christ,  the  Muslims  the  Mahdi,  the  Buddhists  the  fifth
Buddha,  the  Zoroastrians  Shah  Bahram,  the  Hindus  the  reincarna-
tion of  Krishna,  and  the  Atheists— a  better  social  organisation  !
Baha'u'llah  represents  all  these,  and  thus  destroys  the  rivalries  and
the  enmities  of  the  different  religions ;  reconciles  them  in  their
primitive  purity,  and  frees  them  from  the  corruption  of  dogmas  and
rites.  For  Bahaism  has  no  clergy,  no  religious  ceremonial,  no  public
prayers ;  its  only  dogma  is  belief  in  God  and  in  His  Manifestations
(Zoroaster,  Moses,  Jesus,  etc.,  Baha'u'llah).  The  principal  works  of
Baha'u'llah  are  the  Kitabu'l-Iqan,  the  Kitabu'l-Aqdas,  the  Kitdbu'l-
Ahd,  and  numerous  letters  or  tablets  addressed  to  sovereigns  or
to  private  individuals.  Ritual  holds  no  place  in  the  religion,  which
must  be  expressed  in  all  the  actions  of  life,  and  accomplished  in
neighbourly  love.  Every  one  must  have  an  occupation.  The  educa-
tion of  children  is  enjoined  and  regulated.  No  one  has  the  power  to
receive  confession  of  sins,  or  to  give  absolution.  The  priests  of  the
existing  religions  should  renounce  celibacy,  and  should  preach  by
their  example,  mingling  in  the  life  of  the  people.  Monogamy  is
universally  recommended,  etc.  Questions  not  treated  of  are  left  to
the  civil  law  of  each  country,  and  to  the  decisions  of  the  Baitu'l-'Adl,
or  Houses  of  Justice,  instituted  by  Baha'u'llah.  Respect  towards
the  Head  of  the  State  is  a  part  of  respect  towards  God.  A  universal
language,  and  the  creation  of  tribunals  of  arbitration  between  nations,
are  to  suppress  wars.  "  You  are  all  leaves  of  the  same  tree,  and
drops  of  the  same  sea,"  Baha'u'llah  has  said.  Briefly,  it  is  not  so
much  a  new  religion  as  Religion  renewed  and  unified,  which  is  directed
to-day  by  'Abdu'1-Baha.' — (Nouveau  Larousse  Illustr6,  supplement,
p.  66.)


CONTENTS
PART  I

ON   THE   INFLUENCE  OF  THE    PROPHETS   IN
THE  EVOLUTION  OF  HUMANITY

PAGE

i.  NATURE  is  GOVERNED  BY  ONE  UNIVERSAL  LAW,      .        .  3

ii.  PROOFS  AND  EVIDENCES  OP  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD,       .  5

in.  THE  NEED  OF  AN  EDUCATOR,  ......  8

iv.  ABRAHAM,  ....•> 14

v.  MOSES, 17

vi.  CHRIST, »        ....  20

vn.  MUHAMMAD,       .        .        .        .        ...        .        .  22

vin.  THE  BAB,  .                .     ' ' .        .        .        .        .        .        .  30

ix.  BAHA'U'LLAH,     .........  32

x.  TRADITIONAL  PROOFS  EXEMPLIFIED  FROM  THE  BOOK  OF

DANIEL, 43

XL  COMMENTARY    ON    THE    ELEVENTH    CHAPTER    OF    THE

REVELATION  OF  ST.  JOHN, 53

xii.  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  ELEVENTH  CHAPTER  OF  THE  BOOK

OF  ISAIAH, 72

xni.  COMMENTARY    ON     THE    TWELFTH    CHAPTER    OF    THE

REVELATION  OF  ST.  JOHN 77

ix


c  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

PAOK

xiv.  SPIRITUAL  PROOFS, 83

xv.  TRUE  WEALTH,   ........        89

PART    II

SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS

xvi.  OUTWARD  FORMS  AND  SYMBOLS  MUST   BE   USED  TO

CONVEY  INTELLECTUAL  CONCEPTIONS,    ...        95

xvii.  THE  BIRTH  OF  CHRIST, 99

xvin.  THE  GREATNESS  OP  CHRIST  is  DUE  TO  HIS  PER-
FECTIONS,   102

xix.  THE  BAPTISM  OF  CHRIST, 104

xx.  THE  NECESSITY  OF  BAPTISM, 107

xxi.  THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  BREAD  AND  THE  WINE,       .  112

xxn.  MIRACLES, 115

xxiii.  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST, 119

xxiv.  THE    DESCENT    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT   UPON   THE

APOSTLES, 122

xxv.  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT, 124

xxvi.  THE  SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST,  AND  THE  DAY  OF

JUDGMENT, 126

xxvii.  THE  TRINITY, 129

xxvin.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  VERSE  :    '  0  FATHER,  GLORIFY

THOU    ME,    WITH    THE    GLORY   WHICH   I   HAD   WITH

THEE    BEFORE     THE    WORLD    WAS.' — (St.    John
xvii.  5) 132

xxix.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  VERSE  :  '  As  IN  ADAM  ALT.  DIE,
EVEN  so  IN  CHRIST  SHALL  ALL  BE  MADE  ALIVE.'
—(1  Cor.  xv.  22) .  .  134

xxx.  ADAM  AND  EVE, 139


CONTENTS  xi

FAOE

xxxi.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  BLASPHEMY  AGAINST  THE  HOLT

SPIRIT.— (Matt.  xii.  31,  32), 145

xxxii.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  VERSE  :  '  FOR  MANY  ARE

CALLED,   BUT  FEW  ARE  CHOSEN.' — (Matt.  Xlii.  14),         148

xxxin.  THE  'RETURN'  SPOKEN  OF  BY  THE  PROPHETS,  .        .      151

xxxiv.  PETER'S  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH.— (Matt.  xvi.  16, 18),       154

xxxv.  PREDESTINATION, 158

PART  III

ON  THE  POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  THE
MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD

xxxvi.  THE  FIVE  ASPECTS  OF  SPIRIT, 163

xxxvii.  THE     DIVINITY     CAN     ONLY     BE     COMPREHENDED

THROUGH  THE  DlVINE  MANIFESTATIONS,          .          .         167

xxxvui.  THE   THREE   STATIONS   OF  THE  DIVINB  MANIFESTA-
TIONS,      173

xxxix.  THE  HUMAN  CONDITION  AND  THE  SPIRITUAL  CON-
DITION OF  THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS,      .        .      177

XL.  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS,  .      180
XLI.  THE  UNIVERSAL  CYCLES, 183

XLII.  THE  POWER  AND  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  DIVINE  MANI-
FESTATIONS,   185

XLIII.  THE  Two  CLASSES  OF  PROPHETS,        .        .        .        .188

XLIV.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  REBUKES  ADDRESSED  BY  GOD

TO  THE  PROPHETS, 192

XLV.  EXPLANATION  OF  THE  VERSE  OF  THE  KITABU'L-AQDAS  :
'THERE  is  NO  ASSOCIATE  FOR  THE  DAWNING-
PLACE  OF  COMMAND  IN  THB  SUPREME  SINLESS-
NESS,'  197


xii  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS


PART  IV

ON  THE  ORIGIN,  POWERS,  AND  CONDITIONS

OF  MAN

PAGE

XLVI.  MODIFICATION  OF  SPECIES, 205

XLVII.  THE  UNIVERSE  is  WITHOUT  BEGINNING — THE  ORIGIN

OF  MAN, 209

XLVIII.  THE  DIFFERENCE  WHICH  EXISTS  BETWEEN  MAN  AND

THE  ANIMAL, 215

XLIX.  THE  GROWTH   AND   DEVELOPMENT   OF  THE   HUMAN

RACE, 222

L.  SPIRITUAL  PROOFS  OF  THE  ORIGIN  OF  MAN,        .        .      227

LI.  THE  SPIRIT  AND  MIND  OF  MAN  HAVE  EXISTED  FROM

THE  BEGINNING,        .        .        .        .        .        .        .      230

LII.  THE  APPEARING  OF  THE  SPIRIT  IN  THE  BODY,  .  233

LIII.  THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  GOD  AND  THE  CREATURE,  .  236

Lrv.  THE  PROCEEDING  OF  THE  HUMAN  SPIRIT  FROM  GOD,  239

LV.  SOUL,  SPIRIT,  AND  MIND, 243

LVI.  THE    PHYSICAL    POWERS    AND    THE    INTELLECTUAL

POWERS, 245

LVII.  THE  CAUSES  OF  THE  DIFFERENCES  IN  THE  CHARACTERS

OF  MEN, 247

LVIII.  THE   DEGREE   OF   KNOWLEDGE  POSSESSED   BY  MAN,

AND  THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS 252

LIX.  MAN'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD, 255

LX.  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT— (I.),      .        .        .      259
LXI.  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT— (II.),    .        .        .      263


CONTENTS  xiii

PAGE

LXII.  PERFECTIONS  ARE  WITHOUT  LIMIT,      ....  267

LXIII.  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MAN  IN  THE  OTHER  WORLD,      .  270

LXIV.  THE    STATE    OF    MAN    AND    HIS    PROGRESS    AFTER

DEATH, 272

LXV.  EXPLANATION  OF  A  VERSE  IN  THE  KITABU'L-AQDAS,  .  275

LXVI.  THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  RATIONAL  SOUL  AFTER  THE

DEATH  OF  THE  BODY — (I.), 277

THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  CHILDREN— (II.),      .        •        •  278

LXVII.  ETERNAL  LIFE  AND  ENTRANCE  INTO  THE  KINGDOM

OF  GOD,     .        .        . 280

LXVIII.  FATE, 283

LXIX.  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  STARS, 284

LXX.  FREE-WILL, 287

LXXI.  VISIONS,  AND  COMMUNICATION  WITH  SPIRITS,     .        .  290

LXXII.  HEALING  BY  SPIRITUAL  MEANS, 293

LXXIII.  HEALING  BY  MATERIAL  MEANS, 296


PART  V

MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS

LXXIV.  THE  NON-EXISTENCE  OF  EVIL,            *  301

LXXV.  THERE  ARE  TWO  KINDS  OF  TORMENT,       .  .        .      303

LXXVI.  THE  JUSTICE  AND  MERCY  OF  GOD,    .  .        .      304

LXXVII.  THE  RIGHT  METHOD  OF  TREATING  CRIMINALS,        .      307

LXXVIII.  THE  REALITY  OF  THE  EXTERIOR  WORLD,  .        .      313


xiv          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS


PAGE


LXXIX.  REAL  PRE-EXISTENCE, 315

LXXX.  REINCARNATION, .  318

LXXXI.  PANTHEISM, 327

LXXXII.  THE  FOUR  METHODS  OF  ACQUIRING  KNOWLEDGE,     .  335

LXXXIII.  THE  NECESSITY  OF  FOLLOWING  THE  TEACHINGS  OF

THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS, 338


PAET  I

ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS
IN  THE  EVOLUTION  OF  HUMANITY


NATURE  IS  GOVERNED  BY  ONE
UNIVERSAL  LAW

NATURE  is  that  condition,  that  reality,  which  in  appear-
ance consists  in  life  and  death,  or  in  other  words,  in
the  composition  and  decomposition  of  all  things.

This  Nature  is  subjected  to  an  absolute  organisation,
to  determined  laws,  to  a  complete  order  and  a  finished
design,  from  which  it  will  never  depart;  to  such  a
degree,  indeed,  that  if  you  look  carefully  and  with  inner
sight,1  from  the  smallest  invisible  atom  up  to  such
large  bodies  of  the  world  of  existence  as  the  globe  of
the  sun  or  the  other  great  stars  and  luminous  spheres,
whether  you  regard  their  arrangement,  their  composition,
their  form  or  their  movement,  you  will  find  that  all  are
in  the  highest  degree  of  organisation,  and  are  under
one  absolute  law  from  which  they  will  never  depart.

But  when  you  look  at  Nature  itself,  you  see  that  it
has  no  intelligence,  no  will.  For  instance,  the  nature
of  fire  is  to  burn,  it  burns  without  will  or  intelligence ;
the  nature  of  water  is  fluidity,  it  flows  without  will
or  intelligence;  the  nature  of  the  sun  is  radiance,  it
shines  without  will  or  intelligence ;  the  nature  of  vapour
is  to  ascend,  it  ascends  without  will  or  intelligence.
Thus  it  is  clear  that  the  natural  movements  of  all
things  are  compelled;  there  are  no  voluntary  move-

1  i.e.  mental  perception.


4  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

ments  except  those  of  animals,  and  above  all,  those
of  man.  Man  is  able  to  deviate  from  and  to  oppose
Nature,  because  he  discovers  the  constitution  of  things,
and  through  this  he  commands  the  forces  of  Nature ;
all  the  inventions  he  has  made  are  due  to  his  dis-
covery of  the  constitution  of  things.  For  example,  he
invented  the  telegraph  which  is  the  means  of  com-
munication between  the  East  and  the  West.  It  is
evident,  then,  that  man  rules  over  Nature.

Now,  when  you  behold  in  existence  such  organisa-
tions, arrangements,  and  laws,  can  you  say  that  all
these  are  the  effect  of  Nature,  though  Nature  has
neither  intelligence  nor  perception  ?  If  not,  it  becomes
evident  that  this  Nature,  which  has  neither  perception
nor  intelligence,  is  in  the  grasp  of  Almighty  God  who
is  the  Ruler  of  the  world  of  Nature ;  whatever  He  wishes
He  causes  Nature  to  manifest.

One  of  the  things  which  has  appeared  in  the  world
of  existence,  and  which  is  one  of  the  requirements
of  Nature,  is  human  life.  Considered  from  this  point
of  view  man  is  the  branch,  nature  is  the  root ;  then  can
the  will  and  the  intelligence,  and  the  perfections  which
exist  in  the  branch,  be  absent  in  the  root  ?

Hence  it  is  evident  that  Nature  in  its  own  essence
is  in  the  grasp  of  the  power  of  God,  who  is  the  Eternal
Almighty  One :  He  holds  Nature  within  accurate  regula-
tions and  laws,  and  rules  over  it.1

1  On  the  idea  of  God,  cf.  '  The  Divinity  can  only  be  comprehended
through  the  Divine  Manifestations,'  page  167  ;  and  '  Man's  Know-
ledge of  God,'  page  255.

The  reader  will  there  see  that  Bahaism  haa  not  an  anthropomorphic
conception  of  God,  and  that  if  it  employs  a  customary  terminology,
it  is  careful  to  explain  its  symbolic  meaning.


II

PROOFS  AND  EVIDENCES  OF  THE
EXISTENCE  OF  GOD

ONE  of  the  proofs  and  demonstrations  of  the  existence
of  God,  is  the  fact  that  man  did  not  create  himself:
nay,  his  creator  and  designer  is  another  than  himself.

It  is  certain  and  indisputable  that  the  creator  of  man
is  not  like  man,  because  a  powerless  creature  cannot
create  another  being.  The  maker,  the  creator,  has
to  possess  all  perfections  in  order  that  he  may  create.

Can  the  creation  be  perfect  and  the  creator  im-
perfect? Can  a  picture  be  a  masterpiece  and  the
painter  imperfect  in  his  art?  for  it  is  his  art  and
his  creation.  Moreover,  the  picture  cannot  be  like  the
painter,  otherwise  the  painting  would  have  created
itself.  However  perfect  the  picture  may  be,  in  com-
parison with  the  painter  it  is  in  the  utmost  degree
of  imperfection.

Contingency  is  the  source  of  imperfections:  God  is
the  source  of  perfections.  The  imperfections  of  the
contingent  world  are  in  themselves  a  proof  of  the
perfections  of  God.

For  example,  when  you  look  at  man  you  see  that
he  is  weak.  This  weakness  of  the  creature  is  a  proof
of  the  power  of  the  Eternal  Almighty  One,  because


6  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

if  there  were  no  power  weakness  could  not  be  imagined.
Then  the  weakness  of  the  creature  is  a  proof  of  the
power  of  the  Creator ;  for  if  there  were  no  power
there  could  be  no  weakness;  so  from  this  weakness
it  becomes  evident  that  there  is  power  in  the  world.
Again,  in  the  contingent  world  there  is  poverty ;  then
necessarily  wealth  exists,  since  poverty  is  apparent  in
the  world.  In  the  contingent  world  there  is  ignorance  ;
necessarily  knowledge  exists,  because  ignorance  is
found ;  for  if  there  were  no  knowledge,  neither  would
there  be  ignorance.  Ignorance  is  the  non-existence  of
knowledge,  and  if  there  were  no  existence,  non-existence
could  not  be  realised.

It  is  certain  that  the  whole  contingent  world  is
subjected  to  a  law  and  rule  which  it  can  never  disobey ;
even  man  is  forced  to  submit  to  death,  to  sleep,  and
to  other  conditions, — that  is  to  say,  man  in  certain
particulars  is  governed,  and  necessarily  this  governed
one  must  have  a  governor.  Because  a  characteristic
of  contingent  beings  is  dependency,  and  this  dependency
is  an  essential  necessity,  therefore  there  must  be  an
independent  being  whose  independence  is  essential.

In  the  same  way  it  is  understood  from  the  man  who
is  sick,  that  there  must  be  one  who  is  in  health;  for
if  there  were  no  health,  his  sickness  could  not  be
proved.

Therefore  it  is  known  that  there  is  an  Eternal
Almighty  One  who  is  the  possessor  of  all  perfections ;
because  unless  He  be  their  possessor,  He  must  be
like  His  creature.

Throughout  the  world  of  existence  it  is  the  same;
the  smallest  created  thing  proves  that  there  is  a


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  7

creator.  For  instance,  this  piece  of  bread  proves  that
it  has  a  maker.

Praise  be  to  God!  the  least  change  produced  in
the  form  of  the  smallest  thing  proves  the  existence
of  a  creator:  then  can  this  great  universe,  which  is
endless,  be  self- created  and  come  into  existence  from
the  action  of  matter  and  the  elements  ?  What  a
strange  mistake  is  such  a  supposition  !

These  obvious  arguments  are  adduced  for  weak
souls ;  but  if  the  inner  perception  be  open,  a  hundred
thousand  clear  proofs  become  visible.  Thus,  when
man  feels  the  indwelling  spirit,  he  is  in  no  need  of
arguments  for  its  existence;  but  for  those  who  are
deprived  of  the  bounty  of  the  spirit,  it  is  necessary
to  establish  external  arguments.


Ill

THE  NEED  OF  AN  EDUCATOR

WHEN  we  consider  existence,  we  see  that  the  mineral,
vegetable,  animal,  and  human  worlds  are  all  in  need  of
an  educator.

If  the  earth  is  not  cultivated  it  becomes  a  jungle
where  useless  weeds  grow;  but  if  a  cultivator  comes
and  tills  the  ground,  it  produces  crops  which  nourish
living  creatures.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  soil
needs  the  cultivation  of  the  farmer.  Consider  the
trees  :  if  they  remain  without  a  cultivator  they  will  be
fruitless,  and  without  fruit  they  are  useless ;  but  if  they
receive  the  care  of  a  gardener,  these  same  barren  trees
become  fruitful,  and  through  cultivation,  fertilisation,
and  engrafting,  the  trees  which  had  bitter  fruits  yield
sweet  fruits.  These  are  rational  proofs ;  in  this  age  the
peoples  of  the  world  need  the  arguments  of  reason.

The  same  is  true  with  respect  to  animals:  notice
that  when  the  animal  is  trained  it  becomes  domestic,
and  also  that  man,  if  he  is  left  without  training,
becomes  bestial,  and,  moreover,  if  left  under  the  rule
of  nature,  becomes  lower  than  an  animal ;  whereas  if
he  is  educated  he  becomes  an  angel.  For  the  greater
number  of  animals  do  not  devour  their  own  kind,  but
men,  among  the  negroes  of  Central  Africa,  kill  and  eat
each  other.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  9

Now  reflect  that  it  is  education  that  brings  the  East
and  the  West  under  the  authority  of  man ;  it  is  educa-
tion that  brings  to  perfection  wonderful  industries ;  it
is  education  that  nourishes  glorious  sciences  and  arts ;
it  is  education  that  makes  manifest  new  discoveries
and  laws.  If  there  were  no  educator,  there  would  be
no  such  things  as  comforts,  civilisation,  facilities,  or
humanity.  If  a  man  be  left  alone  in  a  wilderness
where  he  sees  none  of  his  own  kind,  he  will  undoubtedly
become  a  mere  brute ;  it  is  then  clear  that  an  educator
is  needed.

But  education  is  of  three  kinds:  material,  human,
and  spiritual.  Material  education  is  concerned  with
the  progress  and  development  of  the  body,  through
gaining  its  material  comfort  and  ease.  This  education
is  common  to  animals  and  man.

Human  education  signifies  civilisation  and  progress :
that  is  to  say,  government,  administration,  charitable
works,  trades,  arts  and  handicrafts,  sciences,  great
inventions  and  discoveries  of  physical  laws,  which  are
the  activities  essential  to  man  as  distinguished  from
the  animal

Divine  education  is  that  of  the  Kingdom  of  God :  it
consists  in  acquiring  divine  perfections,  and  this  is
true  education;  for  in  this  estate  man  becomes  the
centre  of  divine  appearance,  the  manifestation  of  the
words, '  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image  and  after  our
likeness.'  This  is  the  supreme  goal  of  the  world  of
humanity.

Now  we  need  an  educator  who  will  be  at  the  same
time  a  material,  human,  and  spiritual  educator,  and
whose  authority  will  be  effective  in  all  conditions.  So


10  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

if  any  one  should  say, '  I  possess  perfect  comprehension
and  intelligence,  and  I  have  no  need  of  such  an
educator/  he  would  be  denying  that  which  is  clear
and  evident,  as  though  a  child  should  say, '  I  have  no
need  of  education ;  I  will  act  according  to  my  reason
and  intelligence,  and  so  I  shall  attain  the  perfections
of  existence ' ;  or  as  though  the  blind  should  say, '  I  am
in  no  need  of  sight,  because  many  other  blind  people
exist  without  difficulty.'

Then  it  is  plain  and  evident  that  man  needs  an
educator,  and  this  educator  must  be  unquestionably
and  indubitably  perfect  in  all  respects,  and  distinguished
above  all  men.  For  otherwise  he  cannot  be  their
educator.  More  particularly  because  he  must  be  at  the
same  time  their  material  and  human  as  well  as  their
spiritual  educator ;  that  is  to  say,  he  will  teach  men  to
organise  and  carry  out  physical  matters,  and  to  regulate
the  form  of  society  with  regard  to  the  establishing  of
help  and  assistance  in  life,  so  that  material  affairs  may
be  organised  and  regulated  for  any  circumstances  that
may  occur.  In  the  same  way  he  will  establish  human
education ;  that  is  to  say,  he  must  educate  intelligence
and  thought  in  such  a  way  that  they  may  attain
complete  development,  so  that  knowledge  and  science
may  increase,  and  the  reality  of  things,  the  mysteries
of  beings,  and  the  properties  of  existence  may  be  dis-
covered; that  day  by  day  instructions,  inventions,
and  laws  may  be  improved;  and  from  things  per-
ceptible to  the  senses  conclusions  as  to  intellectual
things  may  be  deduced.

He  must  also  impart  spiritual  education;  so  that
intelligence  and  comprehension  may  penetrate  the


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  11

metaphysical  world,  and  may  receive  benefit  from  the
sanctifying  breeze  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  may  enter
into  relationship  with  the  Supreme  Concourse.  He
must  so  educate  the  human  reality  that  it  may  become
the  centre  of  the  divine  appearance,  to  such  a  degree
that  the  attributes  and  the  names  of  God  shall  be
resplendent  in  the  mirror  of  the  reality  of  man,  and
the  holy  verse, '  We  will  make  man  in  Our  image  and
likeness,'  shall  become  true.

It  is  clear  that  human  power  is  not  able  to  fill  such  a
great  office,  and  that  the  reason  alone  could  not  under-
take the  responsibility  of  so  great  a  mission.  How  can
one  solitary  person  without  help  and  without  support
lay  the  foundations  of  such  a  noble  construction  ?  He
must  depend  on  the  help  of  the  spiritual  and  divine
power  to  be  able  to  undertake  this  mission.  One  Holy
Soul  gives  life  to  the  world  of  humanity,  changes
the  aspect  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  causes  intelli-
gence to  progress,  vivifies  souls,  lays  the  founda-
tion of  a  new  existence,  establishes  the  basis  of  a
marvellous  creation,  organises  the  world,  brings  nations
and  religions  under  the  shadow  of  one  standard,
delivers  man  from  the  world  of  imperfections  and
vices,  and  inspires  him  with  the  desire  and  need  of
natural  and  acquired  perfections.  Certainly  nothing
short  of  a  divine  power  could  accomplish  so  great  a
work.  We  ought  to  consider  this  with  justice,  for  this
is  the  office  of  justice.

A  Cause  which  all  the  governments  and  peoples  of
the  world,  with  all  their  powers  and  armies,  cannot
promulgate  and  spread,  one  Holy  Soul  can  promote
without  help  or  support !  Can  this  be  done  by  human


12  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

power  ?  No,  in  the  name  of  God !  For  example,
Christ,  alone  and  solitary,  upraised  the  standard  of
spiritual  peace  and  righteousness,  a  work  which  all  the
victorious  governments  with  all  their  hosts  were  unable
to  accomplish.  Consider  what  was  the  fate  of  so  many
and  diverse  empires  and  peoples :  the  Roman  Empire,
France,  Germany,  Russia,  England,  etc.;  all  were
gathered  together  under  the  same  tent;  that  is  to
say,  the  appearance  of  Christ  brought  about  a  union
among  these  diverse  nations ;  some  of  whom,  under  the
influence  of  Christianity,  became  so  united  that  they
sacrificed  their  lives  and  property  for  one  another.
After  the  time  of  Constantine,  who  was  the  protagonist
of  Christianity,  divisions  broke  out  among  them.  The
point  I  wish  to  make  is  that  Christ  sustained  a  cause
that  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  could  not  establish!
He  united  the  various  religions  and  modified  ancient
customs.  Consider  what  great  divergences  existed  be-
tween Romans,  Greeks,  Syrians,  Egyptians,  Pho3nicians,
Israelites,  and  other  peoples  of  Europe.  Christ  removed
all  discord,  and  became  the  cause  of  love  between  these
communities.  Although  after  some  time  empires
destroyed  this  union,  the  work  of  Christ  was  accom-
plished.

Therefore  the  perfect  educator  must  be  at  the  same
time  not  only  a  material,  but  also  a  human  and  spiritual
educator;  and  he  must  possess  a  supernatural  power,
so  that  he  may  hold  the  position  of  a  divine  teacher.
If  he  does  not  show  forth  such  a  holy  power,  he  will
not  be  able  to  educate,  for  if  he  be  imperfect,  how  can
he  give  a  perfect  education  ?  if  he  be  ignorant,  how  can
he  make  others  wise  ?  If  he  be  unjust,  how  can  he


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  13

make  others  just  ?  If  he  be  earthly,  how  can  he  make
others  heavenly  ?

Now  we  must  consider  justly:  did  these  Divine
Manifestations1  who  have  appeared  possess  all  these
qualifications  or  not?  If  they  had  not  these  quali-
fications and  these  perfections,  they  were  not  real
educators.

Therefore  it  must  be  our  task  to  prove  to  the
thoughtful  by  reasonable  arguments  the  prophethood
of  Moses,  of  Christ,  and  of  the  other  Divine  Manifesta-
tions. And  the  proofs  and  evidences  which  we  give
must  not  be  based  on  traditional  but  on  rational
arguments.

It  has  now  been  proved  by  rational  arguments  that
the  world  of  existence  is  in  the  utmost  need  of  an
educator,  and  that  its  education  must  be  effected  by
a  divine  power.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  divine
power  is  due  to  inspiration,  and  that  the  world  must
be  educated  through  this  power  which  is  above  human
power.

1  Divine  Manifestations  are  the  founders  of  religions.  Cf.  '  Two
Classes  of  Prophets,'  page  188.


IV

ABRAHAM

ONE  ot  those  who  possessed  this  power  and  was
assisted  by  it  was  Abraham.  He  was  born  in  the
country  between  the  two  rivers,1  and  of  a  family  who
were  ignorant  of  the  Oneness  of  God.  He  opposed  his
own  nation  and  people,  and  even  his  own  family,  by
rejecting  all  their  gods.  Alone  and  without  help  he
resisted  a  powerful  tribe,  a  task  which  is  neither  simple
nor  easy.  It  is  as  if  in  this  day  some  one  were  to  go
to  a  Christian  people  who  are  attached  to  the  Bible,
and  deny  Christ ;  or  in  the  Papal  Court — I  ask  forgive-
ness of  God ! — if  such  a  one  were  in  the  most  violent
manner  to  blaspheme  against  Christ  in  opposition  to
the  people.

These  people  believed  not  in  one  God  but  in  many
gods,  to  whom  they  ascribed  miracles ;  therefore  they
all  arose  against  him,  and  no  one  supported  him  except
Lot,  his  brother's  son,  and  one  or  two  other  people  of  no
importance.  At  last,  reduced  to  the  utmost  distress  by
the  opposition  of  his  enemies,  he  was  obliged  to  leave
his  native  land.  In  reality  they  banished  him  in  order
that  he  might  be  crushed  and  destroyed,  and  that  no
trace  of  him  might  be  left.

1  Mesopotamia.
14


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  15

Abraham  then  came  into  the  region  of  the  Holy
Land.  His  enemies  considered  that  his  exile  would
lead  to  his  destruction  and  ruin,  as  it  seemed  impossible
that  a  man  banished  from  his  native  land,  deprived  of
his  rights,  and  oppressed  on  all  sides — even  though  he
were  a  king — could  escape  death  or  subjugation.  But
Abraham  stood  fast  and  showed  forth  supernatural
firmness ;  and  God  made  this  exile  to  be  to  his  eternal
honour,  because  he  established  the  Unity  of  God,  in  the
midst  of  a  polytheistic  generation.  In  consequence  of
his  exile  the  descendants  of  Abraham  became  powerful,
and  the  Holy  Land  was  given  to  them.  As  a  result  the
teachings  of  Abraham  were  spread  abroad,  a  Jacob
appeared  among  his  posterity,  and  a  Joseph  who  became
ruler  in  Egypt.  In  consequence  of  his  exile  a  Moses
and  a  being  like  Christ  were  manifested  from  his  pos-
terity, and  Hagar  was  found  from  whom  Ishmael  was
born,  one  of  whose  descendants  was  Muhammad.  In
consequence  of  his  exile  the  Bab  appeared  from  his
posterity,1  and  the  Prophets  of  Israel  were  numbered
among  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  And  so  it  will
continue  for  ever  and  ever.  Finally,  in  consequence  of
his  exile  the  whole  of  Europe  and  most  of  Asia  came
under  the  protecting  shadow  of  the  God  of  Israel.
See  what  a  power  it  is  that  enabled  a  man  who  was
a  fugitive  from  his  country  to  found  such  a  family
to  establish  such  a  faith,  and  to  promulgate  such
teachings.  Can  any  one  say  that  this  occurred  ac-
cidentally ?  We  must  be  just :  was  this  man  an
educator  or  not  ?

Since  the  exile  of  Abraham  from  Ur  to  Aleppo  in

1  The  Bab's  descent  was  from  Muhammad.


16  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Syria  produced  this  result,  we  must  consider  what  will
be  the  effect  of  the  exile  of  Baha'u'llah  in  his  several
progresses  from   Tihran  to   Baghdad,  from  thence  to
Constantinople,  to  Roumelia,  and  the  Holy  Land.
See  what  a  perfect  educator  Abraham  was !


MOSES

MOSES  was  for  a  long  time  a  shepherd  in  the  wilder-
ness. Regarded  outwardly,  he  was  a  man  brought  up
in  a  tyrannical  household,  and  was  known  amongst  the
people  as  one  who  had  committed  a  murder.  By  the
officers  and  the  priests  of  Pharaoh  he  was  much  hated
and  detested.

It  was  such  a  man  as  this  that  freed  a  great  nation
from  the  chains  of  captivity,  made  them  contented,
brought  them  out  from  Egypt,  and  led  them  to  the
Holy  Land.

This  people  from  the  depths  of  degradation  were
lifted  up  to  the  height  of  glory.  They  were  captive,
they  became  free;  they  were  the  most  ignorant  of
peoples,  they  became  the  most  wise.  As  the  result  of
the  institutions  that  Moses  gave  them,  they  attained
a  position  which  entitled  them  to  honour  among  all
nations,  and  their  fame  spread  to  all  lands ;  to  such  a
degree  indeed  that  among  surrounding  nations  if  one
wished  to  praise  a  man  one  said,  'surely  he  is  an
Israelite.'  Moses  established  the  religious  law  and  the
civil  law ;  these  gave  life  to  the  people  of  Israel,  and  led
them  to  the  highest  possible  degree  of  civilisation  at
that  period.

B


18  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

To  such  a  development  did  they  attain  that  the  sages
of  Greece  came  to  regard  the  illustrious  men  of  Israel
as  models  of  perfection.  Such  an  one  was  Socrates,
who  visited  Syria,  and  took  from  the  children  of  Israel
the  teachings  of  the  Unity  of  God  and  of  the  immor-
tality of  the  soul.  After  his  return  to  Greece  he  pro-
mulgated these  teachings.  Later  the  people  of  Greece
rose  in  opposition  to  him,  accused  him  of  impiety,
arraigned  him  before  the  Areopagus,  and  condemned
him  to  death  by  poison.

Now,  how  could  a  man  who  was  a  stammerer,  who
had  been  brought  up  in  the  house  of  Pharaoh,  who  was
known  among  men  as  a  murderer,  who  through  fear
had  for  a  long  time  remained  in  concealment,  and  who
had  become  a  shepherd — establish  so  great  a  Cause,
when  the  wisest  philosophers  on  earth  have  not  dis-
played one  thousandth  part  of  this  influence  ?  This  is
indeed  a  prodigy.

A  man  who  had  a  stammering  tongue,  who  could
not  even  converse  correctly,  succeeded  in  sustaining
this  great  Cause !  If  he  had  not  been  assisted  by  divine
power  he  would  never  have  been  able  to  carry  out  this
great  work.  These  facts  are  undeniable.  Scientists,
Greek  philosophers,  the  great  men  of  Rome,  became
famous  in  the  world,  each  one  of  them  having  special-
ised in  one  branch  of  learning  only.  Thus  Galen  and
Hippocrates  became  celebrated  in  medicine,  Aristotle
in  logic  and  reasoning,  and  Plato  in  ethics  and  theology.
How  is  it  that  a  shepherd  could  acquire  all  of  this
knowledge?  It  is  beyond  doubt  that  he  must  have
been  assisted  by  an  omnipotent  power.

Consider   also  what  trials  and   difficulties  arise  for


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  19

people.  To  prevent  an  act  of  cruelty,  |Moses  struck
down  an  Egyptian,  and  afterwards  became  known
amongst  men  as  a  murderer ;  more  notably  because  the
man  he  had  killed  was  of  the  ruling  nation.  Then  he
fled,  and  it  was  after  that  that  he  was  raised  to  the  rank
of  a  Prophet !

In  spite  of  his  evil  repute,  how  wonderfully  he  was
guided  by  a  supernatural  power  in  establishing  his
great  institutions  and  laws  !


VI

CHRIST

AFTERWARDS  Christ  came  saying,  'I  am  born  of  the
Holy  Spirit.'  Though  it  is  now  easy  for  the  Christians
to  believe  this  assertion,  at  that  time  it  was  very
difficult.  The  text  of  the  Gospel  says,  'Is  not  this
the  son  of  Joseph  of  Nazareth  whom  we  know  ?  How
can  he  say  therefore,  I  came  down  from  heaven  ? '

Briefly,  this  man,  who  apparently,  and  in  the  eyes
of  all,  was  lowly,  arose  with  such  great  power  that  he
abolished  a  religion  that  had  lasted  fifteen  hundred
years,  at  a  time  when  the  slightest  deviation  from  it
exposed  the  offender  to  danger  or  to  death.  More-
over, in  the  days  of  Christ  the  morals  of  the  whole
world  and  the  condition  of  the  Israelites  had  become
completely  confused  and  corrupted,  and  Israel  had
fallen  into  a  state  of  the  utmost  degradation,  misery,
and  bondage.  At  one  time  they  had  been  taken
captive  by  the  Chaldeans  and  Persians,  at  another  time
they  were  reduced  to  slavery  by  the  Assyrians,  then
they  became  the  subjects  and  vassals  of  the  Greeks,
and  at  the  coming  of  Christ  they  were  ruled  over  and
despised  by  the  Romans.

This  young  man,  Christ,  by  the  help  of  a  super-
natural power,  abrogated  the  ancient  Mosaic  Law,
20


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  21

reformed  the  general  morals,  and  once  again  laid  the
foundation  of  eternal  glory  for  the  Israelites.  More-
over, he  brought  to  humanity  the  glad  tidings  of
universal  peace,  and  spread  abroad  teachings  which
were  not  for  Israel  alone,  but  were  for  the  general
happiness  of  the  whole  human  race.

Those  who  first  strove  to  do  away  with  him  were
the  Israelites  and  his  own  kindred.  To  all  outward
appearances  they  overcame  him,  and  brought  him
into  direst  distress.  At  last  they  crowned  him  with
the  crown  of  thorns  and  crucified  him.  But  Christ,
while  apparently  in  the  deepest  misery  and  affliction,
proclaimed:  'This  Sun  will  be  resplendent,  this  Light
will  shine,  my  grace  will  surround  the  world,  and  all
my  enemies  will  be  brought  low.'  And  as  he  said,  so
it  was:  for  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  have  not  been
able  to  withstand  him.  Nay,  all  their  standards  have
been  overthrown,  whilst  the  banner  of  that  Oppressed
One  has  been  raised  to  the  zenith.

But  this  is  opposed  to  all  the  rules  of  human  reason.
Then  it  becomes  clear  and  evident  that  this  Glorious
Being  was  a  true  educator  of  the  world  of  humanity,
and  that  he  was  helped  and  confirmed  by  divine
power.


VII
MUHAMMAD

Now  we  come  to  Muhammad.  Americans  and  Euro-
peans have  heard  a  number  of  stories  about  the  Prophet
which  they  have  thought  to  be  true,  although  the
narrators  were  either  ignorant  or  antagonistic ;  most  of
them  were  clergy ;  others  were  ignorant  Muslims  who
repeated  unfounded  traditions  about  Muhammad  which
they  ignorantly  believed  to  be  to  his  praise.

Thus  some  benighted  Muslims  made  his  polygamy
the  pivot  of  their  praises,  and  held  it  to  be  a  wonder,
regarding  it  as  a  miracle;  and  European  historians,
for  the  most  part,  rely  on  the  tales  of  these  ignorant
people.

For  example,  a  foolish  man  said  to  a  clergyman  that
the  true  proof  of  greatness  is  bravery  and  the  shedding
of  blood,  and  that  in  one  day  on  the  field  of  battle
a  follower  of  Muhammad  had  cut  off  the  heads  of
one  hundred  men!  This  misled  the  clergyman  to
infer  that  murder  is  considered  an  accessory  to  the
religion  of  Muhammad.  The  military  expeditions  of
Muhammad,  on  the  contrary,  were  always  defensive
actions:  a  proof  of  this  is  that  during  thirteen  years,
in  Mecca,  he  and  his  disciples  endured  the  most  violent

persecutions.    At  this  period  they  were  the  target  for
22


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS   23

the  arrows  of  hatred:  some  of  his  companions  were
killed  and  their  property  confiscated;  others  fled  to
foreign  lands.  Muhammad  himself,  after  the  most
extreme  persecutions  by  the  Quraishites,  who  finally
resolved  to  kill  him,  fled  to  Madina  in  the  middle  of
the  night.  Yet  even  then  his  enemies  did  not  cease
their  persecutions,  but  pursued  him  to  Madina,  and
his  disciples  even  to  Abyssinia.

These  Arab  tribes  were  in  the  lowest  depths  of
savagery  and  barbarism  ;  and  in  comparison  with  them
the  savages  and  wild  Indians  of  America  were  as  ad-
vanced as  a  Plato.  The  savages  of  America  do  not
bury  their  children  alive  as  these  Arabs  did  their
daughters,  glorying  in  it  as  being  an  honourable  thing
to  do.1  Thus  many  of  the  men  would  threaten  their
wives,  saying, '  If  a  daughter  is  born  to  you,  I  will  kill
you.'  Even  down  to  the  present  time  the  Arabs  hate
their  daughters.  Further,  if  a  man  wished  it,  he  was
permitted  to  take  a  thousand  women,  and  most
husbands  had  more  than  ten  wives  in  their  house-
hold. When  these  tribes  made  war,  the  one  which
was  victorious  would  take  the  women  and  children  of
the  vanquished  tribe  captive,  and  treat  them  as  slaves.

When  a  man  who  had  ten  wives  died,  the  sons  of
these  women  took  possession  of  each  other's  mothers ;
and  if  one  of  the  sons  threw  his  mantle  over  the  head
of  his  father's  wife  and  cried  out, '  This  woman  is  my
lawful  property,'  at  once  the  unfortunate  woman  be-
came his  prisoner  and  slave.  He  could  do  whatever
he  wished  with  her.  He  could  kill  her,  imprison  her

1  The  Bani-T&min,  one  of  the  most  barbarous  Arab  tribes,  prac-
tised this  odious  custom.


24  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

in  a  well,  or  beat,  curse,  and  torture  her  until  death
released  her.  According  to  the  Arab  habits  and  customs,
he  was  her  master.  It  is  evident  that  malignity,  jealousy,
hatred,  and  enmity  must  have  existed  between  the
wives  and  children  of  a  household,  and  it  is  therefore
needless  to  enlarge  upon  the  subject.  Again,  consider
what  was  the  condition  and  life  of  these  oppressed
women !  Moreover,  the  means  by  which  these  Arab
tribes  lived  consisted  in  pillage  and  robbery,  so  that
they  were  perpetually  engaged  in  fighting  and  war,
killing  one  another,  plundering  and  devastating  each
other's  property,  and  capturing  women  and  children,
whom  they  would  sell  to  strangers.  How  often  it
happened  that  the  daughters  and  sons  of  an  Amir  who
turned  their  days  into  nights  of  coquetry  and  extreme
luxury,  saw  their  nights  transformed  into  mornings  of
terrible  shame,  poverty,  and  captivity.  Yesterday  they
were  Amirs,  to-day  they  are  captives;  yesterday  they
were  great  ladies,  to-day  they  are  slaves.

Muhammad  was  reared  among  these  tribes,  and  after
enduring  thirteen  years  of  persecution  from  them,  he
fled.1  But  this  people  did  not  cease  to  oppress ;  they
united  to  exterminate  him  and  all  his  followers.  It
was  under  such  circumstances  that  Muhammad  was
forced  to  take  up  arms.  This  is  the  truth :  personally,
we  are  not  bigoted,  and  do  not  wish  to  defend  him,
but  we  are  just,  and  we  say  what  is  just.  Look  at  it
with  justice.  If  Christ  himself  had  been  placed  in
such  circumstances  among  such  tyrannical  and  bar-
barous tribes,  and  if  for  thirteen  years  he  with  his
disciples  had  endured  all  these  trials  with  patience,

1  To  Madina.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  25

culminating  in  flight  from  his  native  land — if  in
spite  of  this  these  lawless  tribes  continued  to  pursue
him,  to  slaughter  the  men,  to  pillage  their  property,
and  to  capture  their  women  and  children,  what  would
have  been  Christ's  conduct  with  regard  to  them  ?  If
this  oppression  had  fallen  only  upon  himself  he  would
have  forgiven  them,  and  such  an  act  of  forgiveness
would  have  been  most  praiseworthy;  but  if  he  had
seen  that  these  cruel  and  bloodthirsty  murderers  wished
to  kill,  to  pillage,  and  to  injure  all  these  oppressed
ones,  and  to  take  captive  the  women  and  children,  it
is  certain  that  he  would  have  protected  them,  and
would  have  resisted  the  tyrants.  What  objection,  then,
can  be  taken  to  Muhammad's  action  ?  Is  it  this,  that
he  did  not  with  his  followers,  and  their  women  and
children,  submit  to  these  savage  tribes  ?  To  free  these
tribes  from  their  bloodthirstiness  was  the  greatest  kind-
ness, and  to  coerce  and  restrain  them  was  a  true  mercy.
They  were  like  a  man  holding  in  his  hand  a  cup  of
poison,  which,  when  about  to  drink,  a  friend  breaks,
and  thus  saves  him.  If  Christ  had  been  placed  in
similar  circumstances,  it  is  certain  that  with  a  con-
quering power  he  would  have  delivered  the  men,
women,  and  children  from  the  claws  of  these  blood-
thirsty wolves.

Muhammad  never  fought  against  the  Christians ;  on
the  contrary,  he  treated  them  kindly  and  gave  them
perfect  freedom.  A  community  of  Christian  people
lived  at  Najran  who  were  under  his  care  and  protection.
Muhammad  said,  '  If  any  one  infringes  their  rights,  I
myself  will  be  his  enemy,  and  in  the  presence  of  God  I
will  bring  a  charge  against  him.'  In  the  edicts  which


26  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

he  promulgated  it  is  clearly  stated  that  the  lives,
properties,  and  laws  of  the  Christians  and  Jews  are
under  the  protection  of  God ;  and  that  if  a  Muhammadan
married  a  Christian  woman,  the  husband  must  not
prevent  her  from  going  to  church,  nor  oblige  her  to
veil  herself;  and  that  if  she  died,  he  must  place  her
remains  in  the  care  of  the  Christian  clergy.  Should
the  Christians  desire  to  build  a  church,  Islam  ought  to
help  them.  In  case  of  war  between  Islam  and  her
enemies,  the  Christians  should  be  exempted  from  the
obligation  of  fighting,  unless  they  desired  of  their  own
free  will  to  do  so  in  defence  of  Islam.  But  as  a  com-
pensation for  this  immunity,  they  should  pay  yearly  a
small  sum  of  money.  Finally,  there  are  seven  detailed
edicts  on  these  subjects,  some  copies  of  which  are  still
extant  at  Jerusalem.  This  is  an  established  fact,  and
is  not  dependent  on  my  affirmation.  The  firman  of
the  second  Caliphate1  still  exists  in  the  custody  of
the  orthodox  Patriarch  of  Jerusalem,  and  of  this  there
is  no  doubt.2

Nevertheless,  after  a  certain  time,  and  through  the
transgression  of  both  the  Muhammadans  and  the
Christians,  hatred  and  enmity  arose  between  them.
Independently  of  this  fact,  all  the  narrations  of  the
Muslims,  Christians,  and  others,  are  simply  fabrications,
which  have  their  origin  in  fanaticism,  or  ignorance,
except  when  they  arise  from  enmity.

For  example,  the  Muslims  say  that  Muhammad  cleft
the  moon,  and  that  it  fell  on  the  mountain  of  Mecca :

1  Of  'Urnar.

2  Cf.   Jurji  Zaydan'a    Umayyada  and  Abbasids.      Translated    by
D.  8.  Margoliouth.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  27

they  think  that  the  inoon  is  a  small  body  which
Muhammad  divided  into  two  parts,  and  threw  one  part
on  this  mountain,  and  the  other  part  on  another
mountain.

Such  stories  are  pure  fanaticism.  Also  the  traditions
which  the  clergy  quote,  and  the  incidents  with  which
they  find  fault,  are  all  exaggerated  if  not  entirely
without  foundation.

Briefly,  Muhammad  appeared  in  the  desert  of  Hijaz
in  the  Arabian  Peninsula,  which  was  a  desolate,  sterile
wilderness,  sandy  and  uninhabited.  Some  parts,  like
Mecca  and  Madina,  are  extremely  hot ;  the  people  are
nomads  with  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  dwellers
in  the  desert,  and  are  entirely  destitute  of  education
and  science.  Muhammad  himself  was  illiterate,  and
the  Quran  was  originally  written  upon  the  bladebones
of  sheep,  or  on  palm  leaves.  These  details  indicate  the
condition  of  the  people  to  whom  Muhammad  was  sent.
The  first  question  which  he  put  to  them  was :  '  Why  do
you  not  accept  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Gospel,  and  why
do  you  not  believe  in  Christ  and  in  Moses  ? '  This  saying
presented  difficulties  to  them,  and  they  argued :  '  Our
forefathers  did  not  believe  in  the  Pentateuch  and  the
Gospel :  tell  us,  why  was  this  ? '  He  answered, '  They
were  misled;  you  ought  to  reject  those  who  do  not
believe  in  the  Pentateuch  and  the  Gospel,  even  though
they  are  your  fathers  and  your  ancestors.'

In  such  a  country,  and  amidst  such  barbarous  tribes,
an  illiterate  man  produced  a  book  in  which,  in  a  perfect
and  eloquent  style,  he  explained  the  divine  attributes
and  perfections,  the  prophethood  of  the  Messengers  of
God,  the  divine  laws,  and  some  scientific  facts.


28  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Thus,  you  know  that  before  the  observations  of
modern  times,  that  is  to  say,  during  the  first  centuries
'  and  down  to  the  fifteenth  century  of  the  Christian  era,
all  the  mathematicians  of  the  world  agreed  that  the
earth  was  the  centre  of  the  universe,  and  that  the  sun
moved.  The  famous  astronomer1  who  was  the  pro-
tagonist of  the  new  theory,  discovered  the  movement
of  the  earth  and  the  immobility  of  the  sun.  Until  his
time  all  the  astronomers  and  philosophers  of  the  world
followed  the  Ptolemaic  system,  and  whoever  said  any-
thing against  it  was  considered  ignorant.  Though
Pythagoras,  and  Plato  during  the  latter  part  of  his
life,  adopted  the  theory  that  the  annual  movement  of
the  sun  around  the  zodiac  does  not  proceed  from  the
sun,  but  rather  from  the  movement  of  the  earth  around
the  sun;  this  theory  had  been  entirely  forgotten,
and  the  Ptolemaic  system  was  accepted  by  all  mathe-
maticians. But  there  are  some  verses  revealed  in
the  Quran  contrary  to  the  theory  of  the  Ptolemaic
system.  One  of  them  is  'The  sun  moves  in  a  fixed
place,'2  which  shows  the  fixity  of  the  sun,  and  its
movement  around  an  axis.  Again,  in  another  verse,
'And  each  star  moves  in  its  own  heaven.'3  Thus  is
explained  the  movement  of  the  sun,  of  the  moon,  of  the
earth,  and  of  other  bodies.  When  the  Quran  appeared
all  the  mathematicians  ridiculed  these  statements,  and
attributed  the  theory  to  ignorance.  Even  the  doctors
of  Islam,  when  they  saw  that  these  verses  were  contrary
to  the  accepted  Ptolemaic  system,  were  obliged  to
explain  them  away.

It  was  not  until  after  the  fifteenth  century  of  the

1  Copernicus.  a  Quran,  Sura  36.  8  Quran,  Sura  36.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  29

Christian  era,  nearly  nine  hundred  years  after  Muham-
mad, that  a  famous  astronomer1  made  new  observations
and  important  discoveries  by  the  aid  of  the  telescope
which  he  had  invented.  The  rotation  of  the  earth,
the  fixity  of  the  sun,  and  also  its  movement  around  an
axis,  were  discovered.  It  is  thus  evident  that  the  verses
of  the  Quran  agree  with  existing  facts,  and  that  the
Ptolemaic  system  is  imaginary.

In  short,  many  Oriental  peoples  have  been  reared  for
thirteen  centuries  under  the  shadow  of  the  religion  of
Muhammad.  During  the  middle  ages,  while  Europe
was  in  the  lowest  depths  of  barbarism,  the  Arab  peoples
were  superior  to  the  other  nations  of  the  earth  in
learning,  in  the  arts,  mathematics,  civilisation,  govern-
ment, and  other  sciences.  The  enlightener  and  educator
of  these  nomadic  tribes,  and  the  founder  of  the  civilisa-
tion and  perfections  of  humanity  among  these  different
races,  was  an  illiterate  man,  Muhammad.  Was  this
illustrious  man  a  thorough  educator  or  not  ?  A  just
judgment  is  necessary.

1  Galileo.


VIII
THE  BAB

As  for  the  Bab,1 — may  my  soul  be  his  sacrifice! — at
a  youthful  age,  that  is  to  say  when  he  had  reached  the
twenty-fifth  year  of  his  blessed  life,  he  stood  forth  to
proclaim  his  Cause.  It  was  universally  admitted  by  the
Shiites  that  he  had  never  studied  in  any  school,  and
had  not  acquired  knowledge  from  any  teacher ;  all  the
people  of  Shiraz  bear  witness  to  this.  Nevertheless,  he
suddenly  appeared  before  the  people,  endowed  with  the
most  complete  erudition.  Although  he  was  but  a
merchant,  he  confounded  all  the  Ulama2  of  Persia.
All  alone,  in  a  way  which  is  beyond  imagination,  he
upheld  the  Cause  against  the  Persians,  who  are  re-
nowned for  their  religious  fanaticism.  This  illustrious
soul  arose  with  such  power  that  he  shook  the  supports
of  the  religion,  of  the  morals,  the  conditions,  the  habits,
and  the  customs  of  Persia,  and  instituted  new  rules,
new  laws,  and  a  new  religion.  Though  the  great
personages  of  the  State,  nearly  all  the  clergy,  and  the
public  men,  arose  to  destroy  and  annihilate  him,  he
alone  withstood  them,  and  moved  the  whole  of  Persia.

1  The  Bab  is  here  designated  by  his  title  Hazrati  'Ala,  His  Supreme
Highness ;  but  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader  we  shall  continue  to
designate  him  by  the  name   under  which  he  is  known  throughout
Europe,  i.  e.  the  Bab.

2  Doctors  of  the  religion  of  Islam.

80


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  31

Many  Ulama  and  public  men,  as  well  as  other  people,
joyfully  sacrificed  their  lives  in  his  Cause,  and  hastened
to  the  plain  of  martyrdom.

The  government,  the  nation,  the  doctors  of  divinity,
and  the  great  personages,  desired  to  extinguish  his
light,  but  they  could  not  do  so.  At  last  his  moon
arose,  his  star  shone  forth,  his  foundations  became
firmly  established,  and  his  dawning  -  place  became
brilliant.  He  imparted  divine  education,  and  produced
marvellous  results  on  the  thoughts,  morals,  customs,
and  conditions  of  the  Persians.  He  announced  the
glad  tidings  of  the  manifestation  of  the  Sun  of  Baha  to
his  followers,  and  prepared  them  to  believe.

The  appearance  of  such  wonderful  signs  and  great
results,  the  effects  produced  upon  the  minds  of  the
people,  and  upon  the  prevailing  ideas;  the  establish-
ment of  the  foundations  of  progress,  and  the  organisa-
tion of  the  principles  of  success  and  prosperity  by  a
young  merchant,  constitute  the  greatest  proof  that  he
was  a  perfect  educator.  A  just  person  will  never
hesitate  to  believe  this.


IX
BAHA'U'LLAH

BAHA'u'LLAH1  appeared  at  a  time  when  the  Persian
Empire  was  immersed  in  profound  obscurantism  and
ignorance,  and  lost  in  the  blindest  fanaticism.

In  the  European  histories,  no  doubt,  you  have  read
detailed  accounts  of  the  morals,  customs,  and  ideas  of
the  Persians  during  the  last  centuries.  It  is  useless
to  repeat  them.  Briefly,  we  will  say  that  Persia  had
fallen  so  low  that  to  all  foreign  travellers  it  was  a
matter  of  regret  that  this  country,  which  in  former
times  had  been  so  glorious  and  highly  civilised,  had
now  become  so  decayed,  ruined,  and  upset.

It  was  at  this  time  that  Baha'u'llah  appeared.  His
father  was  one  of  the  viziers,  not  one  of  the  Ulama.  As
all  the  people  of  Persia  know,  he  had  never  studied
in  any  school,  nor  had  he  associated  with  the  Ulama
or  the  men  of  learning.  The  early  part  of  his  life  was
passed  in  the  greatest  happiness.  His  companions  and
associates  were  Persians  of  the  highest  rank,  but  not
learned  men.

1  Jamali  Mubarak,  the  Blessed  Beauty,  the  title  which  is  here  given
to  Baha'u'llah.     He  is  also  called  Jamali  Qidam,  the  Pre-existent,  or
Ancient  Beauty.      But  we  shall  designate  him  as  Baha'u'llah,  the
title  by  which  he  is  known  in  the  West.
82


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  33

As  soon  as  the  Bab  became  manifested,Baha'u'llahsaid,
'  This  great  man  is  the  Lord  of  the  righteous,  and  faith
in  him  is  incumbent  upon  all.'  And  he  arose  to  assist
the  Bab,  and  gave  many  proofs  and  positive  evidences
of  his  truth,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  Ulama  of
the  state  religion  had  constrained  the  Persian  Govern-
ment to  oppose  and  resist  him,  and  had  further  issued
decrees  ordering  the  massacre,  pillage,  persecution,  and
expulsion  of  his  followers.  In  all  the  provinces  they
began  to  kill,  to  burn,  to  pillage  the  converts  and  even
to  assault  the  women  and  children.  Regardless  of  this,
Baha'u'llah  arose  to  proclaim  the  word  of  the  Bab  with
the  greatest  firmness  and  energy.  Not  for  one  moment
was  he  in  concealment;  he  mixed  openly  with  his
enemies.  He  was  occupied  in  showing  forth  evidences
and  proofs,  and  was  recognised  as  the  herald  of  the
word  of  God.  In  many  changes  and  chances  he
endured  the  greatest  misfortunes,  and  at  every  moment
he  ran  the  risk  of  being  martyred.

He  was  put  into  chains,  and  confined  in  an  under-
ground prison.  His  vast  property  and  inheritance  were
pillaged  and  confiscated.  He  was  exiled  four  times,
and  found  rest  only  in  the  '  Greatest  Prison.' l

In  spite  of  all  this  he  never  ceased  for  one  instant
his  proclamation  of  the  greatness  of  the  Cause  of  God.
He  manifested  such  virtue,  knowledge,  and  perfections,
that  he  became  a  wonder  to  all  the  people  of  Persia.
So  much  so  that  in  Tihran,  Baghdad,  Constantinople,
Roumelia,  and  even  in  Acca,  every  one  of  the  learned
and  scientific  men  who  entered  his  presence,  whether

1  Exiled  first  to  Baghdad,  then  to  Constantinople,  then  to  Adrianople,
he  was  imprisoned  in  Acca  (Acre),  '  the  Greatest  Prison,'  in  1869.


34  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

friend  or  enemy,  never  failed  to  receive  the  most
sufficient  and  convincing  answer  to  whatever  question
was  propounded.  All  frequently  acknowledged  that  he
was  alone  and  unique  in  his  perfections.

It  often  happened  that  in  Baghdad  certain  Muham-
madan  Ulama,  Jewish  rabbis,  and  Christians,  met  to-
gether with  some  European  scholars,  in  a  blessed
reunion :  each  one  had  some  question  to  propose,  and
although  they  were  possessed  of  varying  degrees  of
culture,  they  each  heard  a  sufficient  and  convincing
reply,  and  retired  satisfied.  Even  the  Persian  Ulama
who  were  at  Karbala  and  Najaf  chose  a  wise  man  whom
they  sent  on  a  mission  to  him ;  his  name  was  Mulla
Hasan  Amu.  He  came  into  the  Holy  Presence,  and
proposed  a  number  of  questions  on  behalf  of  the  Ulama,
to  which  Baha'u'llah  replied.  Then  Hasan  Amu  said :
'  The  Ulama  recognise  without  hesitation  and  confess
the  knowledge  and  virtue  of  Baha'u'llah,  and  they  are
unanimously  convinced  that  in  all  learning  he  has  no
peer  or  equal ;  and  it  is  also  evident  that  he  has  never
studied  or  acquired  this  learning ' ;  but  still  the  Ulama
said:  'We  are  not  contented  with  this,  we  do  not
acknowledge  the  reality  of  his  mission  by  virtue  of  his
wisdom  and  righteousness.  Therefore  we  ask  him  to
show  us  a  miracle  in  order  to  satisfy  and  tranquillise
our  hearts.'

Baha'u'llah  replied:  'Although  you  have  no  right
to  ask  this,  for  God  should  test  His  creatures,  and
they  should  not  test  God,  still  I  allow  and  accept  this
request.  But  the  Cause  of  God  is  not  a  theatrical
display  that  is  presented  every  hour,  of  which  some
new  diversion  may  be  asked  for  every  day.  If  it


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  35

were  thus,  the  Cause  of  God  would    become  mere
child's  play.

The  Ulama  must  therefore  assemble  and  with  one
accord  choose  one  miracle,  and  write  that  after  the
performance  of  this  miracle  they  will  no  longer  enter-
tain doubts  about  me,  and  that  all  will  acknowledge
and  confess  the  truth  of  my  Cause.  Let  them  seal  this
paper  and  bring  it  to  me.  This  must  be  the  accepted
criterion:  If  the  miracle  is  performed,  no  doubt  will
remain  for  them ;  and  if  not,  we  shall  be  convicted  of
imposture.'  The  learned  man,  Hasan  Amu,  rose  and
replied, '  There  is  no  more  to  be  said ' ;  he  then  kissed
the  knee  of  the  Blessed  One  although  he  was  not  a
believer,  and  went.  He  gathered  the  Ulama  and  gave
them  the  sacred  message.  They  consulted  together
and  said,  '  This  man  is  an  enchanter :  perhaps  he  will
perform  an  enchantment,  and  then  we  shall  have
nothing  more  to  say.'  Acting  on  this  belief,  they  did
not  dare  to  push  the  matter  further.1

This  man,  Hasan  Amu,  mentioned  this  fact  at
many  meetings.  After  leaving  Karbala  he  went  to
Kirmanshah  and  Tihran,  and  spread  a  detailed  account
of  it  everywhere,  laying  emphasis  on  the  fear  and  the
withdrawal  of  the  Ulama.

Briefly,  all  his  adversaries  in  the  Orient  acknow-
ledged his  greatness,  grandeur,  knowledge,  and  virtue ;
and  though  they  were  his  enemies,  they  always  spoke
of  him  as  '  the  renowned  BahaVllah.'

At  the  time  when  this  great  Light  suddenly  arose

1  The  penetrating  judgment  of  Baha'u'llah  upon  this  occasion  over-
came the  malignity  of  his  enemies,  who,  it  was  certain,  would  never
agree  in  choosing  what  miracle  to  ask  for.


36  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

upon  the  horizon  of  Persia,  all  the  people,  the  ministers,
the  Ulama,  and  men  of  other  classes  rose  against  him,
pursuing  him.  with  the  greatest  animosity,  and  pro-
claiming '  that  this  man  wishes  to  suppress  and  destroy
the  religion,  the  law,  the  nation,  and  the  empire.'  The
same  was  said  of  Christ.  But  Baha'u'llah  alone  and
without  support  resisted  them  all,  without  ever  show-
ing the  least  weakness.  At  last  they  said:  'As  long
as  this  man  is  in  Persia  there  will  be  no  peace
and  tranquillity ;  we  must  banish  him,  so  that  Persia
may  return  to  a  state  of  quietude.'

They  proceeded  to  use  violence  towards  him  to  oblige
him  to  ask  for  permission  to  leave  Persia,  thinking  that
by  this  means  the  light  of  his  truth  would  be  extin-
guished; but  the  result  was  quite  the  contrary.  The
Cause  became  magnified,  and  its  flame  more  intense.
At  first  it  spread  throughout  Persia  only,  but  the  exile
of  Baha'u'llah  caused  the  diffusion  of  the  Cause  through-
out other  countries.  Afterwards  his  enemies  said, '  Irak
Arabi1  is  not  far  enough  from  Persia;  we  must  send
him  to  a  more  distant  kingdom.'  This  is  why  the
Persian  Government  determined  to  send  Baha'u'llah
from  Irak  to  Constantinople.  Again  the  event  proved
that  the  Cause  was  not  in  the  least  weakened;  once
more  they  said,  '  Constantinople  is  a  place  of  passage
and  of  sojourn  for  various  races  and  peoples,  among
them  are  many  Persians.'  For  this  reason  the  Persians
further  exiled  him  to  Roumelia ;  but,  when  there,  the
flame  became  more  powerful,  and  the  Cause  more
exalted.  At  last  the  Persians  said,  '  Not  one  of  these
places  is  safe  from  his  influence ;  we  must  send  him  to

1  The  district  in  which  Baghdad  is  situated.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  37

some  place  where  he  will  be  reduced  to  powerlessness,
and  where  his  family  and  followers  will  have  to  submit
to  the  direst  afflictions.'  So  they  chose  the  prison
of  Acca,  which  is  reserved  especially  for  murderers,
thieves,  and  highway  robbers,  and  in  truth  they  classed
him  with  such  people.  But  the  power  of  God  became
still  further  manifested,  for  his  prison  became  the
means  of  the  promulgation  of  his  doctrine,  and  the
proclamation  of  his  word.  The  greatness  of  Baha'
u'llah  then  became  evident,  for  it  was  from  this  prison
and  under  such  circumstances  that  he  caused  Persia
to  advance  from  knowledge  to  knowledge.  He  over-
came all  his  enemies,  and  proved  to  them  that  they
could  not  resist  the  Cause.  His  holy  teachings  pene-
trated all  regions,  and  his  Cause  was  established.

Indeed,  in  all  parts  of  Persia  his  enemies  arose
against  him  with  the  greatest  hatred,  imprisoning,
killing,  and  beating  his  converts;  and  burning  and
razing  to  the  ground  thousands  of  dwellings,  striving
by  every  means  to  exterminate  and  crush  the  Cause.
In  spite  of  all  this,  from  the  prison  of  murderers,
highway  robbers,  and  thieves,  it  became  exalted.  His
teachings  were  spread  abroad,  and  his  exhortations
affected  many  of  those  who  had  been  the  most  full
of  hatred,  and  made  them  firm  believers;  even  the
Persian  Government  itself  became  awakened,  and  re-
gretted the  evils  that  had  arisen  through  the  fault
of  the  Ulama.

When  Baha'u'llah  came  to  this  prison  in  the  Holy
Land,  the  wise  men  realised  that  the  glad  tidings  which
God  gave  through  the  tongue  of  the  Prophets  two  or
three  thousand  years  before,  were  again  manifested,


38  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  that  God  was  faithful  to  His  promise ;  for  to  some
of  the  Prophets  He  had  revealed  and  given  the  good
news  that '  the  Lord  of  Hosts  should  be  manifested  in
the  Holy  Land.'  All  these  promises  were  fulfilled;
and  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  Baha'u'llah  could
have  been  obliged  to  leave  Persia,  and  to  pitch  his  tent
in  this  Holy  Land,  but  for  the  persecution  of  his
enemies,  his  banishment,  and  exile.  His  enemies
intended  that  his  imprisonment  should  completely
destroy  and  annihilate  the  blessed  Cause,  but  this
prison  was  in  reality  of  the  greatest  assistance,  and
became  the  means  of  its  development.  The  divine  re-
nown of  Baha'u'llah  reached  the  East  and  the  West,  and
the  rays  of  the  Sun  of  Truth  illuminated  all  the  world.
Praise  be  to  God !  though  he  was  a  prisoner,  his  tent
was  raised  on  Mount  Carmel,  and  he  moved  abroad  with
the  greatest  majesty.  Every  person,  friend  or  stranger,
who  was  honoured  by  his  presence  used  to  say, '  This  is
a  prince,  not  a  captive.'

As  soon  as  he  arrived  at  this  prison  he  addressed  an
epistle  to  Napoleon,1  which  he  sent  through  the  French
ambassador.  The  gist  of  it  was:  'Ask  what  is  our
crime,  and  why  we  are  confined  in  this  prison  and  this
dungeon.'  Napoleon  made  no  reply.  Then  a  second
epistle  was  issued,  which  is  contained  in  the  Suratu'l-
Haikal.z  The  epitome  of  it  is  :  '  Oh  Napoleon,  as  thou
hast  not  listened  to  my  proclamation,  and  as  thou  hast
not  answered  it,  thy  dominion  will  before  long  be  taken
away  from  thee  and  thou  wilt  be  utterly  destroyed.'
This  epistle  was  sent  to  Napoleon  by  post,  through  the

1  Napoleon  in.

2  One  of  Baha'u'llah's  works  written  after  his  Declarations.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  39

care  of  Cesar  Ketafagoo,1  as  was  known  to  all  the  com-
panions of  his  exile.  Copies  of  this  epistle  were
rapidly  spread  throughout  the  whole  of  Persia,  for  the
Kitabu'l-Haikal  was  then  in  circulation  in  Persia,  and
this  letter  was  among  the  contents  of  this  book.  This
happened  in  1869  A.D.,  and  as  the  Suratul-Haikal  was
circulated  in  Persia  and  India,  and  was  in  the  hands  of
all  believers,  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  contained
in  this  letter  was  confidently  expected.  Not  long
after,  in  1870  A.D.,  the  war  between  Germany  and
France  broke  out;  and  though  no  one  at  that  time
expected  the  victory  of  Germany,  Napoleon  was
defeated  and  dishonoured,  he  surrendered  to  his
enemies,  and  his  glory  was  changed  into  deep  abase-
ment.

Tablets 2  were  also  sent  to  other  kings,  and  amongst
them  was  the  letter  to  H.M.  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah.  In
that  epistle  Baha'u'llah  said :  '  Have  me  summoned,
gather  the  Ulama,  and  ask  for  proofs  and  arguments,
so  that  the  truth  and  falsehood  may  become  known.'
H.M.  Nasiru'd-Din  Shah  sent  the  blessed  epistle  to  the
Ulama  and  proposed  to  them  that  they  should  under-
take this  mission,  but  they  dared  not  do  so.  Then  he
asked  seven  of  the  most  celebrated  among  them  to
write  an  answer  to  the  challenge.  After  some  time
they  returned  the  blessed  letter,  saying,  '  This  man  is
the  opposer  of  religion  and  the  enemy  of  the  Shah.'
His  majesty  the  Shah  of  Persia  was  much  vexed,  and
said, '  This  is  a  question  for  proofs  and  arguments,  and

1  Son  of  a  French  Consul  in  Syria  with  whom  Baha'u'llah  had  friendly
relations.

2  Name  given  to  the  epistles  of  Baha'u'llah.


40  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  truth  or  falsehood :  how  can  it  refer  to  politics  ?
Alas !  how  much  we  respected  these  Ulama,  who  cannot
even  reply  to  this  epistle.'

Briefly,  all  that  was  recorded  in  the  Tablets  to  the
Kings  has  nearly  been  fulfilled:  if  from  the  year
1870  A.D.  we  compare  the  events  that  have  occurred,
we  will  find  that  nearly  all  have  appeared  as  predicted ;
only  a  few  remain  which  will  afterwards  become
manifested.

So  also  foreign  peoples,  and  other  sects  who  were  not
believers,  attributed  many  wonderful  things  to  Bah  a'
u'llah :  some  believed  that  he  was  a  saint,1  and  some
even  wrote  of  him.  One  of  them,  Sayyid  Dawoudi,  a
Sunnite  savant  of  Baghdad,  wrote  a  short  treatise  in
which  he  recorded  some  supernatural  acts.  Even  now,
in  all  parts  of  the  East,  there  are  some  people  who
though  they  do  not  believe  in  his  manifestation,  never-
theless believe  him  to  be  a  saint  and  have  faith  in  his
miracles.

To  sum  up,  both  his  antagonists  and  his  partisans,
as  well  as  all  those  who  were  received  in  the  sacred
spot,  acknowledged  and  bore  witness  to  the  greatness
of  Baha'u'llah;  though  they  did  not  believe  in  him,
still  they  acknowledged  his  grandeur,  and  as  soon  as
they  entered  the  sacred  spot,  the  presence  of  Baha
u'llah  produced  such  an  effect  on  most  of  them  that
they  could  not  utter  a  word.  How  many  times  it
happened  that  one  of  his  most  bitter  enemies  would
resolve  within  himself: '  I  will  say  such  and  such  things
when  I  reach  his  presence,  and  I  will  dispute  and
argue  thus  with  him,'  but  when  he  entered  the  Holy

1  Wait.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  41

Presence  he  would  become  amazed  and  confounded,
and  remain  speechless.

Baha'u'llah  had  never  studied  Arabic,  he  had  not
had  a  tutor  or  teacher  nor  had  he  entered  a  school;
nevertheless  the  eloquence  and  elegance  of  his  blessed
expositions  in  Arabic,  as  well  as  his  Arabic  writings,
caused  astonishment  and  stupefaction  to  the  most
accomplished  Arabic  scholars,  and  all  recognised  and
declared  that  he  was  incomparable  and  unequalled.

If  we  carefully  examine  the  text  of  the  Bible,  we  see
that  the  Divine  Manifestation  never  said  to  those  who
denied  him,  '  Whatever  miracle  you  desire,  I  am  ready
to  perform,  and  I  will  submit  to  whatever  test  you  pro-
pose.' But  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Shah,  Baha'u'llah
said  clearly, '  Gather  the  Ulama  and  summon  me,  that
the  evidences  and  proofs  may  be  established.' 1

For  fifty  years  Baha'u'llah  faced  his  enemies  like  a
mountain :  all  wished  to  annihilate  him  and  sought  his
destruction.  A  thousand  times  they  planned  to  crucify
and  destroy  him,  and  during  these  fifty  years  he  was  in
constant  danger.

In  this  day  Persia  is  in  such  a  state  of  decadence  and
ruin,  that  all  intelligent  men,  whether  Persians  or
foreigners,  who  realise  the  true  state  of  affairs,  recog-
nise that  its  progress,  its  civilisation  and  its  reconstruc-
tion, depend  upon  the  promulgation  of  the  teachings
and  the  development  of  the  theories  of  this  great
personage.


1  Cf.  page  35  note  1.  In  giving  such  importance  to  this  example
of  the  good  sense  of  Baha'u'llah,  'Abdu'1-Baha  means  to  empha-
sise the  uselessneas  of  miracles  as  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  Mani-
festations of  God.  Cf.  '  Miracles,'  page  115.


42  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Christ  in  his  blessed  day  in  reality  only  educated
eleven  men:  the  greatest  of  them  was  Peter,  who
nevertheless,  when  he  was  tested,  thrice  denied  Christ.
In  spite  of  this,  the  Cause  of  Christ  subsequently  per-
meated the  world.  At  the  present  day  Baha'u'llah
has  educated  thousands  of  souls  who,  while  under  the
menace  of  the  sword,  raised  to  the  highest  heaven  the
cry  of  '  Ta  Baha'u'l-Abha' ;l  and  in  the  fire  of  tests,
their  faces  became  illuminated  like  gold.  Then  reflect
what  will  take  place  in  the  future.

Finally,  we  must  be  just,  and  acknowledge  what  an
educator  this  Glorious  Being  was,  what  marvellous  signs
were  manifested  by  him,  and  what  power  and  might
have  been  realised  in  the  world  through  him.

1  A  cry  used  as  a  declaration  of  faith  by  the  Bahais,  literally  '  Oh
Glory,  the  most  Glorious. '


TRADITIONAL  PROOFS  EXEMPLIFIED  FROM
THE  BOOK  OF  DANIEL

TO-DAY,  at  table,  let  us  speak  for  a  little  of  proofs.
If  you  had  coine  to  this  blessed  place  in  the  days  of
the  manifestation  of  the  evident  Light,1  if  you  had
attained  to  the  court  of  his  presence,  and  had  witnessed
his  luminous  beauty,  you  would  have  understood  that
his  teachings  and  perfection  were  not  in  need  of  further
evidence.

Only  through  the  honour  of  entering  his  presence,
many  souls  became  confirmed  believers ;  they  had  no
need  of  other  proofs.  Even  those  people  who  rejected
and  hated  him  bitterly,  when  they  had  met  him,  would
testify  to  the  grandeur  of  Baha'u'llah,  saying :  '  This  is
a  magnificent  man,  but  what  a  pity  that  he  makes  such
a  claim !  Otherwise  all  that  he  says  is  acceptable.'

But  now,  as  that  Light  of  Reality  has  set,  all  are  in
need  of  proofs ;  so  we  have  undertaken  to  demonstrate
logical  proofs  of  the  truth  of  his  claim.  We  will  cite
another  which  alone  is  sufficient  for  all  who  are  just,
and  which  no  one  can  deny.  It  is  that  this  illustrious
Being  uplifted  his  Cause  in  the  '  Greatest  Prison ' ; 2  from
this  Prison  his  light  was  shed  abroad ;  his  fame

1  Baha'u'llah.  "  Acca.

43


44  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

conquered  the  world;  and  the  proclamation  of  his
glory  reached  the  East  and  West :  until  our  time  no
such  thing  has  ever  occurred.

If  there  be  justice  this  will  be  acknowledged ;  but
there  are  some  people  who,  even  if  all  the  proofs  in
the  world  be  adduced  before  them,  still  will  not  judge
justly !

Thus  the  religion  and  the  state  of  Persia  with  all
their  strength  could  not  resist  him.  Verily,  single
and  alone,  imprisoned  and  oppressed,  he  accomplished
whatever  he  desired.

I  do  not  wish  to  mention  the  miracles  of  Baha'
u'llah,  for  it  may  perhaps  be  said  that  these  are  tradi-
tions, liable  both  to  truth  and  to  error,  like  the  accounts
of  the  miracles  of  Christ  in  the  Gospel,  which  come  to
us  from  the  apostles  and  not  from  any  one  else,  and
are  denied  by  the  Jews.  Though  if  I  wish  to  mention
the  supernatural  acts  of  Baha'u'llah,  they  are  numerous;
they  are  acknowledged  in  the  Orient,  and  even  by  some
strangers  to  the  Cause.  But  these  narratives  are  not
decisive  proofs  and  evidences  to  all ;  the  hearer  might
perhaps  say  that  this  account  may  not  be  in  accord-
ance with  what  occurred,  for  it  is  known  that  other
sects  recount  miracles  performed  by  their  founders.
For  instance,  the  Brahmanists  relate  miracles:  from
what  evidence  may  we  know  that  those  are  false  and
that  these  are  true  ?  If  these  are  fables,  the  others
also  are  fables ;  if  these  are  generally  accepted,  so  also
the  others  are  generally  accepted :  consequently  these
accounts  are  not  satisfactory  proofs.  Yes,  miracles
are  proofs  for  the  bystander  only,  and  even  he  may
regard  them  not  as  a  miracle  but  as  an  enchantment.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  45

Extraordinary  feats  have  also  been  related  of  some
conjurors.

Briefly,  my  meaning  is  that  many  wonderful  things
were  done  by  Baha'u'llah,  but  we  do  not  recount  them  ;
for  they  do  not  constitute  proofs  and  evidences  for  the
peoples ;  and  they  are  not  decisive  proofs  even  for  those
who  see  them,  for  they  may  think  that  they  are  merely
enchantments.

Also,  most  of  the  miracles  of  the  Prophets  which  are
mentioned  have  an  inner  significance.  For  instance,
in  the  Gospel  it  is  written  that  at  the  martyrdom  of
Christ  darkness  prevailed,  and  the  earth  quaked,  and
the  veil  of  the  Temple  was  rent  hi  twain  from  the  top
to  the  bottom,  and  the  dead  came  forth  from  their
graves.  If  these  events  had  happened  they  would
indeed  have  been  wonderful,  and  would  certainly  have
been  recorded  in  the  history  of  the  times.  They  would
have  become  the  cause  of  much  troublings  of  heart.
The  soldiers  would  either  have  taken  down  Christ  from
the  cross  or  they  would  have  fled.  These  events  are
not  related  in  any  history,  therefore  it  is  evident  they
ought  not  to  be  taken  literally,  but  as  having  an  inner
significance.1

Our  purpose  is  not  to  deny  such  miracles ;  our  only
meaning  is  that  they  do  not  constitute  decisive  proofs,
and  that  they  have  an  inner  significance.

Accordingly  to-day,  at  table, .we  will  refer  to  the
explanation  of  the  traditional  proofs  which  are  in  the
Holy  Books.  Until  now,  all  that  we  have  spoken  of
are  logical  proofs.

The  state  in  which  one  should  be  to  seriously  search

1  Of.  '  Miracles,'  page  115.


46  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

for  the  truth  is  the  condition  of  the  thirsty  burning
soul  desiring  the  water  of  life,  of  the  fish  struggl-
ing to  reach  the  sea,  of  the  sufferer  seeking  for
the  true  doctor  to  obtain  the  divine  cure,  of  the  lost
caravan  endeavouring  to  find  the  right  road,  of  the
lost  and  wandering  ship  striving  to  reach  the  shore  of
salvation.

Also,  the  seeker  must  be  endowed  with  certain
qualities.  First  of  all  he  must  be  just,  and  severed  from
all  else  save  God ;  his  heart  must  be  entirely  turned  to
the  supreme  horizon ;  he  must  be  free  from  the  bond-
age of  vices  and  passions,  for  all  these  are  obstacles ;
furthermore,  he  must  be  able  to  endure  all  hardships ;
he  must  be  absolutely  pure  and  sanctified,  and  free
from  the  love  or  the  hatred  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
world.  Why?  because  the  fact  of  his  love  for  any
person  or  thing  might  prevent  him  from  recognising
the  truth  in  another,  and  in  the  same  way,  hatred  for
anything  might  be  a  hindrance  hi  discerning  truth.
This  is  the  condition  of  seeking ;  and  the  seeker  must
have  these  qualities  and  attributes.  Until  he  reaches
this  condition,  it  is  not  possible  for  him  to  attain  to
the  Sun  of  Reality.

Let  us  now  return  to  our  subject.

All  the  peoples  of  the  world  are  awaiting  two  Mani-
festations, who  must  be  contemporaneous ;  all  wait  for
the  fulfilment  of  this .  promise.  In  the  Bible  the  Jews
have  the  promise  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  and  the  Messiah ;
in  the  Gospel  the  return  of  Christ  and  Elijah  is
promised.

In  the  religion  of  Muhammad  there  is  the  promise
of  the  Mahdi  and  the  Messiah,  and  it  is  the  same  with


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  47

the  Zoroastrian  and  the  other  religions,  but  if  we  relate
these  matters  in  detail  it  would  take  too  long.  The
essential  fact  is  that  all  are  promised  two  Manifesta-
tions, who  will  come,  one  following  on  the  other.  It
has  been  prophesied  that  in  the  time  of  these  two
Manifestations  the  earth  will  be  transformed,  the
world  of  existence  will  be  renewed,  and  beings  will  be
clothed  in  new  garments.  Justice  and  truth  will
encompass  the  world,  enmity  and  hatred  will  disappear,
all  causes  of  division  among  peoples,  races,  and  nations
will  vanish,  and  the  cause  of  union,  harmony,  and  con-
cord will  appear.  The  negligent  will  awake,  the  blind
will  see,  the  deaf  will  hear,  the  dumb  will  speak,  the
sick  will  be  cured,  the  dead  will  arise.  War  will  give
place  to  peace,  enmity  will  be  conquered  by  love ;  the
causes  of  dispute  and  wrangling  will  be  entirely
removed,  and  true  felicity  will  be  attained.  The  world
will  become  the  mirror  of  the  Heavenly  Kingdom,
humanity  will  be  the  Throne  of  Divinity.  All  nations
will  become  one,  all  religions  will  be  unified,  all
individual  men  will  become  of  one  family  and  of  one
kindred.  All  the  regions  of  the  earth  will  become  one,
the  superstitions  of  nationality,  patriotism,  personality,
language,  and  politics  will  disappear ;  and  all  men  will
attain  to  life  eternal,  under  the  shadow  of  the  Lord  of
Hosts.

Now  we  must  prove  from  the  Holy  Books  that  these
two  Manifestations  have  come,  and  we  must  divine  the
meaning  of  the  words  of  the  Prophets ;  for  we  wish  for
proofs  drawn  from  the  Holy  Books.

A  few  days  ago,  at  table,  we  put  forth  logical  proofs
establishing  the  truth  of  these  two  Manifestations.


48  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

To  conclude :  in  the  Book  of  Daniel,1  from  the
rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  to  the  martyrdom  of  Christ,
seventy  weeks  are  appointed;  for  by  the  martyrdom
of  Christ  the  sacrifice  is  accomplished  and  the  altar
destroyed.  This  is  a  prophecy  of  the  manifestation
of  Christ.  These  seventy  weeks  begin  with  the  restora-
tion and  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem,  concerning  which
four  edicts  were  issued  by  three  kings.

The  first  was  issued  by  Cyrus  in  the  year  536  B.C.  ;
this  is  recorded  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Book  of
Ezra.  The  second  edict,  with  reference  to  the  rebuild-
ing of  Jerusalem,  is  that  of  Darius  of  Persia  in  the
year  519  B.C.  ;  this  is  recorded  in  the  sixth  chapter  of
Ezra.  The  third  is  that  of  Artaxerxes  in  the  seventh
year  of  his  reign,  that  is  in  457  B.C.  ;  this  is  recorded
in  the  seventh  chapter  of  Ezra.  The  fourth  is  that  of
Artaxerxes  in  the  year  444  B.C.  ;  this  is  recorded  in  the
second  chapter  of  Nehemiah.

But  Daniel  refers  especially  to  the  third  edict  which
was  issued  in  the  year  457  B.C.  Seventy  weeks  make
four  hundred  and  ninety  days.  Each  day,  according
to  the  text  of  the  Holy  Book,  is  a  year.  For  in  the
Bible  it  is  said :  '  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  one  year.' 2
Therefore  four  hundred  and  ninety  days  are  four
hundred  and  ninety  years.  The  third  edict  of  Artax-
erxes was  issued  four  hundred  and  fifty-seven  years
before  the  birth  of  Christ,  and  Christ  when  he  was
martyred  and  ascended  was  thirty-three  years  of  age.
When  you  add  thirty-three  to  four  hundred  and  fifty-
seven,  the  result  is  four  hundred  and  ninety,  which  is
the  time  announced  by  Daniel  for  the  manifestation  of
Christ.

1  Chap.  ix.  24.  2  Cf.  Numbers  xiv.  34.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  49

But  in  the  twenty-fifth  verse  of  the  ninth  chapter  of
the  Book  of  Daniel  this  is  expressed  in  another  manner,
as  seven  weeks  and  sixty-two  weeks;  and  apparently
this  differs  from  the  first  saying.  Many  have  remained
perplexed  at  these  differences,  trying  to  reconcile  these
two  statements.  How  can  seventy  weeks  be  right  in
one  place,  and  sixty- two  weeks  and  seven  weeks  in
another  ?  These  two  sayings  do  not  accord.

But  Daniel  mentions  two  dates.  One  of  these  dates
begins  with  the  command  of  Artaxerxes  to  Ezra  to
rebuild  Jerusalem;  this  is  the  seventy  weeks  which
came  to  an  end  with  the  ascension  of  Christ,  when  by
his  martyrdom  the  sacrifice  and  oblation  ceased.

The  second  period,  which  is  found  in  the  twenty-
sixth  verse,  means  that  after  the  termination  of  the
rebuilding  of  Jerusalem  until  the  ascension  of  Christ,
there  will  be  sixty- two  weeks;  the  seven  weeks  are
the  duration  of  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem,  which  took
forty-nine  years :  when  you  add  these  seven  weeks  to
the  sixty-two  weeks,  it  makes  sixty-nine  weeks,  and  in
the  last  week  (69-70)  the  ascension  of  Christ  took
place.  These  seventy  weeks  are  thus  completed,  and
there  is  no  contradiction.

As  the  manifestation  of  Christ  is  established  by  the
prophecies  of  Daniel,  so  also  are  the  manifestations
of  Baha'u'llah  and  of  the  Bab.  Until  now  we  have
only  mentioned  logical  proofs ;  now  we  shall  speak  of
traditional  proofs.

In  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Daniel,  verse
thirteen,  it  is  said :  '  Then  I  heard  one  saint  speaking,
and  another  saint  said  unto  that  certain  saint  which
spake,  How  long  shall  be  the  vision  concerning  the

D


50  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

daily  sacrifice,  and  the  transgression  of  desolation,  to
give  both  the  sanctuary  and  the  host  to  be  trodden
under  foot?'  Then  he  answered  (v.  14):  'Unto  two
thousand  and  three  hundred  days;  then  shall  the
sanctuary  be  cleansed';  (v.  17)  'But  he  said  unto
me  ...  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  be  the  vision.'
That  is  to  say,  how  long  will  this  misfortune,  this  ruin,
this  abasement  and  degradation  last?  meaning,  when
will  be  the  dawn  of  the  Manifestation  ?  Then  he
answered, '  Two  thousand  and  three  hundred  days ;  then
shall  the  sanctuary  be  cleansed.'  Briefly,  the  purport
of  this  passage  is  that  he  appoints  two  thousand  three
hundred  years,  for  in  the  text  of  the  Bible  each  day
is  a  year.  Then  from  the  date  of  the  issuing  of  the
edict  of  Artaxerxes  to  rebuild  Jerusalem  until  the  day
of  the  birth  of  Christ  there  are  456  years,  and  from
the  birth  of  Christ  until  the  day  of  the  manifestation
of  the  Bab  there  are  1844  years.  When  you  add  456
years  to  this  number  it  makes  2300  years.  That  is
to  say,  the  fulfilment  of  the  vision  of  Daniel  took  place
in  the  year  1844  A.D.,  and  this  is  the  year  of  the  Bab's
manifestation  according  to  the  actual  text  of  the  Book
of  Daniel.  Consider  how  clearly  he  determines  the  year
of  manifestation;  there  could  be  no  clearer  prophecy
for  a  manifestation  than  this.

In  Matthew,  chapter  24  verse  3,  Christ  clearly  says
that  what  Daniel  meant  by  this  prophecy  was  the  date
of  the  manifestation,  and  this  is  the  verse :  '  As  he  sat
upon  the  Mount  of  Olives,  the  disciples  came  unto  him
privately,  saying,  Tell  us,  when  shall  these  things  be  ?
and  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming,  and  of  the
end  of  the  world  ? '  One  of  the  explanations  he  gave


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  51

them  in  reply  was  this  (v.  15):  'When  ye  therefore
shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation,  spoken  of  by
Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy  place  (whoso
readeth  let  him  understand).'  In  this  answer  he  re-
ferred them  to  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  Book  of
Daniel,  saying  that  every  one  who  reads  it  will  under-
stand that  it  is  this  time  that  is  spoken  of.  Consider
how  clearly  the  manifestation  of  the  Bab  is  spoken  of
in  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  Gospel.

To  conclude,  let  us  now  explain  the  date  of  the
manifestation  of  Baha'u'llah  from  the  Bible.  The  date
of  Baha'u'llah  is  calculated  according  to  lunar  years
from  the  mission  and  the  Hejira  of  Muhammad;  for
in  the  religion  of  Muhammad  the  lunar  year  is  in
use,  as  also  it  is  the  lunar  year  which  is  employed
concerning  all  commands  of  worship.

In  Daniel,  chapter  12  verse  6,  it  is  said :  '  And  one
said  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  which  was  upon  the
waters  of  the  river,  How  long  shall  it  be  to  the  end
of  these  wonders?  And  I  heard  the  man  clothed  in
linen,  which  was  upon  the  waters  of  the  river,  when
he  held  up  his  right  hand  and  his  left  hand  unto
heaven,  and  sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever  that
it  shall  be  for  a  time,  times  and  a  half;  and  that  when
he  shall  have  accomplished  to  scatter  the  power  of  the
holy  people,  all  these  things  shall  be  finished.'

As  I  have  already  explained  the  signification  of  one
day,  it  is  not  necessary  to  explain  it  further;  but  we
will  say  briefly  that  each  day  of  the  Father  counts
as  a  year,  and  in  each  year  there  are  twelve  months.
Thus  three  years  and  a  half  make  forty-two  months,
and  forty-two  months  are  twelve  hundred  and  sixty


52  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

days.  The  Bab,  the  precursor  of  Baha'ullah,  appeared
in  the  year  1260  from  the  Hejira  of  Muhammad,  by
the  reckoning  of  Islam.

Afterwards,  in  verse  11,  it  is  said:  'And  from  the
time  that  the  daily  sacrifice  shall  be  taken  away,  and
the  abomination  that  maketh  desolation  be  set  up,
there  shall  be  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety
days.  Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth  and  cometh  to  the
thousand  three  hundred  and  five-and-thirty  days  ! '

The  beginning  of  this  lunar  reckoning  is  from  the
day  of  the  proclamation  of  the  prophethood  of
Muhammad  in  the  country  of  Hijaz;  and  that  was
three  years  after  his  mission ;  because  in  the  beginning
the  prophethood  of  Muhammad  was  kept  secret,  and
no  one  knew  it  save  Khadija  and  Ibn  Naufal.1  After
three  years  it  was  announced.  And  Baha'u'llah  in  the
year  1290  from  the  proclamation  of  the  mission  of
Muhammad  caused  his  manifestation  to  be  known.2

1  Waraqat-Ibn-Naufal,  Khadija's  cousin.

2  The  year  1290  from  the  proclamation  of  the  mission  of  Muhammad,
was  the  year  1280  of  the  Hejira,  or  1863-1864  of  our  era.     It  was
at  this  epoch  (April  1864)  that  Baha'u'llah  on  leaving  Baghdad  for
Constantinople,  declared  to  those  who  surrounded  him  that  he  was
the  Manifestation  announced  by  the  Bab.

It  is  this  declaration  which  the  Bahais  celebrate  by  the  Feast  of
Rizwan,  this  name  being  that  of  the  garden  at  the  entrance  of  the
city,  where  Baha'u'llah  stayed  during  twelve  days,  and  where  he
made  the  declaration.


XI

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  ELEVENTH  CHAPTER
OF  THE  REVELATION  OF  ST.  JOHN

IN  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  chapter  of  the
Revelation  of  St.  John  it  is  said : —

'And  there  was  given  me  a  reed  like  unto  a  rod:
and  the  angel  stood,  saying,  Rise,  and  measure  the
temple  of  God,  and  the  altar,  and  them  that  worship
therein.

'  But  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  leave
out,  and  measure  it  not;  for  it  is  given  unto  the
Gentiles:  and  the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under
foot  forty  and  two  months.'

This  reed  is  a  perfect  man  who  is  likened  to  a  reed,
and  the  manner  of  its  likeness  is  this: — when  the
interior  of  a  reed  is  empty  and  free  from  all  matter,
it  will  produce  beautiful  melodies ;  and  as  the  sound
and  melodies  do  not  come  from  the  reed,  but  from
the  flute-player  who  blows  upon  it,  so  the  sanctified
heart  of  that  blessed  being  is  free  and  emptied  from
all  save  God,  pure  and  exempt  from  the  attachments
of  all  human  conditions,  and  is  the  companion  of  the
Divine  Spirit.  Whatever  he  utters  is  not  from  himself,
but  from  the  real  flute-player,  and  it  is  a  divine  in-
spiration. That  is  why  he  is  likened  to  a  reed ;  and


54  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

that  reed  is  like  a  rod,  that  is  to  say  it  is  the  helper  of
every  impotent  one,  and  the  support  of  human  beings.
It  is  the  rod  of  the  Divine  Shepherd  by  which  He
guards  His  flock,  and  leads  them  about  the  pastures
of  the  Kingdom.

Then  it  is  said, '  The  angel  stood,  saying,  Rise,  and
measure  the  temple  of  God,  and  the  altar,  and  them  that
worship  therein ' ;  that  is  to  say,  compare  and  measure :
measuring  is  the  discovery  of  proportion.  Thus  the
angel  said :  Compare  the  temple  of  God  and  the  altar
and  them  that  are  praying  therein,  that  is  to  say,
investigate  what  is  their  true  condition,  and  discover
in  what  degree  and  state  they  are,  and  what  conditions,
perfections,  behaviour  and  attributes  they  possess,  and
make  yourself  cognisant  of  the  mysteries  of  those  holy
souls  who  dwell  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  in  purity  and
sanctity.

'But  the  court  which  is  without  the  temple  leave
out,  and  measure  it  not,  for  it  is  given  unto  the
Gentiles.'

In  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century  after  Christ,
when  Jerusalem  was  conquered,  the  Holy  of  Holies  was
outwardly  preserved:  that  is  to  say,  the  house  which
Solomon  built;  but  outside  the  Holy  of  Holies  the
outer  court  was  taken  and  given  to  the  Gentiles.  '  And
the  holy  city  shall  they  tread  under  foot  forty  and  two
months/  that  is  to  say,  the  Gentiles  shall  govern  and
control  Jerusalem  forty  and  two  months,  signifying
twelve  hundred  and  sixty  days ;  and  as  each  day  signi-
fies a  year,  by  this  reckoning  it  becomes  twelve  hundred
and  sixty  years,  which  is  the  duration  of  the  cycle  of
the  Quran.  For  in  the  texts  of  the  Holy  Book,  each


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  55

day  is  a  year ;  as  it  is  said  in  the  fourth  chapter  of
Ezekiel,  verse  6 :  '  Thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the
house  of  Judah  forty  days :  I  have  appointed  thee  each
day  for  a  year.'

These  prophecies  are  from  the  time  of  the  appearance
of  Islam,  when  Jerusalem  was  trodden  under  foot,  which
means  that  it  was  dishonoured.  But  the  Holy  of  Holies
was  preserved,  guarded,  and  respected;  and  these
events  continued  until  1260.  This  twelve  hundred  and
sixty  years  is  a  prophecy  of  the  manifestation  of  the
bab l  of  Baha'u'llah,  which  took  place  in  the  year  1260
of  the  Hejira  of  Muhammad,  and  as  the  period  of  twelve
hundred  and  sixty  years  has  expired,  Jerusalem,  the
Holy  City,  is  now  beginning  to  become  prosperous,
populous,  and  flourishing.  Any  one  who  saw  Jerusalem
sixty  years  ago,  and  who  sees  it  now,  will  recognise  how
populous  and  flourishing  it  has  become,  and  how  it  is
again  honoured.

This  is  the  outward  meaning  of  these  verses  of  the
Revelation  of  St.  John ;  but  they  have  another  explana-
tion and  a  symbolic  sense,  which  is  as  follows: — the
Law  of  God  is  divided  into  two  parts ;  one  is  the  funda-
mental basis  which  comprises  all  spiritual  things,  that
is  to  say,  it  refers  to  the  spiritual  virtues  and  divine
qualities;  this  does  not  change  nor  alter:  it  is  the
Holy  of  Holies  which  is  the  essence  of  the  Law  of  Adam,
Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  Christ,  Muhammad,  the  Bab,
and  Baha'u'llah,  and  which  lasts  and  is  established  in
all  the  prophetic  cycles.  It  will  never  be  abrogated,
for  it  is  spiritual  and  not  material  truth;  it  is  faith,
knowledge,  certitude,  justice,  piety,  righteousness,  trust-

1  The  Gate,  i.e.  precursor.


56  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

worthiness,  love  of  God,  inward  peace,  purity,  detach-
ment, humility,  meekness,  patience,  and  constancy.  It
shows  mercy  to  the  poor,  defends  the  oppressed,  gives
to  the  wretched,  and  uplifts  the  fallen.

V  These  divine  qualities,  these  eternal  commandments,

will  never  be  abolished ;  nay,  they  will  last  and  will  be
established  for  ever  and  ever.  These  virtues  of
humanity  will  be  renewed  in  each  of  the  different
cycles  ;  for  at  the  end  of  every  cycle  the  spiritual  Law
of  God,  that  is  to  say  the  human  virtues,  disappears,
and  only  the  form  subsists.

Thus  among  the  Jews,  at  the  end  of  the  cycle  of
Moses  which  coincides  with  the  Christian  manifestation,
the  Law  of  God  disappeared,  only  a  form  without  spirit
remaining.  The  Holy  of  Holies  departed  from  amongst
them ;  but  the  outer  court  of  Jerusalem— which  is  the
expression  used  for  the  form  of  the  religion — fell  into
the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  In  the  same  way  the  funda-
mental principles  of  the  religion  of  Christ,  which  are
the  greatest  virtues  of  humanity,  have  disappeared,  and
its  form  has  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  clergy  and
the  priests.  Likewise  the  foundation  of  the  religion  of
Muhammad  has  disappeared,  but  its  form  remains  in
the  hands  of  the  official  Ulama.

These  foundations  of  the  Religion  of  God,  which  are
spiritual  and  which  are  the  virtues  of  humanity,  cannot
be  abrogated;  they  are  irremovable  and  eternal,  and
are  renewed  in  the  cycle  of  every  Prophet.

The  second  part  of  the  Religion  of  God,  which  refers
to  the  material  world,  and  which  comprises  fasting,
prayer,  forms  of  worship,  marriage,  and  divorce,  the
abolition  of  slavery,  legal  processes,  transactions,  indem-


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  57

nities  for  murder,  violence,  theft,  and  injuries,  this  part
of  the  Law  of  God  which  refers  to  material  things,
is  modified  and  altered  in  each  prophetic  cycle  in
accordance  with  the  necessities  of  the  times.

Briefly,  what  is  meant  by  the  term  Holy  of  Holies  is
that  spiritual  Law  which  will  never  be  modified,  altered,
or  abrogated,  and  the  Holy  City  means  the  material  Law
which  may  be  abrogated ;  and  this  material  Law,  which
is  described  as  the  Holy  City,  was  to  be  trodden  under
foot  for  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years.

'And  I  will  give  power  unto  my  two  witnesses,
and  they  shall  prophesy  a  thousand  two  hundred  and
threescore  days,  clothed  in  sackcloth.'  These  two
witnesses  are  Muhammad  the  Messenger  of  God,  and
'Ali,  son  of  Abu  Talib.

In  the  Quran  it  is  said  that  God  addressed  Muham-
mad, the  Messenger  of  God,  saying :  '  We  made  you  a
Witness,  a  Herald  of  good  news,  and  a  Warner.'  That
is  to  say,  We  have  established  thee  as  the  witness,  the
giver  of  good  tidings,  and  as  one  bringing  the  wrath  of
God.1  The  meaning  of  '  a  witness '  is,  one  by  whose
testimony  things  may  be  verified.  The  commands  of
these  two  witnesses  were  to  be  performed  for  twelve
hundred  and  sixty  days,  each  day  signifying  a  year.
Now,  Muhammad  was  the  root,  and  'Ali  the  branch,  like
Moses  and  Joshua.  It  is  said  they  '  are  clothed  in  sack-
cloth/ meaning  that  they,  apparently,  were  to  be  clothed
in  old  raiment,  not  in  new  raiment ;  in  other  words,  in
the  beginning  they  would  possess  no  splendour  in  the
eyes  of  the  people,  nor  would  their  Cause  appear  new ;

1  This  sentence  is  the  Persian  translation  of  the  Arabic  text  of  the
Quran  which  has  been  quoted.


58  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

for  Muhammad's  spiritual  Law  corresponds  to  that  of
Christ  in  the  Gospel,  and  most  of  his  laws  relating  to
material  things  correspond  to  those  of  the  Pentateuch.
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  old  raiment.

Then  it  is  said :  '  These  are  the  two  olive  trees  and  the
two  candlesticks  standing  before  the  God  of  the  earth.'
These  two  souls  are  likened  to  olive  trees,  because  at
that  time  all  lamps  were  lighted  by  olive  oil.  The
meaning  is  two  persons  from  whom  that  spirit  of  the
wisdom  of  God,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  illumination
of  the  world,  appears;  these  lights  of  God  were  to
radiate  and  shine,  therefore  they  are  likened  to  two
candlesticks :  the  candlestick  is  the  abode  of  the  light,
and  from  it  the  light  shines  forth.  In  the  same  way
the  light  of  guidance  would  shine  and  radiate  from  these
illumined  souls.

Then  it  is  said,  'They  are  standing  before  God,'
meaning  that  they  are  standing  in  the  service  of  God,
and  educating  the  creatures  of  God,  such  as  the  bar-
barous nomad  Arab  tribes  of  the  Arabian  peninsula,
whom  they  educated  in  such  a  way  that  in  those  days
they  reached  the  highest  degree  of  civilisation,  and
their  fame  and  renown  became  world- wide.

'  And  if  any  man  would  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth
out  of  their  mouth  and  devoureth  their  enemies.'  That
is  to  say,  that  no  one  would  be  able  to  withstand  them ;
that  if  a  person  wished  to  belittle  their  teachings  and
their  Law,  he  would  be  surrounded  and  exterminated
by  this  same  Law  which  proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth ;
and  every  one  who  attempted  to  injure,  to  antagonise,
and  to  hate  them,  would  be  destroyed  by  a  command
which  would  come  out  of  their  mouth.  And  thus  it


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  59

happened;  all  their  enemies  were  vanquished,  put  to
flight,  and  annihilated.  In  this  most  evident  way  God
assisted  them.

Afterwards  it  is  said :  '  These  have  power  to  shut
heaven  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  prophecy/
meaning  that  in  that  cycle  they  would  be  like  kings.
The  Law  and  teachings  of  Muhammad,  and  the  explana-
tions and  commentaries  of  'Ali,  are  a  heavenly  bounty ;
if  they  wish  to  give  this  bounty  they  have  power  to  do
so.  If  they  do  not  wish  it,  the  rain  will  not  fall :  in  this
connection  rain  stands  for  bounty.

Then  it  is  said :  '  They  have  power  over  water  to  turn
it  to  blood,'  meaning  that  the  prophethood  of  Muham-
mad was  the  same  as  that  of  Moses,  and  that  the  power
of  'Ali  was  the  same  as  that  of  Joshua :  if  they  wished,
they  could  turn  the  water  of  the  Nile  into  blood,  so
far  as  the  Egyptians  and  those  who  denied  them  were
concerned ;  that  is  to  say,  that  that  which  was  the  cause
of  their  life,  through  their  ignorance  and  pride,  became
the  cause  of  their  death.  So  the  kingdom,  wealth,
and  power  of  Pharaoh  and  his  people,  which  were  the
causes  of  the  life  of  the  nation,  became,  through
their  opposition,  denial,  and  pride,  the  cause  of  death,
destruction,  dispersion,  degradation,  and  poverty.
Hence  these  two  witnesses  have  power  to  destroy  the
nations.

Then  it  is  said :  '  And  smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues
as  often  as  they  will,' — meaning  that  they  also  would
have  the  power  and  the  material  force  necessary  to
educate  the  wicked  and  those  who  are  oppressors  and
tyrants :  for  to  these  two  witnesses  God  granted  both
outward  and  inward  power,  that  they  might  educate


60  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and    correct    the    ferocious,    bloodthirsty,    tyrannical
nomad  Arabs,  who  were  like  beasts  of  prey.

'  And  when  they  shall  have  finished  their  testimony/
means  when  they  should  have  performed  that  which
they  are  commanded,  and  should  have  delivered  the
divine  message,  promoting  the  Law  of  God  and  propa-
gating the  heavenly  teachings ;  to  the  intent  that  the
signs  of  spiritual  life  might  be  manifest  in  souls,  and
the  light  of  the  virtues  of  the  world  of  humanity  might
shine  forth,  until  complete  development  should  be
brought  about  among  the  nomad  tribes.

'  The  beast  that  ascendeth  out  of  the  bottomless  pit
shall  war  against  them,  and  shall  overcome  them  and
kill  them,'  —  this  beast  means  the  Bani-Umayya 1
who  attacked  them  from  the  pit  of  error,  and
who  rose  against  the  religion  of  Muhammad  and
against  the  reality  of  'Ali — in  other  words,  the  love  of
God.

It  is  said,  'The  beast  made  war  against  these  two
witnesses ' — that  is  to  say,  a  spiritual  war ;  meaning  that
the  beast  would  act  in  entire  opposition  to  the  teach-
ings, customs,  and  institutions  of  these  two  holy  souls,  to
such  an  extent  that  the  virtues  and  perfections  which
were  diffused  by  the  power  of  those  two  witnesses
among  the  peoples  and  tribes  would  be  entirely  dis-
pelled, and  the  animal  nature  and  carnal  desires  would
conquer.  Therefore  this  beast  making  war  against
them  would  gain  the  victory — meaning  that  the  dark-
ness of  error  coming  from  this  beast  was  to  have
ascendency  over  the  horizons  of  the  world,  and  kill
those  two  witnesses : — in  other  words,  that  it  would

1  Dynasty  of  the  Umayyads.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  61

destroy  the  spiritual  life  which  they  spread  abroad  in
the  midst  of  the  nation,  and  entirely  remove  the  divine
laws  and  teachings,  treading  under  foot  the  Religion  of
God :  nothing  would  thereafter  remain  but  a  lifeless
body  without  spirit.

'  And  their  dead  bodies  shall  lie  in  the  street  of  the
great  city,  which  spiritually  is  called  Sodom  and  Egypt,
where  also  our  Lord  was  crucified.'  'Their  bodies'
means  the  Religion  of  God,  and  '  the  street '  means  in
public  view.  The  meaning  of  '  Sodom  and  Egypt,'  the
place  '  where  also  our  Lord  was  crucified,'  is  this  region
of  Syria,  and  especially  Jerusalem,  where  the  Bani-
Umayya  then  had  their  dominions;  and  it  was  here
that  the  Religion  of  God  and  the  divine  teachings  first
disappeared,  and  a  body  without  spirit  remained.
'  Their  bodies '  represents  the  Religion  of  God,  which
remained  like  a  dead  body  without  spirit.

'  And  they  of  the  people  and  kindreds  and  tongues
and  nations  shall  see  their  dead  bodies  three  days  and
a  half,  and  shall  not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  put
in  graves.'

As  it  was  before  explained,  in  the  terminology  of  the
Holy  Books  three  days  and  a  half  signify  three  years
and  a  half,  and  three  years  and  a  half  are  forty  and
two  months,  and  forty  and  two  months  twelve  hundred
and  sixty  days;  and  as  each  day  by  the  text  of  the
Holy  Book  signifies  one  year,  the  meaning  is  that  for
twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years,  which  is  the  cycle  of
the  Quran,  the  nations,  tribes,  and  peoples  would  look
at  their  bodies,  that  is  to  say,  that  they  would  make  a
spectacle  of  the  Religion  of  God :  though  they  would
not  act  in  accordance  with  it,  still,  they  would  not


62  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

suffer  their  bodies — meaning  the  Religion  of  God — to  be
put  in  the  grave.  That  is  to  say,  that  in  appearance
they  would  cling  to  the  Religion  of  God  and  not  allow
it  to  completely  disappear  from  their  midst,  nor  the
body  of  it  to  be  entirely  destroyed  and  annihilated.
Nay,  in  reality  they  would  leave  it,  while  outwardly
preserving  its  name  and  remembrance.

Those  '  kindreds,  people,  and  nations '  signify  those
who  are  gathered  under  the  shadow  of  the  Quran,  not
permitting  the  Cause  and  Law  of  God  to  be,  in  outward
appearance,  entirely  destroyed  and  annihilated :  for
there  are  prayer  and  fasting  among  them,  but  the
fundamental  principles  of  the  Religion  of  God,  which
are  morals  and  conduct,  with  the  knowledge  of  divine
mysteries,  have  disappeared  ;  the  light  of  the  virtues  of
the  world  of  humanity,  which  is  the  result  of  the  love
and  knowledge  of  God,  is  extinguished,  and  the  dark-
ness of  tyranny,  oppression,  satanic  passions  and
desires,  has  become  victorious.  The  body  of  the  Law
of  God,  like  a  corpse,  has  been  exposed  to  public  view
for  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  days,  each  day  being
counted  as  a  year,  and  this  period  is  the  cycle  of
Muhammad.

The  people  forfeited  all  that  these  two  persons  had
established,  which  was  the  foundation  of  the  Law  of
God,  and  destroyed  the  virtues  of  the  world  of
humanity,  which  are  the  divine  gifts  and  the  spirit  of
this  religion,  to  such  a  degree,  that  truthfulness,
justice,  love,  union,  purity,  sanctity,  detachment,  and
all  the  divine  qualities,  departed  from  amongst  them.
In  the  religion  only  prayers  and  fasting  persisted ;  this
condition  lasted  for  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years,


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  63

which  is  the  duration  of  the  cycle  of  the  Furqan.1  It
was  as  if  these  two  persons  were  dead,  and  their  bodies
were  remaining  without  spirit.

'And  they  that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  rejoice
over  them,  and  make  merry,  and  shall  send  gifts  to
one  another,  because  these  two  prophets  tormented
them  that  dwelt  on  the  earth.'  'Those  who  dwelt
upon  the  earth'  means  the  other  nations  and  races,
such  as  the  peoples  of  Europe  and  distant  Asia,  who,
when  they  saw  that  the  character  of  Islam  was  entirely
changed,  the  Law  of  God  forsaken,  that  virtues,  zeal,
and  honour  had  departed  from  amongst  them,  and
that  their  qualities  were  changed — became  happy,  and
rejoiced  that  corruption  of  morals  had  infected  the
people  of  Islam,  and  that  they  would  in  consequence
be  overcome  by  other  nations.  So  this  thing  has  come
to  pass.  Witness  this  people  which  had  attained  the
summit  of  power,  how  degraded  and  downtrodden  it
is  now.

The  other  nations  '  shall  send  gifts  to  one  another,'
meaning  that  they  should  help  each  other,  for  '  these
two  prophets  tormented  them  that  dwelt  upon  the
earth ' :  that  is,  they  overcame  the  other  nations  and
peoples  of  the  world  and  conquered  them.

'And  after  three  days  and  a  half  the  spirit  of  life
from  God  entered  into  them,  and  they  stood  upon
their  feet:  and  great  fear  fell  upon  them  that  saw
them.'  Three  days  and  a  half,  as  we  before  explained,
is  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years.  Those  two  persons
whose  bodies  were  lying  spiritless,  are  the  teachings  and
the  Law  that  Muhammad  established  and  'Ali  promoted,

1  Another  name  for  the  Qurau,  signifying  the  Distinction.


64  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

from  which,  however,  the  reality  had  departed  and
only  the  form  remained.  The  spirit  came  again  into
them,  means  that  those  foundations  and  teachings
were  again  established.  In  other  words,  the  spirituality
of  the  Religion  of  God  had  been  changed  into  material-
ity, and  virtues  into  vices ;  the  love  of  God  had  been
changed  into  hatred,  enlightenment  into  darkness,
divine  qualities  into  satanic  ones,  justice  into  tyranny,
mercy  into  enmity,  sincerity  into  hypocrisy,  guidance
into  error,  and  purity  into  sensuality.  Then  after
three  days  and  a  half,  which  by  the  terminology  of
the  Holy  Books  is  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years,
these  divine  teachings,  heavenly  virtues,  perfections
and  spiritual  bounties,  were  again  renewed  by  the
appearance  of  the  Bab  and  the  devotion  of  Janabi
Quddus.1

The  holy  breezes  were  diffused,  the  light  of  truth
shone  forth,  the  season  of  the  life-giving  spring  came,
and  the  morn  of  guidance  dawned.  These  two  lifeless
bodies  again  became  living,  and  these  two  great  ones —
one  the  founder  and  the  other  the  promoter — arose,
and  were  like  two  candlesticks,  for  they  illumined  the
world  with  the  light  of  truth.

'  And  they  heard  a  great  voice  from  heaven  saying
unto  them,  Come  up  hither,  and  they  ascended  up  to
heaven,' — meaning,  that  from  the  invisible  heaven  they
heard  the  voice  of  God,  saying :  You  have  performed
all  that  was  proper  and  fitting  in  delivering  the  teach-
ings and  glad  tidings,  you  have  given  My  message  to
the  people  and  raised  the  call  of  God,  and  have  accom-

1  Haji  Muhammad  'AH  Barforushi,  one  of  the  chief  disciples  of  the
Bab  and  one  of  the  nineteen  Letters  of  the  Living.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  65

plished  your  duty.  Now,  like  Christ,  you  must  sacri-
fice your  life  for  the  Well-Beloved,  and  be  martyrs.
And  that  Sun  of  Reality,  and  that  Moon  of  Guidance,1
both,  like  Christ,  set  on  the  horizon  of  the  greatest
martyrdom  and  ascended  to  the  Kingdom  of  God.

'And  their  enemies  beheld  them' — meaning  that
many  of  their  enemies  after  witnessing  their  martyr-
dom, realised  the  sublimity  of  their  station  and  the
exaltation  of  their  virtue,  and  testified  to  their  great-
ness and  perfection.

'And  the  same  hour  there  was  a  great  earthquake,
and  the  tenth  part  of  the  city  fell,  and  in  the  earth-
quake were  slain  of  men  seven  thousand.'

This  earthquake  occurred  in  Shiraz  after  the  martyr-
dom of  the  Bab.  The  city  was  in  a  turmoil,  and  many
people  were  destroyed.  Great  agitation  also  took  place
through  diseases,  cholera,  dearth,  scarcity,  famine,  and
afflictions,  the  like  of  which  had  never  been  known.

'  And  the  remnant  was  affrighted  and  gave  glory  to
the  God  of  heaven.'

When  the  earthquake  took  place  in  Fars,  all  the
remnant  lamented  and  cried  day  and  night,  and  were
occupied  in  glorifying  and  praying  to  God.  They  were
so  troubled  and  affrighted  that  they  had  no  sleep  nor
rest  at  night.

'  The  second  woe  is  past ;  and  behold  the  third  woe
cometh  quickly.'  The  first  woe  is  the  appearance  of
the  Prophet,  Muhammad  the  son  of  'Abd  u'llah — peace  be
upon  him  !  The  second  woe  is  that  of  the  Bab — to  him
be  glory  and  praise !  The  third  woe  is  the  great  day
of  the  manifestation  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  and  the

1  The  Bab  and  Janabi  Quddus.
E


X


66  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

radiance  of  the  Beauty  of  the  Promised  One.  The
explanation  of  this  subject,  woe,  is  mentioned  in  the
thirtieth  chapter  of  Ezekiel,  verses  2  and  3,  where  it
is  said :  '  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  again  unto  me,
saying,  Son  of  man,  prophesy  and  say,  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God ;  Howl  ye,  Woe  worth  the  day !  For  the  day
is  near,  even  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near.'

Therefore  it  is  certain  that  the  day  of  woe  is  the  day
of  the  Lord ;  for  in  that  day  woe  is  for  the  neglectful,
woe  is  for  the  sinners,  woe  is  for  the  ignorant.  That  is
why  it  is  said,  'The  second  woe  is  past,  behold  the
third  woe  cometh  quickly ! '  This  third  woe  is  the  day
of  the  manifestation  of  Baha'u'llah,  the  day  of  God ;
and  it  is  near  to  the  day  of  the  appearance  of  the  Bab.

'And  the  seventh  angel  sounded;  and  there  were
great  voices  in  heaven,  saying,  The  kingdoms  of  this
world  are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  His
Christ ;  and  He  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever/

The  seventh  angel  is  a  man  qualified  with  heavenly
attributes,  who  will  arise  with  heavenly  qualities  and
character.  Voices  will  be  raised,  so  that  the  appear-
ance of  the  Divine  Manifestation  will  be  proclaimed
and  diffused.  In  the  day  of  the  manifestation  of  the
Lord  of  Hosts,  and  at  the  epoch  of  the  divine  cycle  of
the  Omnipotent  which  is  promised  and  mentioned  in  all
the  books  and  writings  of  the  Prophets — in  that  day  of
God,  the  Spiritual  and  Divine  Kingdom  will  be  estab-
lished, and  the  world  will  be  renewed ;  a  new  spirit
will  be  breathed  into  the  body  of  creation,  the  season
of  the  divine  spring  will  come,  the  clouds  of  mercy  will
rain,  the  sun  of  reality  will  shine,  the  life-giving  breeze
will  blow,  the  world  of  humanity  will  wear  a  new


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  67

garment,  the  surface  of  the  earth  will  be  a  sublime
paradise;  mankind  will  be  educated,  wars,  disputes,
quarrels,  and  malignity  will  disappear,  and  truthful-
ness, righteousness,  honesty,  and  the  worship  of  God
will  appear;  union,  love,  and  brotherhood  will  sur-
round the  world,  and  God  will  rule  for  evermore:
meaning  that  the  Spiritual  and  Everlasting  Kingdom
will  be  established.  Such  is  the  day  of  God.  For  all
the  days  which  have  come  and  gone  were  the  days  of
Abraham,  Moses  and  Christ,  or  of  the  other  Prophets ;
but  this  day  is  the  day  of  God,  for  the  Sun  of  Reality
will  arise  in  it  with  the  utmost  warmth  and  splendour.

'And  the  four  and  twenty  elders  which  sat  before
God  on  their  seats,  fell  upon  their  faces  and  worshipped
God.

'  Saying,  We  give  Thee  thanks,  0  Lord  God  Almighty,
which  art,  and  wast,  and  art  to  come,  because  Thou
hast  taken  to  Thee  Thy  great  power,  and  hast  reigned.'

In  each  cycle  the  guardians  and  holy  souls  have
been  twelve.  So  Jacob  had  twelve  sons ;  in  the  time
of  Moses  there  were  twelve  heads  or  chiefs  of  the  tribes ;
in  the  time  of  Christ  there  were  twelve  Apostles ;  and
in  the  time  of  Muhammad  there  were  twelve  Imams.
But  in  this  glorious  manifestation  there  are  twenty-
four,  double  the  number  of  all  the  others,  for  the
greatness  of  this  manifestation  requires  it.  These
holy  souls  are  in  the  presence  of  God  seated  on  their
own  thrones :  meaning  that  they  reign  eternally.

These  twenty-four  great  persons,  though  they  are
seated  on  the  thrones  of  everlasting  rule,  yet  are  wor-
shippers of  the  appearance  of  the  universal  Manifesta-
tion, and  they  are  humble  and  submissive,  saying, '  We


68  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

give  thanks  to  Thee,  0  Lord  God  Almighty,  which  art,
and  wast,  and  art  to  come,  because  Thou  hast  taken  to
Thee  Thy  great  power  and  hast  reigned' — that  is  to
say,  Thou  wilt  issue  all  Thy  teachings,  Thou  wilt  gather
all  the  people  of  the  earth  under  Thy  shadow,  and
Thou  wilt  bring  all  men  under  the  shadow  of  one  tent.
Although  it  is  the  Eternal  Kingdom  of  God,  and  He
always  had,  and  has,  a  Kingdom,  the  Kingdom  here
means  the  manifestation  of  Himself ; l  and  He  will  issue
all  the  laws  and  teachings  which  are  the  spirit  of  the
world  of  humanity,  and  everlasting  life.  And  that
universal  Manifestation  will  subdue  the  world  by
spiritual  power,  not  by  war  and  combat ;  he  will  do
it  with  peace  and  tranquillity,  not  by  the  sword  and
arms;  he  will  establish  this  Heavenly  Kingdom  by
true  love,  and  not  by  the  power  of  war.  He  will  pro-
mote these  divine  teachings  by  kindness  and  righteous-
ness, and  not  by  weapons  and  harshness.  He  will  so
educate  the  nations  and  people  that,  notwithstanding
their  various  conditions,  their  different  customs  and
characters,  and  their  diverse  religions  and  races,  they
will,  as  it  is  said  in  the  Bible,  like  the  wolf  and  the
lamb,  the  leopard,  the  kid,  the  sucking  child  and  the
serpent,  become  comrades,  friends,  and  companions.
The  contentions  of  races,  the  differences  of  religions,
and  the  barriers  between  nations  will  be  completely
removed,  and  all  will  attain  perfect  union  and  recon-
ciliation under  the  shadow  of  the  Blessed  Tree.

'And  the  nations  were  angry,'  for  Thy  teachings
opposed  the  passions  of  the  other  peoples:  'and  Thy
wrath  is  come,'  that  is  to  say,  all  will  be  afflicted  by

1  i.e.  His  most  complete  manifestation.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  69

evident  loss ;  because  they  do  not  follow  Thy  precepts,
counsels,  and  teachings,  they  will  be  deprived  of  Thy
everlasting  bounty,  and  veiled  from  the  light  of  the
Sun  of  Reality.

'And  the  time  of  the  dead  that  they  should  be
judged,'  means  that  the  time  has  come  that  the  dead —
that  is  to  say,  those  who  are  deprived  of  the  spirit  of
the  love  of  God  and  have  not  a  share  of  the  sanctified
eternal  life — will  be  judged  with  justice,  meaning  they
will  arise  to  receive  that  which  they  deserve.  He  will
make  the  reality  of  their  secrets  evident,  showing  what
a  low  degree  they  occupy  in  the  world  of  existence,
and  that  in  reality  they  are  under  the  rule  ot  death.

'  That  Thou  shouldst  give  reward  unto  Thy  servants
the  prophets,  and  the  saints,  and  them  that  fear  Thy
name  small  and  great.'  That  is  to  say,  he  will  dis-
tinguish the  righteous  by  endless  bounty,  making  them
shine  on  the  horizon  of  eternal  honour,  like  the  stars  of
heaven.  He  will  assist  them  by  endowing  them  with
behaviour  and  actions  which  are  the  light  of  the  world
of  humanity,  the  cause  of  guidance,  and  the  means  of
everlasting  life  in  the  Divine  Kingdom.

'And  shouldst  destroy  them  which  destroy  the
earth,'  means  that  he  will  entirely  deprive  the  neglect-
ful ;  for  the  blindness  of  the  blind  will  be  manifest,  and
the  vision  of  the  seers  will  be  evident;  the  ignorance
and  want  of  knowledge  of  the  people  of  error  will  be
recognised,  and  the  knowledge  and  wisdom  of  the
people  under  guidance  will  be  apparent — consequently
the  destroyers  will  be  destroyed.

'And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven,'
means  that  the  divine  Jerusalem  is  found,  and  the


70  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Holy  of  Holies  has  become  visible.  The  Holy  of
Holies,  according  to  the  terminology  of  the  people  of
wisdom,  is  the  essence  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  the
heavenly  and  true  teachings  of  the  Lord,  which  have
not  been  changed  in  the  cycle  of  any  Prophet,  as  it
was  before  explained.  The  sanctuary  of  Jerusalem  is
likened  to  the  reality  of  the  Law  of  God,  which  is  the
Holy  of  Holies,  and  all  the  laws,  conventions,  rites,  and
material  regulations  are  the  city  of  Jerusalem — this  is
why  it  is  called  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  Briefly,  as  in
this  cycle  the  Sun  of  Reality  will  make  the  light  of
God  shine  with  the  utmost  splendour,  therefore  the
essence  of  the  teachings  of  God  will  be  realised  in  the
world  of  existence,  and  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and
want  of  knowledge  will  be  dispelled;  the  world  will
become  a  new  world,  and  enlightenment  will  prevail.
So  the  Holy  of  Holies  will  appear.

'And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened  in  heaven/
means  also  that  by  the  diffusion  of  the  divine  teach-
ings, the  appearance  of  these  heavenly  mysteries,  and
the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Reality,  the  doors  of  success
and  prosperity  will  be  opened  in  all  directions,  and  the
signs  of  goodness  and  heavenly  benedictions  will  be
made  plain.

'  And  there  was  seen  in  His  temple  the  ark  of  His
Testament.'  That  is  to  say,  the  Book  of  His  Testament
will  appear  in  His  Jerusalem,  the  Epistle  of  the
Covenant l  will  be  established,  and  the  meaning  of  the
Testament  and  of  the  Covenant  will  become  evident.
The  renown  of  God  will  overspread  the  East  and  West,

1  One  of  the  works  of  Baha'u'llah,  in  which  he  expressly  points  to
'Abdu'1-Baha  as  being  the  one  to  whom  all  must  turn  after  his  death.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  71

and  the  proclamation  of  the  Cause  of  God  will  fill  the
world.  The  violators  of  the  Covenant  will  be  degraded
and  dispersed,  and  the  faithful  cherished  and  glorified,
for  they  cling  to  the  Book  of  the  Testament,  and  are
firm  and  steadfast  in  the  Covenant.

'  And  there  were  lightnings  and  voices,  and  thunder-
ings,  and  an  earthquake  and  great  hail,'  meaning  that
after  the  appearance  of  the  Book  of  the  Testament
there  will  be  a  great  storm,  and  the  lightnings  of  the
anger  and  the  wrath  of  God  will  flash,  the  noise  of  the
thunder  of  the  violation  of  the  Covenant  will  resound,
the  earthquake  of  doubts  will  take  place,  the  hail  of
torments  will  beat  upon  the  violators  of  the  Covenant,
and  even  those  who  profess  belief  will  fall  into  trials
and  temptations.


X


XII

•

COMMENTARY  ON  THE  ELEVENTH
CHAPTER  OF  ISAIAH

IN  Isaiah,  chapter  11  verses  1  to  10,  it  is  said: —
'  And  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of
Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots :  And
the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  him,  the  spirit
of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of  counsel  and
might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of  the  fear  of  the
Lord ;  And  shall  make  him  of  quick  understanding  in
the  fear  of  the  Lord:  and  he  shall  not  judge  after  the
sight  of  his  eyes,  neither  reprove  after  the  hearing  of
his  ears:  But  with  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the
poor,  and  reprove  with  equity  for  the  meek  of  the  earth :
and  he  shall  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  mouth,
and  with  the  breath  of  his  lips  shall  he  slay  the  wicked.
And  righteousness  shall  be  the  girdle  of  his  loins,  and
faithfulness  the  girdle  of  his  reins.  The  wolf  also  shall
dwell  with  the  lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down
with  the  kid ;  and  the  calf  and  the  young  lion  and  the
fatling  together;  and  a  little  child  shall  lead  them.
And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed ;  their  young  ones
shall  lie  down  together:  and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw
like  the  ox.  And  the  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the
hole  of  the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child  shall  put  his

72


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  73

hand  on  the  cockatrice'  den.  They  shall  not  hurt  nor
destroy  in  all  My  holy  mountain :  for  the  earth  shall
be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters
cover  the  sea.'

This  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  might  be  correctly
applied  to  Christ,  for  Joseph  was  of  the  descendants  of
Jesse  the  father  of  David;  but  as  Christ  found  exist-
ence through  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  called  himself  the
Son  of  God.  If  he  had  not  done  so,  this  description
would  refer  to  him.  Besides  this,  the  events  which
he  indicated  as  coming  to  pass  in  the  days  of  that  rod,
if  interpreted  symbolically,  were  in  part  fulfilled  in  the
day  of  Christ,  but  not  all ;  and  if  not  interpreted,  then
decidedly  none  of  these  signs  happened.  For  example,
the  leopard  and  the  lamb,  the  lion  and  the  calf,  the
child  and  the  asp,  are  metaphors  and  symbols  for
various  nations,  peoples,  antagonistic  sects,  and  hostile
races,  who  are  as  opposite  and  inimical  as  the  wolf  and
lamb.  We  say  that  by  the  breath  of  the  spirit  of
Christ  they  found  concord  and  harmony,  they  were
vivified,  and  they  associated  together.

But '  they  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  My  holy
mountain :  for  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge
of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.'  These
conditions  did  not  prevail  in  the  time  of  the  manifesta-
tion of  Christ;  for  to-day  various  and  antagonistic
nations  exist  in  the  world,  very  few  acknowledge  the
God  of  Israel,  and  the  greater  number  are  without  the
knowledge  of  God.  In  the  same  way,  universal  peace
did  not  come  into  existence  in  the  time  of  Christ ;  that
is  to  say,  between  the  antagonistic  and  hostile  nations
there  was  neither  peace  nor  concord,  disputes  and


74  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

disagreements  did  not  cease,  and  reconciliation  and
sincerity  did  not  appear.  So,  even  at  this  day,  amongst
the  Christian  sects  and  nations  themselves,  enmity
hatred,  and  the  most  violent  hostility  are  met  with.

But  in  this  marvellous  cycle  the  earth  will  be
transformed,  and  the  world  of  humanity  arrayed  in
peace  and  beauty.  Disputes,  quarrels,  and  murders
will  be  replaced  by  harmony,  truth,  and  concord;
among  the  nations,  peoples,  races,  and  countries,  love
and  amity  will  appear.  Co-operation  and  union  will  be
established,  and  finally  war  will  be  entirely  suppressed.
When  the  laws  of  the  Most  Holy  Book  are  enforced,
contentions  and  disputes  will  find  a  final  sentence
of  absolute  justice  before  a  general  tribunal1  of  the
nations  and  kingdoms,  and  the  difficulties  that  appear
will  be  solved.  The  five  continents  of  the  world  will
form  but  one,  the  numerous  nations  will  become  one,
the  surface  of  the  earth  will  become  one  land,  and
mankind  will  be  a  single  community.  The  relations
between  the  countries,  the  mingling,  union,  and  friend-
ship of  the  peoples  and  communities,  will  reach  to  such
a  degree  that  the  human  race  will  be  like  one  family
and  kindred.  The  light  of  heavenly  love  will  shine,
and  the  darkness  of  enmity  and  hatred  will  be  dispelled
from  the  world.  Universal  peace  will  raise  its  tent  in
the  centre  of  the  earth,  and  the  Blessed  Tree  of  Life
will  grow  and  spread  to  such  an  extent  that  it  will
overshadow  the  East  and  the  West.  Strong  and  weak,
rich  and  poor,  antagonistic  sects  and  hostile  nations —

1  The  universal  Baitu'l-'AcU,  a  sort  of  tribunal  of  international
arbitration,  instituted  by  Baha'u'llah  in  the  Kitabu'l-Aqdas,  the  Most
Holy  Book.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  75

which  are  like  the  wolf  and  the  lamb,  the  leopard  and
kid,  the  lion  and  the  calf — will  act  towards  each  other
with  the  most  complete  love,  friendship,  justice,  and
equity.  The  world  will  be  filled  with  science,  with  the
knowledge  of  the  reality  of  the  mysteries  of  beings,  and
with  the  knowledge  of  God.

Now  consider,  hi  this  great  century  which  is  the
cycle  of  Baha'u'llah,  what  progress  science  and  know-
ledge have  made,  how  many  secrets  of  existence  have
been  discovered,  how  many  great  inventions  have  been
brought  to  light,  and  are  day  by  day  multiplying  in
number.  Before  long,  material  science  and  learning,  as
well  as  the  knowledge  of  God,  will  make  such  progress,
and  will  show  forth  such  wonders,  that  the  beholders
will  be  amazed.  Then  the  mystery  of  this  verse  in
Isaiah, '  For  the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of
the  Lord,'  will  be  completely  evident.

Reflect  also  that  in  the  short  time  since  Baha'u'llah
has  appeared,  people  from  all  countries,  nations,  and
races  have  entered  under  the  shadow  of  this  Cause.
Christians,  Jews,  Zoroastrians,  Buddhists,  Hindus,  and
Persians  all  associate  together  with  the  greatest  friend-
ship and  love,  as  if  indeed  these  people  had  been
related  and  connected  together,  they  and  theirs,  for  a
thousand  years;  for  they  are  like  father  and  child,
mother  and  daughter,  sister  and  brother.  This  is  one
of  the  meanings  of  the  companionship  of  the  wolf  and
the  lamb,  the  leopard  and  the  kid,  and  the  lion  and  the
calf.

One  of  the  great  events  which  is  to  occur  hi  the
day  of  the  manifestation  of  that  incomparable  Branch,
is  the  hoisting  of  the  Standard  of  God  among  all


76  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

nations;  meaning  that  all  the  nations  and  tribes  will
come  under  the  shadow  of  this  Divine  Banner,  which  is
no  other  than  the  Lordly  Branch  itself,  and  will  become
a  single  nation.  The  antagonism  of  faiths  and  religions,
the  hostility  of  races  and  peoples,  and  the  patriotic
differences,  will  be  eradicated  from  amongst  them.  All
will  become  one  religion,  one  faith,  one  race,  and  one
single  people,  and  will  dwell  in  one  native  land,  which
is  the  terrestrial  globe.  Universal  peace  and  concord
will  be  realised  between  all  the  nations,  and  that
incomparable  Branch  will  gather  together  all  Israel:
signifying  that  in  this  cycle  Israel  will  be  gathered  in
the  Holy  Land,  and  that  the  Jewish  people  who  are
scattered  to  the  East  and  West,  South  and  North,  will
be  assembled  together.

Now  see:  these  events  did  not  take  place  in  the
Christian  cycle,  for  the  nations  did  not  come  under  the
One  Standard  which  is  the  Divine  Branch.  But  in  this
cycle  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  all  the  nations  and  peoples
will  enter  under  the  shadow  of  this  Flag.  In  the  same
way,  Israel,  scattered  all  over  the  world,  was  not
reassembled  in  the  Holy  Land  in  the  Christian  cycle ;
but  in  the  beginning  of  the  cycle  of  Baha'u'llah  this
divine  promise,  as  is  clearly  stated  in  all  the  Books  of
the  Prophets,  has  begun  to  be  manifest.  You  can  see
that  from  all  the  parts  of  the  world  tribes  of  Jews  are
coming  to  the  Holy  Land;  they  live  in  villages  and
lands  which  they  make  their  own,  and  day  by  day  they
are  increasing  to  such  an  extent,  that  all  Palestine  will
become  their  home.


XIII

COMMENTARY  ON   THE  TWELFTH    CHAPTER
OF  THE  REVELATION  OF  ST.  JOHN

WE  have  before  explained  that  what  is  most  frequently
meant  by  the  Holy  City,  the  Jerusalem  of  God,  which  is
mentioned  in  the  Holy  Book,  is  the  Law  of  God.  It  is
compared  sometimes  to  a  bride,  and  sometimes  to
Jerusalem,  and  again  to  the  new  heaven  and  earth.
So  in  chapter  21,  verses  1,  2,  and  3  of  the  Revelation
of  St.  John,  it  is  said :  '  And  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a
new  earth :  for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  were
passed  away,  and  there  was  no  more  sea.  And  I  John
saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from
God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her
husband.  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven
saying,  Behold  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and
He  will  dwell  with  them,  and  they  shall  be  His  people,
and  God  Himself  shall  be  with  them  and  be  their  God.'
Notice  how  clear  and  evident  it  is  that  the  first
heaven  and  earth  signify  the  former  Law.  For  it  is
said  that  the  first  heaven  and  earth  have  passed  away
and  there  is  no  more  sea :  that  is  to  say,  that  the  earth
is  the  place  of  judgment,  and  on  this  earth  of  judgment
there  is  no  sea;  meaning  that  the  teachings  and  the
Law  of  God  will  entirely  spread  over  the  earth,  and  all
men  will  enter  the  Cause  of  God,  and  the  earth  will  be
completely  inhabited  by  believers ;  therefore  there  will

77


78  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

be  no  more  sea,  for  the  dwelling-place  and  abode  of
man  is  the  dry  land.  In  other  words,  at  that  epoch
the  field  of  that  Law  will  become  the  pleasure-ground  of
man.  Such  earth  is  solid,  the  feet  do  not  slip  upon  it.

The  Law  of  God  is  also  described  as  the  Holy  City,
the  New  Jerusalem.  It  is  evident  that  the  New
Jerusalem  which  descends  from  heaven  is  not  a  city
of  stone,  mortar,  bricks,  earth,  and  wood.  It  is  the
Law  of  God  which  descends  from  heaven  and  is  called
new;  for  it  is  clear  that  the  Jerusalem  which  is  of
stone  and  earth  does  not  descend  from  heaven,  and
that  it  is  not  renewed;  but  that  which  is  renewed  is
the  Law  of  God.

The  Law  of  God  is  also  compared  to  an  adorned  bride
who  appears  with  most  beautiful  ornaments,  as  it  has
been  said  in  chapter  21  of  the  Revelation  of  St.  John :
'  And  I  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  coming
down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride
adorned  for  her  husband.'  And  in  chapter  12  verse  1
it  is  said:  'And  there  appeared  a  great  wonder  in
heaven ;  a  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon
under  her  feet,  and  upon  her  head  a  crown  of  twelve
stars ' :  this  woman  is  that  bride,  the  Law  of  God  that
descended  upon  Muhammad.  The  sun  with  which  she
was  clothed,  and  the  moon  which  was  under  her  feet,
are  the  two  nations  which  are  under  the  shadow  of  that
Law,  the  Persian  and  Turkish  kingdoms;  for  the
emblem  of  Persia  is  the  sun,  and  that  of  Turkey  is  the
crescent  moon :  thus  the  sun  and  moon  are  the  emblems
of  two  kingdoms  which  are  under  the  power  of  the  Law
of  God.  Afterwards  it  is  said:  'upon  her  head  is  a
crown  of  twelve  stars' — these  twelve  stars  are  the


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  79

twelve  Imams  who  were  the  promoters  of  the  Law  of
Muhammad,  and  the  educators  of  the  people,  shining
like  stars  in  the  heaven  of  guidance.

Then  it  is  said  in  the  second  verse :  '  and  she  being
with  child  cried/  meaning  that  this  Law  fell  into  the
greatest  difficulties,  and  endured  great  troubles  and
afflictions  until  a  perfect  offspring  was  produced,  that
is,  the  coming  Manifestation,  the  Promised  One,  who  is
the  perfect  offspring,  and  who  was  reared  in  the  bosom
of  this  Law  which  is  as  its  mother.  The  child  who  is
referred  to  is  the  Bab,  the  First  Point,  who  was  in
truth  born  from  the  Law  of  Muhammad.  That  is  to
say,  the  Holy  Reality,  who  is  the  child  and  outcome  of
the  Law  of  God,  his  mother,  and  who  is  promised  by
that  religion,  finds  a  reality  in  the  kingdom  of  that
Law ;  but  because  of  the  despotism  of  the  dragon  the  child
was  carried  up  to  God.  After  twelve  hundred  and  sixty
days  the  dragon  was  destroyed,  and  the  child  of  the
Law  of  God,  the  Promised  One,  became  manifest.

Verses  3  and  4.  '  And  there  appeared  a  great  wonder
in  heaven,  and  behold  a  great  red  dragon,  having  seven
heads  and  ten  horns  and  seven  crowns  upon  his  heads.
And  his  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven,
and  did  cast  them  to  the  earth.'  These  signs  are  an
allusion  to  the  dynasty  of  the  Umayyads  who  domin-
ated the  Muhammadan  religion.  Seven  heads  and  seven
crowns  mean  seven  countries  and  dominions  over  which
the  Bani-Umayya  had  power:  they  were  the  Roman
dominion  around  Damascus,  and  the  Persian,  Arabian,
and  Egyptian  dominions,  together  with  the  dominion
of  Africa,  that  is  to  say  Tunis,  Morocco,  and  Algeria,  the
dominion  of  Andalusia  which  is  now  Spain,  and  the


80  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

dominion  of  Turkestan  and  Transoxania.  The  Bani-
Umayya  had  power  over  these  countries.  The  ten
horns  mean  the  names  of  the  Umayyad  rulers :  that  is,
without  repetition,  there  were  ten  names  of  rulers,
meaning  ten  names  of  commanders  and  chiefs — the
first  is  Abu  Sufian  and  the  last  Marwan — but  several
of  them  bear  the  same  name.  So  there  are  two
Mu'awia,  three  Yazid,  two  Walid,  and  two  Marwan;
but  if  the  names  were  counted  without  repetition  there
would  be  ten.  The  Bani-Umayya,  of  whom  the  first
was  Abu  Sufian,  Amir  of  Mecca  and  chief  of  the
dynasty  of  the  Umayyads,  and  the  last  was  Marwan,
destroyed  the  third  part  of  the  holy  and  saintly  people
of  the  lineage  of  Muhammad  who  were  like  the  stars
of  heaven.

Verse  4.  'And  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman
which  was  ready  to  be  delivered,  for  to  devour  the
child  as  soon  as  it  was  born/  As  we  have  before  ex-
plained, this  woman  is  the  Law  of  God.  The  dragon
was  standing  near  the  woman  to  devour  her  child,  and
this  child  was  the  promised  Manifestation,  the  offspring
of  the  Law  of  Muhammad.  The  Bani-Umayya  were
always  waiting  to  get  possession  of  the  Promised  One
who  was  to  come  from  the  line  of  Muhammad,  to
destroy  and  annihilate  him ;  for  they  much  feared  the
appearance  of  the  promised  Manifestation,  and  they
sought  to  kill  any  of  Muhammad's  descendants  who
might  be  highly  esteemed.

Verse  5. '  And  she  brought  forth  a  man  child,  who  was
to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron.'  This  great  son
is  the  promised  Manifestation  who  was  born  of  the  Law
of  God  and  reared  in  the  bosom  of  the  divine  teachings.


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  81

The  iron  rod  is  a  symbol  of  power  and  might — it  is  not
a  sword — and  means  that  with  divine  power  and  might
he  will  shepherd  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  This
son  is  the  Bab.

Verse  5.  'And  her  child  was  caught  up  unto  God,
and  to  His  throne.'  This  is  a  prophecy  of  the  Bab,
who  ascended  to  the  heavenly  realm,  to  the  Throne  of
God,  and  to  the  centre  of  His  Kingdom.  Consider
how  all  this  corresponds  to  what  happened.

Verse  6.  'And  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness,'  that
is  to  say,  the  Law  of  God  fled  to  the  wilderness,  meaning
the  vast  desert  of  Hijaz,  and  the  Arabian  Peninsula.

Verse  6.  '  Where  she  had  a  place  prepared  of  God.
The  Arabian  Peninsula  became  the  abode  and  dwelling-
place,  and  the  centre  of  the  Law  of  God.

Verse  6.  '  That  they  should  feed  her  there  a  thousand
two  hundred  and  threescore  days.'  In  the  terminology
of  the  Holy  Book  these  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  days
mean  the  twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years  that  the  Law
of  God  was  set  up  in  the  wilderness  of  Arabia,  the  great
desert:  from  it  the  Promised  One  has  come.  After
twelve  hundred  and  sixty  years  that  Law  will  have  no
more  influence,  for  the  fruit  of  that  tree  will  have
appeared,  and  the  result  will  have  been  produced.

Consider  how  the  prophecies  correspond  to  one
another.  In  the  Apocalypse,  the  appearance  of  the
Promised  One  is  appointed  after  forty- two  months,  and
Daniel  expresses  it  as  three  times  and  a  half,  which
is  also  forty-two  months;  which  are  twelve  hundred
and  sixty  days.  In  another  passage  of  John's  Revela-
tion it  is  clearly  spoken  of  as  twelve  hundred  and  sixty
days,  and  in  the  Holy  Book  it  is  said  that  each  day

F


82  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

signifies  one  year.  Nothing  could  be  more  clear  than
this  agreement  of  the  prophecies  with  one  another.
The  Bab  appeared  in  the  year  1260  of  the  Hejira  of
Muhammad,  which  is  the  beginning  of  the  universal
era-reckoning  of  all  Islam.  There  are  no  clearer  proofs
than  this  in  the  Holy  Books  for  any  Manifestation.
For  him  who  is  just,  the  agreement  of  the  times
indicated  by  the  tongues  of  the  Great  Ones  is  the
most  conclusive  proof.  There  is  no  other  possible
explanation  of  these  prophecies.  Blessed  are  the  just
souls  who  seek  the  truth.  But  failing  justice,  the
people  attack,  dispute,  and  openly  deny  the  evidence ;
like  the  Pharisees  who,  at  the  manifestation  of  Christ,
denied  with  the  greatest  obstinacy  the  explanations  of
Christ  and  of  his  disciples.  They  obscured  Christ's
Cause  before  the  ignorant  people,  saying,  '  These  pro-
phecies are  not  of  Jesus,  but  of  the  Promised  One  who
shall  come  later,  according  to  the  conditions  mentioned
in  the  Bible.'  Some  of  these  conditions  were  that  he
must  have  a  kingdom,  be  seated  on  the  throne  of
David,  enforce  the  Law.  of  the  Bible,  and  manifest
such  justice  that  the  wolf  and  the  lamb  shall  gather
at  the  same  spring.

And  thus  they  prevented  the  people  from  knowing
Christ.

Note. — In  these  last  conversations  'Abdu'1-Baha  wishes  to  reconcile
in  a  new  interpretation  the  apocalyptic  prophecies  of  the  Jews,  the
Christians,  and  the  Muslims,  rather  than  to  show  their  supernatural
character.  On  the  powers  of  the  Prophets,  of.  '  The  Knowledge  of  the
Divine  Manifestations,'  page  180  ;  and  '  Visions,  and  Communication
with  Spirits,'  page  290.


XIV
SPIRITUAL  PROOFS

IN  this  material  world  time  has  cycles;  places
change  through  alternating  seasons,  and  for  souls
there  are  progress,  retrogression,  and  education.

Sometime  it  is  the  season  of  spring,  at  another  time
it  is  the  season  of  autumn,  and  again  it  is  the  season
of  summer  or  the  season  of  winter.

In  the  spring  there  are  the  clouds  which  send  down
the  precious  rain,  the  musk- scented  breezes  and  life-
giving  zephyrs ;  the  air  is  perfectly  temperate,  the  rain
falls,  the  sun  shines,  the  fecundating  wind  wafts  the
clouds,  the  world  is  renewed,  and  the  breath  of  life
appears  in  plants,  in  animals,  and  in  men.  Earthly
beings  pass  from  one  condition  to  another.  All  things
are  clothed  in  new  garments,  and  the  black  earth  is
covered  with  herbage;  mountains  and  plains  are
adorned  with  verdure,  trees  bear  leaves  and  blossoms,
gardens  bring  forth  flowers  and  fragrant  herbs.  The
world  becomes  another  world,  and  it  attains  to  a  life-
giving  spirit.  The  earth  was  a  lifeless  body;  it  finds
a  new  spirit,  and  produces  endless  beauty,*grace,  and
freshness.  Thus  the  spring  is  the  cause  of  new  life,
and  infuses  a  new  spirit.

Afterwards  comes  the  summer,  when  the  heat  in-

83


84  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

creases,  and  growth  and  development  attain  their
greatest  power.  The  energy  of  life  in  the  vegetable
kingdom  reaches  to  the  degree  of  perfection,  the  fruit
appears,  and  the  time  of  harvest  ripens;  a  seed  has
become  a  sheaf,  and  the  food  is  stored  for  winter.
Afterwards  comes  tumultuous  autumn  when  unwhole-
some and  sterile  winds  blow;  it  is  the  season  of
sickness,  when  all  things  are  withered,  and  the  balmy
air  is  vitiated.  The  breezes  of  spring  are  changed  to
autumn  winds,  the  fertile  green  trees  have  become
withered  and  bare,  flowers  and  fragrant  herbs  fade
away,  the  beautiful  garden  becomes  a  dust -heap.
Following  this  comes  the  season  of  winter,  with  cold
and  tempests.  It  snows,  rains,  hails,  storms,  thunders
and  lightens,  freezes  and  congeals ;  all  plants  die,  and
animals  languish  and  are  wretched.

When  this  state  is  reached,  again  a  new  life-giving
spring  returns,  and  the  cycle  is  renewed.  The  season
of  spring  with  its  hosts  of  freshness  and  beauty,  spreads
its  tent  on  the  plains  and  mountains  with  great  pomp
and  magnificence.  A  second  time  the  form  of  the
creatures  is  renewed,  and  the  creation  of  beings  begins
afresh;  bodies  grow  and  develop,  the  plains  and
wildernesses  become  green  and  fertile,  trees  bring  forth
blossoms,  and  the  spring  of  last  year  returns  in  the
utmost  fulness  and  glory.  Such  is,  and  such  ought
to  be,  the  cycle  and  succession  of  existence:  such  is
the  cycle  and  revolution  of  the  material  world.

It  is  the  same  with  the  spiritual  cycles  of  the
Prophets.  That  is  to  say,  the  day  of  the  appearance
of  the  Holy  Manifestations  is  the  spiritual  springtime,
it  is  the  divine  splendour,  it  is  the  heavenly  bounty,


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  85

the  breeze  of  life,  the  rising  of  the  Sun  of  Reality.
Spirits  are  quickened,  hearts  are  refreshed  and  in-
vigorated, souls  become  good,  existence  is  set  in  motion,
human  realities  are  gladdened,  and  grow  and  develop
in  good  qualities  and  perfections.  Universal  progress
takes  place,  and  there  are  resurrection  and  lamentation ;
for  it  is  the  day  of  judgment,  the  time  of  turmoil  and
distress,  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  the  season  of  joy,
of  happiness,  and  of  absolute  attraction.

Afterwards  the  life-giving  spring  ends  in  fruitful
summer.  The  word  of  God  is  exalted,  the  Law  of  God
is  promulgated;  all  things  reach  perfection.  The
heavenly  table  is  spread,  the  holy  breezes  perfume  the
East  and  the  West,  the  teachings  of  God  conquer  the
world,  men  become  educated,  praiseworthy  results  are
produced,  universal  progress  appears  in  the  world  of
humanity,  and  the  divine  bounties  surround  all  things.
The  Sun  of  Reality  rises  from  the  horizon  of  the
Kingdom  with  the  greatest  power  and  heat.  When
it  reaches  the  meridian  it  will  begin  to  decline  and
descend,  and  the  spiritual  summer  will  be  followed  by
autumn,  when  growth  and  development  are  arrested.
Breezes  change  into  blighting  winds,  and  the  un-
wholesome season  dissipates  the  beauty  and  freshness
of  the  gardens,  plains,  and  bowers.  That  is  to  say,
attraction  and  goodwill  do  not  remain,  divine  qualities
are  changed,  the  radiance  of  hearts  is  dimmed,  the
spirituality  of  souls  is  altered,  virtues  are  replaced  by
vices,  and  holiness  and  purity  disappear.  Only  the
name  of  the  Religion  of  God  remains,  and  the  exoteric
forms  of  the  divine  teachings.  The  foundations  of
the  Religion  of  God  are  destroyed  and  annihilated,  and


X


86  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

nothing  but  forms  and  customs  exist.  Divisions  appear,
firmness  is  changed  into  instability,  and  spirits  become
dead ;  hearts  languish,  souls  become  inert,  and  winter
arrives;  that  is  to  say,  the  coldness  of  ignorance
envelops  the  world  and  the  darkness  of  human  error
prevails.  After  this  come  indifference,  disobedience,
inconsiderateness,  indolence,  baseness,  animal  instincts,
and  the  coldness  and  insensibility  of  stones.  It  is
like  the  season  of  winter  when  the  terrestrial  globe,
deprived  of  the  effect  of  the  heat  of  the  sun,  becomes
desolate  and  dreary.  When  the  world  of  intelligence
and  thought  has  reached  to  this  state,  there  remain
only  continual  death  and  perpetual  non-existence.

When  the  season  of  winter  has  had  its  effect,  again
the  spiritual  springtime  returns  and  a  new  cycle
appears.  Spiritual  breezes  blow,  the  luminous  dawn
gleams,  the  divine  clouds  give  rain,  the  rays  of  the
Sun  of  Reality  shine  forth,  the  contingent  world  attains
unto  a  new  life,  and  is  clad  in  a  wonderful  garment.
All  the  signs  and  the  gifts  of  the  past  springtime  re-
appear, with  perhaps  even  greater  splendour  in  this
new  season.

The  spiritual  cycles  of  the  Sun  of  Reality  are  like
the  cycles  of  the  material  sun;  they  are  always  re-
volving and  being  renewed.  The  Sun  of  Reality,
like  the  material  sun,  has  numerous  rising  and  dawn-
ing places :  one  day  it  rises  from  the  zodiacal  sign  of
Cancer,  another  day  from  the  sign  of  Libra  or  Aquarius,
another  time  it  is  from  the  sign  of  Aries  that  it
diffuses  its  rays.  But  the  sun  is  one  sun  and  one
reality ;  the  people  of  knowledge  are  lovers  of  the  sun,
and  are  not  fascinated  by  the  places  of  its  rising  and


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PKOPHETS  87

dawning.  The  people  of  perception  are  the  seekers  of
the  Truth,  and  not  of  the  places  of  its  appearance,  nor
of  its  dawning  points;  therefore  they  will  adore  the
Sun  from  whatever  point  in  the  zodiac  it  may  appear,
and  they  will  seek  the  Reality  in  every  Sanctified  Soul
who  manifests  it.  Such  people  always  attain  to  the
truth,  and  are  not  veiled  from  the  Sun  of  the  Divine
World.  So,  the  lover  of  the  sun  and  the  seeker  of  the
light  will  always  turn  towards  the  sun,  whether  it
shines  from  the  sign  of  Aries  or  gives  its  bounty  from
the  sign  of  Cancer,  or  radiates  from  Gemini ;  but  the
ignorant  and  uninstructed  are  lovers  of  the  signs  of
the  zodiac,  and  enamoured  and  fascinated  by  the  rising-
places,  and  not  by  the  sun.  When  it  was  in  the  sign
of  Cancer  they  turned  towards  it,  though  afterwards
the  sun  changed  to  the  sign  of  Libra;  as  they  were
lovers  of  the  sign,  they  turned  towards  it  and  attached
themselves  to  it,  and  were  deprived  of  the  influences
of  the  sun  merely  because  it  had  changed  its  place.
For  example,  once  the  Sun  of  Reality  poured  forth  its
rays  from  the  sign  of  Abraham,  and  then  it  dawned
from  the  sign  of  Moses  and  illuminated  the  horizon;
afterwards  it  rose  with  the  greatest  power  and  brilliancy
from  the  sign  of  Christ :  those  who  were  the  seekers
of  Reality,  worshipped  that  Reality  wherever  they  saw
it,  but  those  who  were  attached  to  Abraham  were
deprived  of  its  influences,  when  it  shone  upon  Sinai
and  illuminated  the  reality  of  Moses.  Those  who  held
fast  to  Moses  when  the  Sun  of  Reality  shone  from
Christ  with  the  utmost  radiance  and  lordly  splendour,
were  also  veiled ;  and  so  forth.

Therefore  man  must  be  the  seeker  after  the  Reality ;


88  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  he  will  find  that  Reality  in  each  of  the  Sanctified
Souls.  He  must  be  fascinated  and  enraptured,  and
attracted  to  the  divine  bounty;  he  must  be  like  the
butterfly  who  is  the  lover  of  the  light  from  whatever
lamp  it  may  shine,  and  like  the  nightingale  who  is
the  lover  of  the  rose  in  whatever  garden  it  may  grow.

If  the  sun  were  to  rise  in  the  West,  it  would  still  be
the  sun;  one  must  not  withdraw  from  it  on  account
of  its  rising-place,  nor  consider  the  West  to  be  always
the  place  of  sun-set.  In  the  same  way,  one  must
look  for  the  heavenly  bounties,  and  seek  for  the  Divine
Aurora.  In  every  place  where  it  appears,  one  must
become  its  distracted  lover.  Consider  that  if  the  Jews
had  not  kept  turning  to  the  horizon  of  Moses,  and  had
only  regarded  the  Sun  of  Reality,  without  any  doubt
they  would  have  recognised  the  Sun  in  the  dawning-
place  of  the  reality  of  Christ,  in  the  greatest  divine
splendour.  But,  alas !  a  thousand  times  alas !  attach-
ing themselves  to  the  outward  words  of  Moses,  they
were  deprived  of  the  divine  bounties  and  the  lordly
splendours !


XV
TRUE  WEALTH

THE  honour  and  exaltation  of  every  existing  being
depends  upon  causes  and  circumstances.

The  excellency,  the  adornment,  and  the  perfection  of
the  earth  is  to  be  verdant  and  fertile  through  the  bounty
of  the  clouds  of  springtime.  Plants  grow,  flowers  and
fragrant  herbs  spring  up,  fruit-bearing  trees  become
full  of  blossoms,  and  bring  forth  fresh  and  new  fruit.
Gardens  become  beautiful,  and  meadows  adorned ;
mountains  and  plains  are  clad  in  a  green  robe,  and
gardens,  fields,  villages,  and  cities  are  decorated.  This
is  the  prosperity  of  the  mineral  world.

The  height  of  exaltation  and  the  perfection  of  the
vegetable  world  is  that  a  tree  should  grow  on  the  bank
of  a  stream  of  fresh  water,  that  a  gentle  breeze  should
blow  on  it,  that  the  warmth  of  the  sun  should  shine
on  it,  that  a  gardener  should  attend  to  its  cultivation,
and  that  day  by  day  it  should  develop  and  yield  fruit.
But  its  real  prosperity  is  to  progress  into  the  animal
and  human  world,  and  replace  that  which  has  been
exhausted  in  the  bodies  of  animals  and  men.

The  exaltation  of  the  animal  world  is  to  possess
perfect  members,  organs,  and  powers,  and  to  have  all
its  needs  supplied.  This  is  its  chief  glory,  its  honour

89


90  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  exaltation.  So  the  supreme  happiness  of  an  animal
is  to  have  possession  of  a  green  and  fertile  meadow,  per-
fectly pure  flowing  water,  and  a  lovely,  verdant  forest
If  these  things  are  provided  for  it,  no  greater  pro-
sperity can  be  imagined.  For  example,  if  a  bird  builds
its  nest  in  a  green  and  fruitful  forest,  in  a  beautiful
high  place,  upon  a  strong  tree,  and  at  the  top  of  a
lofty  branch,  and  if  it  finds  all  it  needs  of  seeds  and
water,  this  is  its  perfect  prosperity.

But  real  prosperity  for  the  animal  consists  in  passing
from  the  animal  world  to  the  human  world,  like  the
microscopic  beings  that,  through  the  water  and  air,
enter  into  man  and  are  assimilated,  and  replace  that
which  has  been  consumed  in  his  body.  This  is  the
great  honour  and  prosperity  for  the  animal  world ;  no
greater  honour  can  be  conceived  for  it.

Therefore  it  is  evident  and  clear  that  this  wealth,
this  comfort,  and  this  material  abundance,  form  the
complete  prosperity  of  minerals,  vegetables,  and  animals.
No  riches,  wealth,  comfort,  or  ease  of  the  material  world
is  equal  to  the  wealth  of  a  bird ;  all  the  areas  of  these
plains  and  mountains  are  its  dwelling,  and  all  the
seeds  and  harvests  are  its  food  and  wealth,  and  all
the  lands,  villages,  meadows,  pastures,  forests,  and
wildernesses  are  its  possessions.  Now,  which  is  the
richer,  this  bird,  or  the  most  wealthy  man  ?  for  no
matter  how  many  seeds  it  may  take  or  bestow,  its
wealth  does  not  decrease.

Then  it  is  clear  that  the  honour  and  exaltation  of
man  must  be  something  more  than  material  riches;
material  comforts  are  only  a  branch,  but  the  root  of
the  exaltation  of  man  is  the  good  attributes  and


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PROPHETS  91

virtues  which  are  the  adornments  of  his  reality.  These
are  the  divine  appearances,  the  heavenly  bounties,  the
sublime  emotions,  the  love  and  knowledge  of  God;
universal  wisdom,  intellectual  perception,  scientific
discoveries,  justice,  equity,  truthfulness,  benevolence,
natural  courage,  and  innate  fortitude;  the  respect  for
rights  and  the  keeping  of  agreements  and  covenants;
rectitude  in  all  circumstances ;  serving  the  truth  under
all  conditions;  the  sacrifice  of  one's  life  for  the  good
of  all  people;  kindness  and  esteem  for  all  nations;
obedience  to  the  teachings  of  God;  service  in  the
Divine  Kingdom;  the  guidance  of  the  people,  and
the  education  of  the  nations  and  races.  This  is  the
prosperity  of  the  human  world !  This  is  the  exaltation
of  man  in  the  world !  This  is  eternal  life  and  heavenly
honour !

These  virtues  do  not  appear  from  the  reality  of  man
except  through  the  power  of  God  and  the  divine  teach-
ings, for  they  need  supernatural  power  for  their  mani-
festation. It  may  be  that  in  the  world  of  nature  a
trace  of  these  perfections  may  appear;  but  they  are
not  established  and  lasting ;  they  are  like  the  rays  of
the  sun  upon  the  wall.

As  the  compassionate  God  has  placed  such  a
wonderful  crown  upon  the  head  of  man,  man  should
strive  that  its  brilliant  jewels  maj^  become  visible  in
the  world.


PART  II
SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS


XVI

OUTWARD  FORMS  AND  SYMBOLS  MUST  BE
USED  TO  CONVEY  INTELLECTUAL  CON-
CEPTIONS

A  SUBJECT  that  is  essential1  for  the  comprehension
of  the  questions  that  we  have  mentioned,  and  of
others  of  which  we  are  about  to  speak,  so  that  the
essence  of  the  problems  may  be  understood,  is  this :
that  human  knowledge  is  of  two  kinds.  One  is  the
knowledge  of  things  perceptible  to  the  senses — that
is  to  say,  things  which  the  eye,  or  ear,  or  smell,  or  taste,
or  touch  can  perceive,  which  are  called  objective  or
sensible.  So  the  sun,  because  it  can  be  seen,  is  said  to
be  objective ;  and  in  the  same  way  sounds  are  sensible
because  the  ear  hears  them;  perfumes  are  sensible
because  they  can  be  inhaled  and  the  sense  of  smell
perceives  them;  foods  are  sensible  because  the  palate
perceives  their  sweetness,  sourness,  or  saltness ;  heat  and
cold  are  sensible  because  the  feelings  perceive  them.
These  are  said  to  be  sensible  realities.

The  other  kind  of  human  knowledge  is  intellectual —
that  is  to  say,  it  is  a  reality  of  the  intellect,  it  has  no
outward  form  and  no  place,  and  is  not  perceptible  to

1  Lit. ,  the  pivot.

95


96  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

the  senses.  For  example,  the  power  of  intellect  is  not
sensible;  none  of  the  inner  qualities  of  man  is  a  sensible
thing ;  on  the  contrary,  they  are  intellectual  realities ;
so  love  is  a  mental  reality  and  not  sensible ;  for  this
reality  the  ear  does  not  hear,  the  eye  does  not  see,
the  smell  does  not  perceive,  the  taste  does  not  discern,
the  touch  does  not  feel.  Even  ethereal  matter,  the
forces  of  which  are  said  in  physics  to  be  heat,  light,
electricity,  and  magnetism,  is  an  intellectual  reality,
and  is  not  sensible.  In  the  same  way  nature,  also,  in
its  essence  is  an  intellectual  reality,  and  is  not  sensible ;
the  human  spirit  is  an  intellectual,  not  sensible  reality.
In  explaining  these  intellectual  realities,  one  is  obliged
to  express  them  by  sensible  figures,  because  in  exterior
existence  there  is  nothing  that  is  not  material.  There-
fore to  explain  the  reality  of  the  spirit,  its  condition,
its  station,  one  is  obliged  to  give  explanations  under
the  forms  of  sensible  things,  because  in  the  external
world  all  that  exists  is  sensible.  For  example,  grief
and  happiness  are  intellectual  things ;  when  you  wish
to  express  those  spiritual  qualities  you  say :  '  My  heart
is  oppressed ;  my  heart  is  enlarged ' ;  though  the  heart
of  man  is  neither  oppressed  nor  enlarged.  This  is  an
intellectual  or  spiritual  state,  to  explain  which  you
are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  sensible  figures.
Another  example:  you  say,  'such  an  individual  made
great  progress,'  though  he  is  remaining  in  the  same
place;  or  again,  'such  an  one's  position  was  exalted,'
although,  like  every  one  else,  he  walks  upon  the  earth.
This  exaltation  and  this  progress  are  spiritual  states
and  intellectual  realities ;  but  to  explain  them  you
are  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  sensible  figures,  because


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  97

in  the  exterior  world  there  is  nothing  that  is  not
sensible.

So  the  symbol  of  knowledge  is  light,  and  of  ignor-
ance, darkness ;  but  reflect,  is  knowledge  sensible  light,
or  ignorance  sensible  darkness  ?  No,  they  are  merely
symbols.  These  are  only  intellectual  states,  but  when
you  desire  to  express  them  outwardly,  you  call  knowledge
light,  and  ignorance  darkness.  You  say :  '  My  heart  was
gloomy,  and  it  became  enlightened.'  Now,  that  light
of  knowledge,  and  that  darkness  of  ignorance,  are  intel-
lectual realities,  not  sensible  ones ;  but  when  we  seek
for  explanations  in  the  external  world,  we  are  obliged  to
give  them  a  sensible  form.

Then  it  is  evident  that  the  dove  which  descended
upon  Christ  was  not  a  material  dove,  but  it  was  a
spiritual  state,  which,  that  it  might,  be  comprehensible,
was  expressed  by  a  sensible  figure.  Thus  in  the  Old
Testament  it  is  said  that  God  appeared  as  a  pillar  of
fire ;  this  does  not  signify  the  material  form,  it  is  an  in-
tellectual reality  which  is  expressed  by  a  sensible  image.

Christ  says, '  The  Father  is  in  the  Son,  and  the  Son
is  in  the  Father.'  Was  Christ  within  God,  or  God
within  Christ?  No,  in  the  name  of  God!  On  the
contrary,  this  is  an  intellectual  state,  which  is  expressed
in  a  sensible  figure.

We  come  to  the  explanation  of  the  words  of  Baha'
u'llah  when  he  says :  '  0  King,  verily  I  have  been  like
any  other  man  sleeping  upon  my  couch ;  the  breezes
of  the  Most  Glorious  passed  over  me,  and  taught  me  the
knowledge  of  all  that  has  been.  This  is  not  from  me,
but  from  the  Powerful,  the  Omniscient.' l  This  is  the

1  Extract  from  the  letter  to  Na«iru'd-Din  Shah.
G


98  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

state  of  manifestation ;  it  is  not  sensible,  it  is  an  intel-
lectual reality,  exempt  and  freed  from  time,  from  past,
present,  and  future;  it  is  an  explanation,  a  simile,  a
metaphor,  and  is  not  to  be  accepted  literally ;  it  is  not
a  state  that  can  be  comprehended  by  man.  Sleeping
and  waking  is  passing  from  one  state  to  another.  Sleep-
ing is  the  condition  of  repose,  and  wakefulness  is  the
condition  of  movement ;  sleeping  is  the  state  of  silence,
wakefulness  is  the  state  of  speech ;  sleeping  is  the  state
of  mystery,  wakefulness  is  the  state  of  manifestation.

For  example,  it  is  a  Persian  and  Arabic  expression
to  say  that  the  earth  was  asleep,  and  the  spring  came
and  it  awoke ;  or  the  earth  was  dead,  and  the  spring
came  and  it  revived.  These  expressions  are  metaphors,
allegories,  mystic  explanations  in  the  world  of  signi-
fication.

Briefly,  the  Holy  Manifestations  have  ever  been,  and
ever  will  be,  Luminous  Realities ;  no  change  or  variation
takes  place  in  their  essence.  Before  declaring  their
manifestation,  they  are  silent  and  quiet  like  a  sleeper,
and  after  their  manifestation,  they  speak  and  are
illuminated,  like  one  who  is  awake.


XVII
THE  BIRTH  OF  CHRIST

Question. — How  was  Christ  born  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?

Answer. — In  regard  to  this  question,  theologians
and  materialists  disagree.  The  theologians  believe
that  Christ  was  born  of  the  Holy  Spirit;  but  the
materialists  think  this  is  impossible  and  inadmissible,
and  that  without  doubt  he  had  a  human  father.

In  the  Quran  it  is  said :  '  And  We  sent  Our  Spirit
unto  her,  and  he  appeared  unto  her  in  the  shape  of  a
perfect  man,' 1  meaning  that  the  Holy  Spirit  took  the
likeness  of  the  human  form,  as  an  image  is  produced
in  a  mirror,  and  he  addressed  Mary.

The  materialists  believe  that  there  must  be  marriage,
and  say  that  a  living  body  cannot  be  created  from  a
lifeless  body,  and  without  male  and  female  there  cannot
be  fecundation.  And  they  think  that  not  only  with
man,  but  also  with  animals  and  plants,  it  is  impossible.
For  this  union  of  the  male  and  female  exists  in  all
living  beings  and  plants.  This  pairing  of  things  is  even
shown  forth  in  the  Quran :  '  Glory  be  to  Him  who
has  created  all  the  pairs :  of  such  things  as  the  earth
produceth,  and  of  themselves;  and  of  things  which
they  know  not.'2  That  is  to  say,  men,  animals,  and

1  Quran,  Sura  19.  2  Quran,  Sura  36.

99


100          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

plants  are  all  in  pairs — 'and  of  everything  have  we
created  two  kinds.'  That  is  to  say,  we  have  created
all  the  beings  through  pairing.

Briefly,  they  say  a  man  without  a  human  father  can-
not be  imagined.  In  answer  the  theologians  say :  '  This
thing  is  not  impossible  and  unachievable,  but  it  has  not
been  seen;  and  there  is  a  great  difference  between  a
thing  which  is  impossible  and  one  which  is  unknown.
For  example,  in  former  times  the  telegraph,  which
causes  the  East  and  the  West  to  communicate,
was  unknown,  but  not  impossible ;  photography  and
phonography  were  unknown  but  not  impossible.'

The  materialists  insist  upon  this  belief,  and  the
theologians  reply:  'Is  this  globe  eternal  or  phenomenal? '
The  materialists  answer,  that  according  to  science  and
important  discoveries,  it  is  established  that  it  is  pheno-
menal ;  in  the  beginning  it  was  a  flaming  globe,  and
gradually  it  became  temperate;  a  crust  was  formed
around  it,  and  upon  this  crust  plants  came  into  exist-
ence, then  animals,  and  finally  man.

The  theologians  say :  '  Then  from  your  statement  it
has  become  evident  and  clear  that  mankind  is  pheno-
menal upon  the  globe,  and  not  eternal.  Then  surely
the  first  man  had  neither  father  nor  mother,  for  the
existence  of  man  is  phenomenal.  Is  not  the  creation
of  man  without  father  and  mother,  even  though
gradually,  more  difficult  than  if  he  had  simply  come
into  existence  without  a  father  ?  As  you  admit  that  the
first  man  came  into  existence  without  father  or  mother
— whether  it  be  gradually  or  at  once — there  can  remain
no  doubt  that  a  man  without  a  human  father  is  also
possible  and  admissible;  you  cannot  consider  this


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  101

impossible;  otherwise  you  are  illogical.  For  example,
if  you  say  that  this  lamp  has  once  been  lighted  without
wick  and  oil,  and  then  say  that  it  is  impossible  to  light
it  without  the  wick,  this  is  illogical.'  Christ  had  a
mother ;  the  first  man,  as  the  materialists  believe,  had
neither  father  nor  mother.1

1  This  conversation  shows  the  uselessness  of  discussions  upon  such
questions  ;  the  teachings  of  'Abdu'1-Baha  upon  the  birth  of  Christ  will
be  found  in  the  following  chapter.


XVIII


A  GREAT  man  is  a  great  man,  whether  born  of  a
human  father  or  not.  If  being  without  a  father  is  a
virtue,  Adam  is  greater  and  more  excellent  than  all
the  Prophets  and  Messengers,  for  he  had  neither  father
nor  mother.  That  which  causes  honour  and  greatness,
is  the  splendour  and  bounty  of  the  divine  perfections.
The  sun  is  born  from  substance  and  form,  which  can
be  compared  to  father  and  mother,  and  it  is  absolute
perfection  ;  but  the  darkness  has  neither  substance  nor
form,  neither  father  nor  mother,  and  it  is  absolute
imperfection.  The  substance  of  Adam's  physical  life
was  earth,  but  the  substance  of  Abraham  was  pure
sperm  ;  it  is  certain  that  the  pure  and  chaste  sperm  is
superior  to  earth.

Furthermore,  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  Gospel  of
John,  verses  12  and  13,  it  is  said:  'But  as  many  as
received  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  become  the
sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believed  on  his  name.

'  Which  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of
the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God.'

From  these  verses  it  is  obvious  that  the  being  of  a
disciple  also  is  not  created  by  physical  power,  but  by
102


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  103

the  spiritual  reality.  The  honour  and  greatness  of
Christ  is  not  due  to  the  fact  that  he  did  not  have  a
human  father,  but  to  his  perfections,  bounties,  and  divine
glory.  If  the  greatness  of  Christ  is  his  being  fatherless,
then  Adam  is  greater  than  Christ,  for  he  had  neither
father  nor  mother.  It  is  said  in  the  Old  Testament,
'And  the  Lord  God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the
ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of
life;  and  man  became  a  living  soul.'1  Observe  that
it  is  said  that  Adam  came  into  existence  from  the
Spirit  of  life.  Moreover,  the  expression  which  John
uses  in  regard  to  the  disciples,  proves  that  they  also
are  from  the  Heavenly  Father.  Hence  it  is  evident
that  the  holy  reality,  meaning  the  real  existence  of
every  great  man,  comes  from  God,  and  owes  its  being
to  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

The  purport  is  that,  if  to  be  without  a  human
father  is  the  greatest  human  glory,  then  Adam  is
greater  than  all,  for  he  had  neither  father  nor  mother.
Is  it  better  for  a  man  to  be  created  from  a  living
substance  or  from  earth  ?  Certainly  it  is  better  if  he
be  created  from  a  living  substance.  But  Christ  was
born  and  came  into  existence  from  the  Holy  Spirit.

To  conclude :  the  splendour  and  honour  of  the  holy
souls  and  the  Divine  Manifestations  come  from  their
heavenly  perfections,  bounties,  and  glory,  and  from
nothing  else.

1  Gen.  ii.  ^.


XIX
THE  BAPTISM  OF  CHRIST

Question. — It  is  said  in  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,
chapter  3  verses  13,  14,  15 :  '  Then  cometh  Jesus  from
Galilee  to  Jordan  unto  John,  to  be  baptized  of  him.
But  John  forbade  him,  saying,  I  have  need  to  be  bap-
tized of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  me?  And  Jesus
answering  said  unto  him,  Suffer  it  to  be  so  now:  for
thus  it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness.  Then
he  suffered  him.'

What  is  the  wisdom  of  this :  since  Christ  possessed
all  essential  perfection,  why  did  he  need  baptism  ?

Answer. — The  principle  of  baptism  is  purification
by  repentance.  John  admonished  and  exhorted  the
people,  and  caused  them  to  repent,  then  he  baptized
them.  Therefore  it  is  apparent  that  this  baptism  is
a  symbol  of  repentance  from  all  sin  :  its  meaning  is
expressed  in  these  words:  '0  God!  as  my  body  has
become  purified  and  cleansed  from  physical  impurities,
in  the  same  way  purify  and  sanctify  my  spirit  from
the  impurities  of  the  world  of  nature,  which  are  not
worthy  of  the  Threshold  of  Thy  Unity  ! '  Repentance  is
the  return  from  disobedience  to  obedience.  Man,  after
remoteness  and  deprivation  from  God,  repents,  and
undergoes  purification :  and  this  is  a  symbol  signifying

104


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  105

'0  God!  make  my  heart  good  and  pure,  freed  and
sanctified  from  all  save  thy  love.'

As  Christ  desired  that  this  institution  of  John  should
be  used  at  that  time  by  all,  he  himself  conformed
to  it  hi  order  to  awaken  the  people  and  to  complete
the  law  of  the  former  religion.  Although  the  ablution
of  repentance  was  the  institution  of  John,  it  was  in
reality  formerly  practised  in  the  Religion  of  God.

Christ  was  not  in  need  of  baptism;  but  as  at  that
time  it  was  an  acceptable  and  praiseworthy  action,  and
a  sign  of  the  glad  tidings  of  the  Kingdom,  therefore
he  submitted  to  it.  However,  afterwards  he  said  the
true  baptism  is  not  with  material  water,  but  it  must
be  with  spirit  and  with  water.  In  this  case  water  does
not  signify  material  water,  for  elsewhere  it  is  explicitly
said  baptism  is  with  spirit  and  with  fire ;  from  which
it  is  clear  that  the  reference  is  not  to  material  fire  and
material  water,  for  baptism  with  fire  is  impossible.

Therefore  the  spirit  is  the  bounty  of  God,  the  water
is  knowledge  and  life,  and  the  fire  is  the  love  of  God.
For  material  water  does  not  purify  the  heart  of  man :
no,  it  cleanses  his  body ;  but  the  heavenly  water  and
spirit,  which  are  knowledge  and  life,  make  the  human
heart  good  and  pure;  the  heart  which  receives  a
portion  of  the  bounty  of  the  Spirit  becomes  sanctified,
good,  and  pure.  That  is  to  say,  the  reality  of  man
becomes  purified  and  sanctified  from  the  impurities
of  the  world  of  nature.  These  natural  impurities  are
evil  qualities:  anger,  passion,  worldliness,  pride,  lying,
hypocrisy,  fraud,  self-love,  etc.

Man  cannot  free  himself  from  the  rage  of  the  carnal
passions  except  by  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  That


106          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

is  why  he  says  baptism  with  the  spirit,  with  water,
and  with  fire  is  necessary,  and  that  it  is  essential ;  that
is  to  say,  the  spirit  of  divine  bounty,  the  water  of
knowledge  and  life,  and  the  fire  of  the  love  of  God.
Man  must  be  baptized  with  this  spirit,  this  water,  and
this  fire  so  as  to  become  filled  with  the  eternal  bounty.
Otherwise,  what  is  the  use  of  baptizing  with  material
water  ?  No,  this  baptism  with  water  was  a  symbol  of
repentance,  and  of  seeking  forgiveness  of  sins.

But  in  the  cycle  of  Baha'u'llah  there  is  no  longer
need  of  this  symbol;  for  its  reality,  which  is  to  be
baptized  with  the  Spirit  and  Love  of  God,  is  under-
stood and  established.


XX
THE  NECESSITY  OF  BAPTISM

Question. — Is  the  ablution  of  baptism  useful  and
necessary,  or  is  it  useless  and  unnecessary  ?  In  the
first  case,  if  it  is  useful,  why  was  it  abrogated,  and
in  the  second  case,  if  it  is  useless,  why  did  John
practise  it  ?

Answer. — The  change  hi  conditions,  alterations,
and  transformations,  are  necessities  of  the  essence  of
beings;  and  essential  necessities  cannot  be  separated
from  the  reality  of  things.  So  it  is  absolutely  im-
possible to  separate  heat  from  fire,  humidity  from
water,  or  light  from  the  sun,  for  they  are  essential
necessities.  As  the  change  and  alteration  of  conditions
are  necessities  for  beings,  so  laws  also  are  changed  and
altered,  in  accordance  with  the  changes  and  alterations
of  the  times.  For  example,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  his
Law  was  conformed  and  adapted  to  the  conditions  of
the  time;  but  in  the  days  of  Christ  these  conditions
had  changed  and  altered  to  such  an  extent  that  the
Mosaic  Law  was  no  longer  suited  and  adapted  to  the
needs  of  mankind,  and  it  was  therefore  abrogated.
Thus  it  was  that  Christ  broke  the  Sabbath  and  forbade
divorce.  After  Christ,  four  disciples,  among  whom
were  Peter  and  Paul,  permitted  the  use  of  animal


107


108          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

food  forbidden  by  the  Bible,  except  the  eating  of  those
animals  which  had  been  strangled,  or  which  were
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  of  blood.1  They  also  forbade
fornication.  They  maintained  these  four  command-
ments. Afterwards  Paul  permitted  even  the  eating
of  strangled  animals,  those  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  blood,
and  only  maintained  the  prohibition  of  fornication.  So
in  chap.  14  verse  14  of  his  Epistle  to  the  Romans,
Paul  writes :  '  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord
Jesus,  that  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself:  but  to
him  that  esteemeth  any  thing  to  be  unclean,  to  him
it  is  unclean.'

Also  in  the  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Titus,  chap.  1  verse
15  :  '  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure :  but  unto  them
that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  nothing  pure ;  but
even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled.'

Now  this  change,  these  alterations,  and  this  abroga-
tion are  due  to  the  impossibility  of  comparing  the
time  of  Christ  with  that  of  Moses.  The  conditions
and  requirements  in  the  later  period  were  entirely
changed  and  altered.  The  former  laws  were  therefore
abrogated.

The  existence  of  the  world  may  be  compared  to  that
of  a  man,  and  the  Prophets  and  Messengers  of  God
to  skilful  doctors.  The  human  being  cannot  remain
in  one  condition :  different  maladies  occur  which  have
each  a  special  remedy.  The  skilful  physician  does
not  give  the  same  medicine  to  cure  each  disease  and
each  malady,  but  he  changes  remedies  and  medicines
according  to  the  different  necessities  of  the  diseases
and  constitutions.  One  person  may  have  a  severe

1  Acts  xv.  20.


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  109

illness  caused  by  fever,  and  the  skilled  doctor  will
give  him  cooling  remedies;  and  when  at  some  other
time  the  condition  of  this  person  has  changed,  and
fever  is  replaced  by  chills,  without  doubt  the  skilled
doctor  will  discard  cooling  medicine  and  permit  the
use  of  heating  drugs;  this  change  and  alteration  is
required  by  the  condition  of  the  patient,  and  is  an
evident  proof  of  the  skill  of  the  physician.

Consider,  could  the  Law  of  the  Old  Testament  be
enforced  at  this  epoch  and  time  ?  No,  in  the  name  of
God !  it  would  be  impossible  and  impracticable ;  there-
fore most  certainly  God  abrogated  the  laws  of  the  Old
Testament  at  the  time  of  Christ.  Reflect  also,  that
baptism  in  the  days  of  John  the  Baptist  was  used  to
awaken  and  admonish  the  people  to  repent  from  all
sin,  and  to  watch  for  the  appearance  of  the  Kingdom
of  Christ.  But  at  present  in  Asia,  the  Catholics  and
the  Orthodox  Church  plunge  newly-born  children  into
water  mixed  with  olive  oil,  and  many  of  them  become
ill  from  the  shock ;  at  the  time  of  baptism  they  struggle
and  become  agitated.  In  other  places,  the  clergy
sprinkle  the  water  of  baptism  on  the  forehead.  But
neither  from  the  first  form  nor  from  the  second  do  the
children  derive  any  spiritual  benefit.  Then  what  result
is  obtained  from  this  form?  Other  peoples  are
amazed,  and  wonder  why  the  infant  is  plunged  into
the  water,  since  this  is  neither  the  cause  of  the
spiritual  awakening  of  the  child,  nor  of  its  faith  or
conversion ;  but  it  is  only  a  custom  which  is  followed.
In  the  time  of  John  the  Baptist  it  was  not  so ;  no,  at
first  John  used  to  exhort  the  people,  and  to  guide  them
to  repentance  from  sin,  and  to  fill  them  with  the  desire


110          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

to  await  the  manifestation  of  Christ.  Whoever  received
the  ablution  of  baptism,  and  repented  of  sins  in  absolute
humility  and  meekness,  would  also  purify  and  cleanse
his  body  from  outward  impurities.  With  perfect
yearning,  night  and  day,  he  would  constantly  wait  for
the  manifestation  of  Christ,  and  the  entrance  to  the
Kingdom  of  the  Spirit  of  God.1

To  recapitulate :  our  meaning  is  that  the  change  and
modification  of  conditions,  and  the  altered  requirements
of  different  centuries  and  times,  are  the  cause  of  the
abrogation  of  laws.  For  a  time  comes  when  these  laws
are  no  longer  suitably  adapted  to  conditions.  Consider
how  very  different  are  the  requirements  of  the  first
centuries,  of  the  middle  ages,  and  of  modern  times.  Is
it  possible  that  the  laws  of  the  first  centuries  could  be
enforced  at  present?  It  is  evident  that  it  would  be
impossible  and  impracticable.  In  the  same  manner,
after  the  lapse  of  a  few  centuries,  the  requirements  of
the  present  time  will  not  be  the  same  as  those  of  the
future,  and  certainly  there  will  be  change  and  altera-
tion. In  Europe  the  laws  are  unceasingly  altered  and
modified ;  in  bygone  years,  how  many  laws  existed  in
the  organisations  and  systems  of  Europe,  which  are
now  abrogated  !  These  changes  and  alterations  are  due
to  the  variation  and  mutation  of  thought,  conditions,
and  customs.  If  it  were  not  so,  the  prosperity  of  the
world  of  humanity  would  be  wrecked.

For  example,  there  is  in  the  Pentateuch  a  law  that
if  any  one  break  the  Sabbath,  he  shall  be  put  to  death.
Moreover,  there  are  ten  sentences  of  death  in  the

1  i.e.  of  Christ,  whom  the  Muslims  frequently  designate  by  the
title  of  Ruh  u'llah,  the  Spirit  of  God.


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  111

Pentateuch.  Would  it  be  possible  to  keep  these  laws
in  our  time?  It  is  clear  that  it  would  be  absolutely
impossible.  Consequently  there  are  changes  and  modi-
fications in  the  laws,  and  these  are  a  sufficient  proof  of
the  supreme  wisdom  of  God.

This  subject  needs  deep  thought.  Then  the  cause
of  these  changes  will  be  evident  and  apparent.

Blessed  are  those  who  reflect !


XXI

THE  SYMBOLISM  OF  THE  BREAD  AND
THE  WINE

Question. — The  Christ  said:  '  I  am  the  living  bread  which
came  down  from  heaven,  that  a  man  may  eat  thereof
and  not  die.'  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  utterance  ?

Answer. — This  bread  signifies  the  heavenly  food  and
divine  perfections.  So,  'If  any  man  eateth  of  this
bread'  means  if  any  man  acquires  heavenly  bounty,
receives  the  divine  light,  or  partakes  of  Christ's  perfec-
tions, he  thereby  gains  everlasting  life.  The  blood
also  signifies  the  spirit  of  life  and  the  divine  perfections,
the  lordly  splendour  and  eternal  bounty.  For  all  the
members  of  the  body  gain  vital  substance  from  the
circulation  of  the  blood.

In  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,  chapter  6  verse  26,  it  is
written :  '  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  the  miracles,
but  because  ye  did  eat  of  the  loaves  and  were  filled.'

It  is  evident  that  the  bread  of  which  the  disciples
ate  and  were  filled,  was  the  heavenly  bounty;  for  in
verse  33  of  the  same  chapter  it  is  said  : '  For  the  bread
of  God  is  he  which  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and
giveth  life  unto  the  world.'  It  is  clear  that  the  body
of  Christ  did  not  descend  from  heaven,  but  it  came
from  the  womb  of  Mary;  and  that  which  descended
from  the  heaven  of  God  was  the  spirit  of  Christ.  As


112


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  113

the  Jews  thought  that  Christ  spoke  of  his  body,  they
made  objections,  for  it  is  said  in  the  42nd  verse  of  the
same  chapter :  '  And  they  said,  Is  not  this  Jesus  the
son  of  Joseph,  whose  father  and  mother  we  know  ?  how
is  it  then  that  he  saith,  I  came  down  from  heaven  ? '

Reflect  how  clear  it  is  that  what  Christ  meant  by
the  heavenly  bread  was  his  spirit,  his  bounties,  his
perfections,  and  his  teachings ;  for  it  is  said  in  the  63rd
verse :  '  It  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth,  the  flesh  pro-
fiteth  nothing/

Therefore  it  is  evident  that  the  spirit  of  Christ  is  a
heavenly  grace  which  descends  from  heaven;  whoso-
ever receives  light  from  that  spirit  in  abundance,  that
is  to  say  the  heavenly  teachings;  finds  everlasting  life.
That  is  why  it  is  said  in  the  35th  verse :  '  And  Jesus
said  unto  them,  I  am  the  bread  of  life :  he  that  cometh
to  me  shall  never  hunger;  and  he  that  believeth  on
me  shall  never  thirst.'

Notice  that '  coming  to  him  '  he  expresses  as  eating,
and  '  belief  in  him '  as  drinking.  Then  it  is  evident
and  established  that  the  celestial  food  is  the  divine
bounties,  the  spiritual  splendours,  the  heavenly  teach-
ings, the  universal  meaning  of  Christ.  To  eat  is  to
draw  near  to  him,  and  to  drink  is  to  believe  in  him.
For  Christ  had  an  elemental  body  and  a  celestial  form.
The  elemental  body  was  crucified,  but  the  heavenly
form  is  living  and  eternal,  and  the  cause  of  everlasting
life ;  the  first  was  the  human  nature,  and  the  second  is
the  divine  nature.  It  is  thought  by  some  that  the
Eucharist  is  the  reality  of  Christ,  and  that  the  Divinity
and  the  Holy  Spirit  descend  into  and  exist  in  it.  Now
when  once  the  Eucharist  is  taken,  after  a  few  moments

H


114         SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

it  is  simply  disintegrated,  and  entirely  transformed.
Therefore  how  can  such  a  thought  be  conceived  ?  God
forbid !  certainly  it  is  a  pure  fantasy.

To  conclude :  through  the  manifestation  of  Christ,
the  divine  teachings  which  are  an  eternal  bounty,  were
spread  abroad,  the  light  of  guidance  shone  forth,  and
the  spirit  of  life  was  conferred  on  man.  Whoever
found  guidance  became  living,  whoever  remained  lost
was  seized  by  enduring  death.  This  bread  which  came
down  from  heaven  was  the  divine  body  of  Christ,  his
spiritual  elements,  which  the  disciples  ate,  and  through
which  they  gained  eternal  life.

The  disciples  had  taken  many  meals  from  the  hand
of  Christ;  why  was  the  last  supper  distinguished
from  the  others?  It  is  evident  that  the  heavenly
bread  did  not  signify  this  material  bread,  but  rather
the  divine  nourishment  of  the  spiritual  body  of
Christ,  the  divine  graces  and  heavenly  perfections  of
which  his  disciples  partook,  and  with  which  they
became  filled.

In  the  same  way,  reflect  that  when  Christ  blessed
the  bread  and  gave  it  to  his  disciples  saying,  '  This  is
my  body,'  and  gave  grace  to  them,  he  was  with  them
in  person,  in  presence,  and  form.  He  was  not  trans-
formed into  bread  and  wine;  if  he  had  been  turned
into  bread  and  wine,  he  could  not  have  remained  with
the  disciples  in  body,  in  person,  and  in  presence.

Then  it  is  clear  that  the  bread  and  wine  were  symbols
which  signified:  I  have  given  you  my  bounties  and
perfections,  and  when  you  have  received  this  bounty,
you  have  gained  eternal  life  and  have  partaken  of  your
share  and  your  portion  of  the  heavenly  nourishment.


XXII
MIRACLES

Question. — It  is  recorded  that  miracles  were  performed
by  Christ :  are  the  reports  of  these  miracles  really  to  be
accepted  literally,  or  have  they  another  meaning  ?  It
has  been  proved  by  exact  science  that  the  essence  of
things  does  not  change,  and  that  all  beings  are  under
one  universal  law  and  organisation  from  which  they
cannot  deviate ;  and  therefore  that  which  is  contrary  to
universal  law  is  impossible.

Answer. — The  Holy  Manifestations  are  the  sources  of
miracles  and  the  originators  of  wonderful  signs.  For
them,  any  difficult  and  impracticable  thing  is  possible
and  easy.  For  through  a  supernatural  power  wonders
appear  from  them,  and  by  this  power,  which  is  beyond
nature,  they  influence  the  world  of  nature.  From  all
the  Manifestations  marvellous  things  have  appeared.

But  in  the  Holy  Books  an  especial  terminology  is
employed ;  and  for  the  Manifestations  these  miracles
and  wonderful  signs  have  no  importance;  they  do
not  even  wish  to  mention  them.  For,  if  we  consider
miracles  a  great  proof,  they  are  still  only  proofs  and
arguments  for  those  who  are  present  when  they  are
performed,  and  not  for  those  who  are  absent.

For  example,  if  we  relate  to  a  seeker,  a  stranger  to
Moses  and  Christ,  marvellous  signs,  he  will  deny  them

115


116          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  will  say :  '  Wonderful  signs  are  also  continually
related  of  false  gods  by  the  testimony  of  many  people,
and  they  are  affirmed  in  the  Books.  The  Brahmans
have  written  a  book  about  wonderful  prodigies  from
Brahma.'  He  will  also  say :  '  How  can  we  know  that
the  Jews  and  the  Christians  speak  the  truth,  and  that
the  Brahmans  tell  a  lie  ?  For  both  are  generally  ad-
mitted traditions,  which  are  collected  in  books,  and
may  be  supposed  to  be  true  or  false.'  The  same  may
be  said  of  other  religions :  if  one  is  true,  all  are  true ;
if  one  is  accepted,  all  must  be  accepted.  Therefore
miracles  are  not  a  proof.  For  if  they  are  proofs  for
those  who  are  present,  they  fail  as  proofs  to  those  who
are  absent.

But  in  the  day  of  the  Manifestation  the  people  with
insight  see  that  all  the  conditions  of  the  Manifestation
are  miracles,  for  they  are  superior  to  all  others,  and
this  alone  is  an  absolute  miracle.  Recollect  that
Christ,  solitary  and  alone,  without  a  helper  or  protector,
without  armies  and  legions,  and  under  the  greatest
oppression,  uplifted  the  standard  of  God  before  all  the
people  of  the  world,  and  withstood  them,  and  finally
conquered  all,  although  outwardly  he  was  crucified.
Now  this  is  a  veritable  miracle  which  can  never  be
denied.  There  is  no  need  of  any  other  proof  of  the
truth  of  Christ.

The  outward  miracles  have  no  importance  for  the
people  of  Reality.  If  a  blind  man  receive  sight,  for
example,  he  will  finally  again  become  sightless,  for  he
will  die,  and  be  deprived  of  all  his  senses  and  powers.
Therefore  causing  the  blind  man  to  see  is  comparatively
of  little  importance,  for  this  faculty  of  sight  will  at  last


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  117

disappear.  If  the  body  of  a  dead  person  be  resuscitated,
of  what  use  is  it  since  the  body  will  die  again  ?  But  it
is  important  to  give  perception  and  eternal  life,  that  is,
the  spiritual  and  divine  life.  For  this  physical  life  is
not  immortal,  and  its  existence  is  equivalent  to  non-
existence.  So  it  is  that  Christ  said  to  one  of  his
disciples:  'Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead';  for  'That
which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is
born  of  the  spirit  is  spirit.'

Observe:  those  who  in  appearance  were  physically
alive,  Christ  considered  dead;  for  life  is  the  eternal
life,  and  existence  is  the  real  existence.  Wherever  in
the  Holy  Books  they  speak  of  raising  the  dead,  the
meaning  is  that  the  dead  were  blessed  by  eternal  life ;
where  it  is  said  that  the  blind  received  sight,  the  signi-
fication is  that  he  obtained  the  true  perception ;  where
it  is  said  a  deaf  man  received  hearing,  the  meaning  is
that  he  acquired  spiritual  and  heavenly  hearing.  This
is  ascertained  from  the  text  of  the  Gospel  where  Christ
said:  'These  are  like  those  of  whom  Isaiah  said,
They  have  eyes  and  see  not,  they  have  ears  and  hear
not ;  and  I  healed  them.'

The  meaning  is  not  that  the  Manifestations  are
unable  to  perform  miracles,  for  they  have  all  power.
But  for  them  inner  sight,  spiritual  healing,  and  eternal
life  are  the  valuable  and  important  things.  Con-
sequently, whenever  it  is  recorded  in  the  Holy  Books
that  such  an  one  was  blind  and  recovered  his  sight,  the
meaning  is  that  he  was  inwardly  blind,  and  that  he
obtained  spiritual  vision,  or  that  he  was  ignorant  and
became  wise,  or  that  he  was  negligent  and  became
heedful,  or  that  he  was  worldly  and  became  heavenly.


118          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

As  this  inner  sight,  hearing,  life,  and  healing  are
eternal,  they  are  of  importance.  What,  comparatively,
is  the  importance,  the  value,  and  the  worth  of  this
animal  life  with  its  powers?  In  a  few  days  it  will
cease  like  fleeting  thoughts.  For  example,  if  one  re-
lights an  extinguished  lamp,  it  will  again  become
extinguished;  but  the  light  of  the  sun  is  always
luminous.  This  is  of  importance.


Question. — What  is  the  meaning  of  Christ's  resurrec-
tion after  three  days  ?

Answer. — The  resurrections  of  the  Divine  Manifesta-
tions are  not  of  the  body.  All  their  states,  their  condi-
tions, their  acts,  the  things  they  have  established,  their
teachings,  their  expressions,  their  parables,  and  their
instructions  have  a  spiritual  and  divine  signification,
and  have  no  connection  with  material  things.  For
example,  there  is  the  subject  of  Christ's  coming  from
heaven:  it  is  clearly  stated  in  many  places  in  the
Gospel  that  the  Son  of  man  came  from  heaven,  he  is
in  heaven,  and  he  will  go  to  heaven.  So  in  chapter  6
verse  38  of  the  Gospel  of  John  it  is  written :  '  For  I
came  down  from  heaven ' ;  and  also  in  verse  42  we  find  :
'  And  they  said,  Is  not  this  Jesus,  the  son  of  Joseph,
whose  father  and  mother  we  know  ?  How  is  it  then
that  he  saith,  I  came  down  from  heaven  ? '  Also  in
John,  chapter  3  verse  13 :  '  And  no  man  hath  ascended
up  to  heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from  heaven,
even  the  Son  of  man  which  is  in  heaven.'

Observe  that  it  is  said  '  The  Son  of  man  is  in  heaven,'
while  at  that  time  Christ  was  on  earth.  Notice  also
that  it  is  said  that  Christ  came  from  heaven,  though


119


120          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

he  came  from  the  womb  of  Mary,  and  his  body  was
born  of  Mary.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  when  it  is  said
that  the  Son  of  man  is  come  from  heaven,  this  has  not
an  outward  but  an  inward  signification ;  it  is  a  spiritual,
not  a  material,  fact.  The  meaning  is  that  though,
apparently,  Christ  was  born  from  the  womb  of  Mary,
in  reality  he  came  from  heaven,  from  the  centre  of  the
Sun  of  Reality,  from  the  Divine  World,  and  the  Spiritual
Kingdom.  And  as  it  has  become  evident  that  Christ
came  from  the  spiritual  heaven  of  the  Divine  Kingdom,
therefore  his  disappearance  under  the  earth  for  three
days  has  an  inner  signification,  and  is  not  an  outward
fact.  In  the  same  way,  his  resurrection  from  the
interior  of  the  earth  is  also  symbolical;  it  is  a
spiritual  and  divine  fact,  and  not  material ;  and  like-
wise his  ascension  to  heaven  is  a  spiritual  and  not
material  ascension.

Beside  these  explanations,  it  has  been  established
and  proved  by  science  that  the  visible  heaven  is  a  limit-
less area,  void  and  empty,  where  innumerable  stars  and
planets  revolve.

Therefore  we  say  that  the  meaning  of  Christ's  resur-
rection is  as  follows:  the  disciples  were  troubled  and
agitated  after  the  martyrdom  of  Christ.  The  Reality
of  Christ,  which  signifies  his  teachings,  his  bounties,
his  perfections,  and  his  spiritual  power,  was  hidden
and  concealed  for  two  or  three  days  after  his  martyr-
dom, and  was  not  resplendent  and  manifest.  No,
rather  it  was  lost;  for  the  believers  were  few  in
number  and  were  troubled  and  agitated.  The  Cause  of
Christ  was  like  a  lifeless  body ;  and,  when  after  three
days  the  disciples  became  assured  and  steadfast,  and


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  121

began  to  serve  the  Cause  of  Christ,  and  resolved  to
spread  the  divine  teachings,  putting  his  counsels  into
practice,  and  arising  to  serve  him,  the  Reality  of  Christ
became  resplendent  and  his  bounty  appeared;  his
religion  found  life,  his  teachings  and  his  admonitions
became  evident  and  visible.  In  other  words,  the  Cause
of  Christ  was  like  a  lifeless  body,  until  the  life  and  the
bounty  of  the  Holy  Spirit  surrounded  it.

Such  is  the  meaning  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,
and  this  was  a  true  resurrection.  But  as  the  clergy
have  neither  understood  the  meaning  of  the  Gospels
nor  comprehended  the  symbols,  therefore  it  has  been
said  that  religion  is  in  contradiction  to  science,  and
science  in  opposition  to  religion ;  as,  for  example,  this
subject  of  the  ascension  of  Christ  with  an  elemental
body  to  the  visible  heaven  is  contrary  to  the  science  of
mathematics.  But  when  the  truth  of  this  subject
becomes  clear,  and  the  symbol  is  explained,  science  in
no  way  contradicts  it ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  science  and
the  intelligence  affirm  it.


XXIV

THE  DESCENT  OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT
UPON  THE  APOSTLES

Question. — What  is  the  manner,  and  what  is  the
meaning,  of  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the
apostles,  as  described  in  the  Gospel  ?

Answer. — The  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  not  like
the  entrance  of  air  into  man ;  it  is  an  expression  and  a
simile,  rather  than  an  exact  or  a  literal  image.  No,
rather  it  is  like  the  entrance  of  the  image  of  the  sun
into  the  mirror ;  that  is  to  say,  its  splendour  becomes
apparent  in  it.

After  the  death  of  Christ  the  disciples  were  troubled,
and  their  ideas  and  thoughts  were  discordant  and  con-
tradictory ;  later,  they  became  firm  and  united,  and  at
the  feast  of  Pentecost  they  gathered  together,  and
detached  themselves  from  the  things  of  this  world.
Disregarding  themselves,  they  renounced  their  comfort
and  worldly  happiness,  sacrificing  their  body  and  soul
to  the  Beloved,  abandoning  their  houses,  and  becoming
wanderers  and  homeless,  even  forgetting  their  own
existence.  Then  they  received  the  help  of  God,  and
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  became  manifested ;  the
spirituality  of  Christ  triumphed,  and  the  love  of  God
reigned.  They  were  given  help  at  that  time,  and  dispersed

122


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  123

in  different  directions,  teaching  the  Cause  of  God,  and
giving  forth  proofs  and  evidences.

So  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  apostles
means  their  attraction  by  the  Christ  Spirit,  whereby
they  acquired  stability  and  firmness.  Through  the
spirit  of  the  love  of  God  they  gained  a  new  life,  and
they  saw  Christ  living,  helping,  and  protecting  them.
They  were  like  drops  and  they  became  seas,  they  were
like  feeble  insects  and  they  became  majestic  eagles,
they  were  weak  and  became  powerful.  They  were  like
mirrors  facing  the  sun ;  verily,  some  of  the  light  became
manifest  in  them.


XXV
THE  HOLY  SPIRIT

Question. — What  is  the  Holy  Spirit  ?

Answer. — The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Bounty  of  God,  and
the  luminous  rays  which  emanate  from  the  Manifesta-
tions ;  for  the  focus  of  the  rays  of  the  Sun  of  Reality  was
Christ ;  and  from  this  glorious  focus,  which  is  the  Reality
of  Christ,  the  Bounty  of  God  reflected  upon  the  other
mirrors  which  were  the  reality  of  the  apostles.  The
descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  apostles  signifies
that  the  glorious  divine  bounties  reflected  and  appeared
in  their  reality.  Moreover,  entrance  and  exit,  descent
and  ascent,  are  characteristics  of  bodies  and  not  of
spirits.  That  is  to  say,  sensible  realities  enter  and  come
forth,  but  intellectual  subtleties  and  mental  realities,
such  as  intelligence,  love,  knowledge,  imagination  and
thought,  do  not  enter,  nor  come  forth,  nor  descend,
but  rather  they  have  direct  connection.

For  example,  knowledge,  which  is  a  state  attained  to
by  the  intelligence,  is  an  intellectual  condition;  and
entering  and  coming  out  of  the  mind  are  imaginary
conditions ;  but  the  mind  is  connected  with  the
acquisition  of  knowledge,  like  images  reflected  in  a
mirror.

Therefore,  as  it  is  evident  and  clear  that  the  intel-

124


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  125

lectual  realities  do  not  enter  and  descend,  and  it  is
absolutely  impossible  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should
ascend  and  descend,  enter,  come  out,  or  penetrate,  it
can  only  be  that  the  Holy  Spirit  appears  in  splendour,
as  the  sun  appears  in  the  mirror.

In  some  passages  in  the  Holy  Books  the  Spirit  is
spoken  of,  signifying  a  certain  person ;  as  it  is  currently
said  in  speech  and  conversation  that  such  a  person  is
an  embodied  spirit,  or  he  is  a  personification  of  mercy
and  generosity.  In  this  case  it  is  the  light  we  look  at,
and  not  the  glass.

In  the  Gospel  of  John,  in  speaking  of  the  Promised
One  who  was  to  come  after  Christ,  it  is  said  in  chapter
16,  verses  12,  13 :  'I  have  yet  many  things  to  say  unto
you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now.  Howbeit  when  he,
the  Spirit  of  Truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all
truth :  for  he  shall  not  speak  of  himself ;  but  whatso-
ever he  shall  hear,  that  shall  he  speak.'

Now  consider  carefully  that  from  these  words, '  for
he  shall  not  speak  of  himself;  but  whatsoever  he  shall
hear,  that  shall  he  speak,'  it  is  clear  that  the  Spirit  of
Truth  is  embodied  in  a  man  who  has  individuality,  who
has  ears  to  hear  and  a  tongue  to  speak  In  the  same
way  the  name  'Spirit  of  God'  is  used  in  relation  to
Christ ;  as  you  speak  of  a  light — meaning  both  the  light
and  the  lamp.


XXVI

THE  SECOND  COMING  OF  CHRIST  AND
THE  DAY  OF  JUDGMENT

IT  is  said  in  the  Holy  Books  that  Christ  will  come
again,  and  that  his  coming  depends  upon  the  fulfilment
of  certain  signs  :  when  he  comes  it  will  be  with  these
signs.  For  example,  '  The  sun  will  be  darkened,  and
the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the  stars  shall
fall  from  heaven.  .  .  .  And  then  shall  appear  the  sign
of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven  :  and  then  shall  all  the
tribes  of  the  earth  mourn,  and  they  shall  see  the  Son
of  man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and
great  glory.'  Baha'u'llah  has  explained  these  verses  in
the  Kitabu'l-Iqan  :  l  there  is  no  need  of  repetition  :  refer
to  it  and  you  will  understand  these  sayings.

But  I  have  something  further  to  say  upon  this
subject.  At  his  first  coming  also,  Christ  came  from
heaven,  as  it  is  explicitly  stated  in  the  Gospel.  Christ
himself  says  :  '  And  no  man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,
but  he  that  came  down  from  heaven,  even  the  Son  of
man  which  is  in  heaven.'

It  is  clear  to  all  that  Christ  came  from  heaven,
although  apparently  he  came  from  the  womb  of  Mary.


one  of  the  first  works  of  Baha'u'llah,  written  at
Baghdad,  before  the  declaration  of  his  manifestation.
126


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  127

At  the  first  coming  he  came  from  heaven,  though
apparently  from  the  womb ;  in  the  same  way  also,  at
his  second  coming,  he  will  come  from  heaven,  though
apparently  from  the  womb.  The  conditions  that  are
indicated  in  the  Gospel  for  the  second  coming  of  Christ
are  the  same  as  those  that  were  mentioned  for  the  first
coming,  as  we  before  said.

The  Book  of  Isaiah  announces  that  the  Messiah  will
conquer  the  East  and  the  West,  and  all  nations  of  the
world  will  come  under  his  shadow,  that  his  Kingdom
will  be  established,  that  he  will  come  from  an  unknown
place,  that  the  sinners  will  be  judged,  and  that  justice
will  prevail  to  such  a  degree  that  the  wolf  and  the
lamb,  the  leopard  and  the  kid,  the  sucking  child  and
the  asp,  shall  all  gather  at  one  spring,  and  in  one
meadow,  and  one  dwelling.1  The  first  coming  was  also
under  these  conditions,  though  outwardly  none  of  them
came  to  pass.  Therefore  the  Jews  rejected  Christ,  and,
God  forbid !  called  the  Messiah  masikh?  considered
him  to  be  the  destroyer  of  the  edifice  of  God,  regarded
him  as  the  breaker  of  the  Sabbath  and  the  Law,  and
sentenced  him  to  death.  Nevertheless  each  one  of
these  conditions  had  a  signification  that  the  Jews  did
not  understand :  therefore  they  were  debarred  from
perceiving  the  truth  of  Christ.

The  second  coming  of  Christ  also  will  be  in  like
manner :  the  signs  and  conditions  which  have  been
spoken  of  all  have  meanings,  and  are  not  to  be  taken

1  In  these  conversations,  as  the  reader  will  have  already  observed,
'  Abdu'1-Baha  desires  rather  to  indicate  the  meaning  of  certain  passages
of  the  Scriptures  than  to  quote  the  exact  text.

2  Masikh — i.e.  the  monster.      In  Arabic  there  is  a  play  upon  the
words  Matii/i,  the  Messiah,  and  tnasikh,  the  monster.


128          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

literally.  Among  other  things  it  is  said  that  the  sta  rs
will  fall  upon  the  earth.  The  stars  are  endless  and
innumerable,  and  modern  mathematicians  have  estab  -
lished  and  proved  scientifically  that  the  globe  of  the
sun  is  estimated  to  be  about  one  million  and  a  half
times  greater  than  the  earth,  and  each  of  the  fixed  stars
to  be  a  thousand  times  larger  than  the  sun.  If  these
stars  were  to  fall  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth,  how
could  they  find  place  there  ?  It  would  be  as  though  a
thousand  million  of  Himalaya  mountains  were  to  fall
upon  a  grain  of  mustard  seed.  According  to  reason
and  science  this  thing  is  quite  impossible.  What  is
even  more  strange  is  that  Christ  said :  '  Perhaps  I  shall
come  when  you  are  yet  asleep,  for  the  coming  of  the
Son  of  man  is  like  the  coming  of  a  thief.'  Perhaps  the
thief  will  be  in  the  house  and  the  owner  will  not
know  it.

It  is  clear  and  evident  that  these  signs  have  symbolic
signification,  and  that  they  are  not  literal.  They  are
fully  explained  in  the  Kitdbu'l-Iqan :  refer  to  it.


XXVII
THE  TRINITY

Question. — What  is  the  meaning  of  the  Trinity,  of  the
Three  Persons  in  One  ?

Answer. — The  Divine  Reality  which  is  purified  and
sanctified  from  the  understanding  of  human  beings
and  which  can  never  be  imagined  by  the  people  of
wisdom  and  of  intelligence,  is  exempt  from  all  con-
ception. That  Lordly  Reality  admits  of  no  division;
for  division  and  multiplicity  are  properties  of  creatures,
which  are  contingent  existences,  and  not  accidents
which  happen  to  the  self-existent.

The  Divine  Reality  is  sanctified  by  singleness,  then
how  much  more  by  plurality.  The  descent  of  that
Lordly  Reality  into  conditions  and  degrees  would  be
equivalent  to  imperfection  and  contrary  to  perfection,
and  is  therefore  absolutely  impossible.  It  perpetually
has  been,  and  is,  in  the  exaltation  of  holiness  and
sanctity.  All  that  is  mentioned  of  the  Manifestations
and  Dawning-places  of  God  signifies  the  divine  reflec-
tion, and  not  a  descent  into  the  conditions  of
existence.1

God  is  pure  perfection,  and  creatures  are  but  im-
perfections. For  God  to  descend  into  the  conditions

1  Cf.  'Pantheism, 'p.  327.
I


130          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  existence  would  be  the  greatest  of  imperfections ;  on
the  contrary,  His  manifestation,  His  appearance,  His
rising  are  like  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  a  clear,  pure,
polished  mirror.  All  the  creatures  are  evident  signs  of
God,  like  the  earthly  beings  upon  all  of  which  the  rays
of  the  sun  shine.  But  upon  the  plains,  the  mountains,
the  trees  and  fruits,  only  a  portion  of  the  light  shines,
through  which  they  become  visible,  and  are  reared,  and
attain  to  the  object  of  their  existence;  while  the  Per-
fect Man1  is  in  the  condition  of  a  clear  mirror,  in
which  the  Sun  of  Reality  becomes  visible  and  manifest
with  all  its  qualities  and  perfections.  So  the  Reality  of
Christ  was  a  clear  and  polished  mirror  of  the  greatest
purity  and  fineness.  The  Sun  of  Reality,  the  Essence
of  Divinity,  reflected  itself  in  this  mirror,  and  mani-
fested its  light  and  heat  in  it ;  but  from  the  exaltation
of  its  holiness,  and  the  heaven  of  its  sanctity,  the  Sun
did  not  descend  to  dwell  and  abide  in  the  mirror.  No,
it  continues  to  subsist  in  its  exaltation  and  sublimity,
while  appearing  and  becoming  manifest  in  the  mirror
in  beauty  and  perfection.

Now  if  we  say  that  we  have  seen  the  Sun  in  two
mirrors — one  the  Christ  and  one  the  Holy  Spirit — that
is  to  say,  that  we  have  seen  three  Suns,  one  in  heaven
and  the  two  others  on  the  earth,  we  speak  truly.  And
if  we  say  that  there  is  one  Sun,  and  it  is  pure  single-
ness, and  has  no  partner  and  equal,  we  again  speak
truly.

The  epitome  of  the  discourse  is  that  the  Reality  of
Christ  was  a  clear  mirror,  and  the  Sun  of  Reality,  that
is  to  say  the  Essence  "of  Oneness,  with  its  infinite

1  The  Divine  Manifestation.


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  131

perfections  and  attributes,  became  visible  in  the  mirror.
The  meaning  is  not  that  the  Sun,  which  is  the  Essence
of  the  Divinity,  became  divided  and  multiplied ;  for  the
Sun  is  one,  but  it  appeared  in  the  mirror.  This  is  why
Christ  said, '  The  Father  is  in  the  Son,'  meaning  that
the  Sun  is  visible  and  manifest  in  this  mirror.

The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Bounty  of  God  which  becomes
visible  and  evident  in  the  Reality  of  Christ.  The
Sonship  station  is  the  heart  of  Christ,  and  the  Holy
Spirit  is  the  station  of  the  spirit  of  Christ.  Hence  it
has  become  certain  and  proved  that  the  Essence  of
Divinity  is  absolutely  unique,  and  has  no  equal,  no
likeness,  no  equivalent.

This  is  the  signification  of  the  Three  Persons  of  the
Trinity.  If  it  were  otherwise,  the  foundations  of  the
Religion  of  God  would  rest  upon  an  illogical  proposition
which  the  mind  could  never  conceive,  and  how  can
the  mind  be  forced  to  believe  a  thing  which  it  cannot
conceive  ?  A  thing  cannot  be  grasped  by  the  intelli-
gence except  when  it  is  clothed  in  an  intelligible  form ;
otherwise  it  is  but  an  effort  of  the  imagination.

It  has  now  become  clear,  from  this  explanation,  what
is  the  meaning  of  the  Three  Persons  of  the  Trinity.
The  Oneness  of  God  is  also  proved.


XXVIII

EXPLANATION    OF    VERSE    FIVE,    CHAPTER
SEVENTEEN,  OF  THE  GOSPEL  OF  ST.  JOHN

'  AND  now,  O  Father,  glorify  Thou  me  with  Thine
own  self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  Thee  before
the  world  was.'

There  are  two  kinds  of  priorities :  one  is  essential,  and
is  not  preceded  by  a  cause,  but  its  existence  is  in  itself.
As,  for  example,  the  sun  has  light  in  itself,  for  its
shining  is  not  dependent  on  the  light  of  other  stars :
this  is  called  an  essential  light;  but  the  light  of  the
moon  is  received  from  the  sun,  for  the  moon  is  depen-
dent on  the  sun  for  its  light ;  therefore  the  sun,  with
regard  to  light,  is  the  cause,  and  the  moon  becomes  the
effect.  The  former  is  the  ancient,  the  precedent,  the
antecedent,  while  the  latter  is  the  preceded  and  the
last.

The  second  sort  of  pre-existence  is  the  pre-existence
of  time,  and  that  has  no  beginning.  The  Word  of
God1  is  sanctified  from  time.  The  past,  the  present,
the  future,  all,  in  relation  to  God,  are  equal.  Yester-
day, to-day,  to-morrow  do  not  exist  in  the  sun.

In  the  same  way  there  is  a  priority  with  regard  to
glory:  that  is  to  say,  the  most  glorious  precedes  the

1  i.e.  the  Reality  of  Christ.
132


SOME   CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  133

glorious.  Therefore  the  Reality  of  Christ,  who  is  the
Word  of  God,  with  regard  to  essence,  attributes,  and
glory,  certainly  precedes  the  creatures.  Before  appear-
ing in  the  human  form,  the  Word  of  God  was  in  the
utmost  sanctity  and  glory,  existing  in  perfect  beauty
and  splendour  in  the  height  of  its  magnificence.  When
through  the  wisdom  of  God  the  Most  High  it  shone
from  the  heights  of  glory  in  the  world  of  the  body,  the
Word  of  God,  through  this  body,  became  oppressed,
so  that  it  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Jews,  and  became
the  captive  of  the  tyrannical  and  ignorant,  and  at  last
was  crucified.  That  is  why  he  addressed  God,  saying :
'  Free  me  from  the  bonds  of  the  world  of  the  body,  and
liberate  me  from  this  cage,  so  that  I  may  ascend  to
the  heights  of  honour  and  glory,  and  attain  unto  the
former  grandeur  and  might  which  existed  before  the
bodily  world,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  eternal  world
and  may  ascend  to  the  original  abode,  the  placeless
world,  the  invisible  kingdom.'

It  is  thus  that  you  see  even  in  the  kingdom  of  this
world,  that  is  to  say  in  the  realm  of  souls  and  countries,
that  the  glory  and  the  grandeur  of  Christ  appeared  in
this  earth  after  his  ascension.  When  in  the  world  of
the  body,  he  was  subject  to  the  contempt  and  jeers  of
the  weakest  nation  of  the  world,  the  Jews,  who  thought
it  fitting  to  set  a  crown  of  thorns  upon  his  sacred
head.  But  after  his  ascension  the  bejewelled  crowns
of  all  the  kings  were  humbled  and  bowed  before  the
crown  of  thorns.

Behold  the  glory  that  the  Word  of  God  attained
even  in  this  world  '


XXIX

EXPLANATION  OF  VERSE  TWENTY  -  TWO,
CHAPTER  FIFTEEN,  OF  THE  FIRST  EPISTLE
OF  ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  CORINTHIANS

Question. — In  verse  22  of  chapter  15  of  1  Corinthians
it  is  written :  '  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ
shall  all  be  made  alive.'  What  is  the  meaning  of  these
words  ?

Answer. — Know  that  there  are  two  natures  in  man :
the  physical  nature  and  the  spiritual  nature.  The
physical  nature  is  inherited  from  Adam,  and  the
spiritual  nature  is  inherited  from  the  Reality  of  the
Word  of  God,  which  is  the  spirituality  of  Christ.  The
physical  nature  is  born  of  Adam,  but  the  spiritual
nature  is  born  from  the  bounty  of  the  Holy  Spirit;
the  first  is  the  source  of  all  imperfection,  the  second  is
the  source  of  all  perfection.

The  Christ  sacrificed  himself  so  that  men  might  be
freed  from  the  imperfections  of  the  physical  nature,
and  might  become  possessed  of  the  virtues  of  the
spiritual  nature.  This  spiritual  nature,  which  came
into  existence  through  the  bounty  of  the  Divine
Reality,  is  the  reunion  of  all  perfections,  and  appears
through  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  it  is  the  divine
perfections,  it  is  light,  spirituality,  guidance,  exaltation,

134


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  135

high  aspiration,  justice,  love,  grace,  kindness  to  all,
philanthropy,  the  essence  of  life.  It  is  the  reflection  of
the  splendour  of  the  Sun  of  Reality.

The  Christ  is  the  central  point  of  the  Holy  Spirit :
he  is  born  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  he  is  raised  up  by  the
Holy  Spirit ;  he  is  the  descendant  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
That  is  to  say,  that  the  Reality  of  Christ  does  not
descend  from  Adam ;  no,  it  is  born  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
Therefore  this  verse  hi  Corinthians, '  As  in  Adam  all
die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive,'  means,
according  to  this  terminology,  that  Adam l  is  the  father
of  man,  that  is  to  say,  he  is  the  cause  of  the  physical
life  of  mankind ;  his  was  the  physical  fatherhood.  He
is  a  living  soul,  but  he  is  not  the  giver  of  spiritual  life.
Whereas  Christ  is  the  cause  of  the  spiritual  life  of  man,
and  with  regard  to  the  spirit,  his  was  the  spiritual
fatherhood.  Adam  is  a  living  soul,  Christ  is  a  quicken-
ing spirit.

This  physical  world  of  man  is  subject  to  the  power
of  the  lusts,  and  sin  is  the  consequence  of  this  power
of  the  lusts,  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the  laws  of  justice
and  holiness.  The  body  of  man  is  a  captive  of  nature ;
it  will  act  in  accordance  with  whatever  nature  orders.
It  is  therefore  certain  that  sins  such  as  anger,  jealousy,
dispute,  covetousness,  avarice,  ignorance,  prejudice,
hatred,  pride,  and  tyranny  exist  in  the  physical  world.
All  these  brutal  qualities  exist  in  the  nature  of  man.
A  man  who  has  not  had  a  spiritual  education  is  a
brute.  Like  the  savages  of  Africa,  whose  actions,
habits,  and  morals  are  purely  sensual,  they  act  accord -

1  Abu'l-bashar,  i.e.  the  father  of  man,  is  one  of  the  titles  given  by
the  Muslims  to  Adam.


136          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

ing  to  the  demands  of  nature  to  such  a  degree  that
they  rend  and  eat  one  another.  Thus  it  is  evident  that
the  physical  world  of  man  is  a  world  of  sin.  In  this
physical  world  man  is  not  distinguished  from  the
animal.

All  sin  comes  from  the  demands  of  nature,  and  these
demands,  which  arise  from  the  physical  qualities,  are
not  sins  with  respect  to  the  animals,  while  for  man  they
are  sin.  The  animal  is  the  source  of  imperfections,
such  as  anger,  sensuality,  jealousy,  avarice,  cruelty,
pride:  all  these  defects  are  found  in  animals,  but  do
not  constitute  sins.  But  in  man  they  are  sins.

Adam  is  the  cause  of  man's  physical  life;  but  the
Reality  of  Christ,  that  is  to  say  the  Word  of  God,  is  the
cause  of  spiritual  life.  It  is  'a  quickening  spirit ' :
meaning  that  all  the  imperfections  which  come  from
the  requirements  of  the  physical  life  of  man,  are
transformed  into  human  perfections  by  the  teachings
and  education  of  that  spirit.  Therefore  Christ  was  a
quickening  spirit,  and  the  cause  of  life  in  all  mankind.

Adam  was  the  cause  of  physical  life,  and  as  the
physical  world  of  man  is  the  world  of  imperfections,
and  imperfections  are  the  equivalent  of  death,  Paul
compared  the  physical  imperfections  to  death.

But  the  mass  of  the  Christians  believe  that  as  Adam
ate  of  the  forbidden  tree,  he  sinned  in  that  he  dis-
obeyed, and  that  the  disastrous  consequence  of  this
disobedience  have  been  transmitted  as  a  heritage,  and
have  remained  among  his  descendants.  Hence  Adam
became  the  cause  of  the  death  of  humanity.  This
explanation  is  unreasonable  and  evidently  wrong;  for
it  means  that  all  men,  even  the  Prophets  and  the


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  137

Messengers  of  God,  without  committing  any  sin  or
fault,  but  simply  because  they  are  the  posterity  of
Adam,  have  become  without  reason  guilty  sinners,  and
until  the  day  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  were  held  captive
in  hell  in  painful  torment.  This  is  far  from  the  justice
of  God.  If  Adam  was  a  sinner,  what  is  the  sin  of
Abraham  ?  What  is  the  fault  of  Isaac,  or  of  Joseph  ?
Of  what  is  Moses  guilty  ?

But  Christ,  who  is  the  Word  of  God,  sacrificed  him-
self. This  has  two  meanings,  an  apparent  and  an
esoteric  meaning.  The  outward  meaning  is  this:
Christ's  intention  was  to  represent  and  promote  a
Cause  which  was  to  educate  the  human  world,  to
quicken  the  children  of  Adam,  and  to  enlighten  all
mankind  ;  and  since  to  represent  such  a  great  Cause —
a  Cause  which  was  antagonistic  to  all  the  people  of  the
world  and  all  the  nations  and  kingdoms — meant  that
he  would  be  killed  and  crucified,  so  Christ  in  pro-
claiming his  mission  sacrificed  his  life.  He  regarded
the  cross  as  a  throne,  the  wound  as  a  balm,  the  poison
as  honey  and  sugar.  He  arose  to  teach  and  educate
men,  and  so  he  sacrificed  himself  to  give  the  spirit  of
life.  He  perished  in  body,  so  as  to  quicken  others  by
the  spirit.

The  second  meaning  of  sacrifice  is  this :  Christ  was
like  a  seed,  and  this  seed  sacrificed  its  own  form  so
that  the  tree  might  grow  and  develop.  Although  the
form  of  the  seed  was  destroyed,  its  reality  became
apparent  in  perfect  majesty  and  beauty  in  the  form  of
a  tree.

The  position  of  Christ  was  that  of  absolute  perfec-
tion; he  made  his  divine  perfections  shine  like  the


138          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

sun  upon  all  believing  souls,  and  the  bounties  of  the
light  shone  and  radiated  in  the  reality  of  men.  This
is  why  he  says  '  I  am  the  bread  which  descended  from
heaven ;  whosoever  shall  eat  of  this  bread  will  not  die.'
That  is  to  say,  that  whosoever  shall  partake  of  this
divine  food,  will  attain  unto  eternal  life ;  that  is,  every
one  who  partakes  of  this  bounty  and  receives  these  per-
fections will  find  eternal  life,  will  obtain  pre-existent
favours,  will  be  freed  from  the  darkness  of  error,  and
will  be  illuminated  by  the  light  of  his  guidance.

The  form  of  the  seed  was  sacrificed  for  the  tree,  but
its  perfections,  because  of  this  sacrifice,  became  evident
and  apparent;  the  tree,  the  branches,  the  leaves  and
the  blossoms  being  concealed  in  the  seed.  When  the
form  of  the  seed  was  sacrificed,  its  perfections  appeared
in  the  perfect  form  of  leaves,  blossoms,  and  fruits.


XXX
ADAM  AND  EVE

Question. — What  is  the  truth  of  the  story  of  Adam,
and  his  eating  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  ?

Answer. — In  the  Bible  it  is  written  that  God  put
Adam  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  to  cultivate  and  take  care
of  it,  and  said  to  him :  Eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden
except  the  tree  of  good  and  evil,  for  if  you  eat  of  that
you  will  die.  Then  it  is  said  that  God  caused  Adam  to
sleep,  and  He  took  one  of  his  ribs  and  created  woman,
in  order  that  she  might  be  his  companion.  After  that
it  is  said  the  serpent  induced  the  woman  to  eat  of  the
tree,  saying :  God  has  forbidden  you  to  eat  of  the  tree,
in  order  that  your  eyes  may  not  be  opened,  and  that
you  may  not  know  good  from  evil.  Then  Eve  ate
from  the  tree,  and  gave  unto  Adam,  who  also  ate ;  their
eyes  were  opened,  they  found  themselves  naked,  and
they  hid  their  bodies  with  leaves.  In  consequence  of
this  act  they  received  the  reproaches  of  God.  God
said  to  Adam, '  Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  forbidden  tree  ? '
Adam  answered  '  Eve  tempted  me,  and  I  did  eat.'  God
then  reproved  Eve ;  Eve  said  '  The  serpent  tempted  me
and  I  did  eat.'  For  this  the  serpent  was  cursed,  and
enmity  was  put  between  the  serpent  and  Eve,  and
between  their  descendants.  And  God  said :  The  man

139


140          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

is  become  like  unto  us,  knowing  good  and  evil,  and
perhaps  he  will  eat  of  the  tree  of  life  and  live  for  ever.
So  God  guarded  the  tree  of  life.

If  we  take  this  story  in  its  apparent  meaning,  accord-
ing to  the  interpretation  of  the  masses,  it  is  indeed
extraordinary.  The  intelligence  cannot  accept  it,  affirm
it,  or  imagine  it;  for  such  arrangements,  such  details,
such  speeches  and  reproaches  are  far  from  being  those
of  an  intelligent  man,  how  much  less  of  the  Divinity —
that  Divinity  who  has  organised  this  infinite  universe
in  the  most  perfect  form,  and  its  innumerable  inhabi-
tants with  absolute  system,  strength,  and  perfection.

We  must  reflect  a  little:  if  the  literal  meaning  of
this  story  were  attributed  to  a  wise  man,  certainly  all
would  logically  deny  that  this  arrangement,  this  in-
vention, could  have  emanated  from  an  intelligent  being.
Therefore  this  story  of  Adam  and  Eve  who  ate  from
the  tree,  and  their  expulsion  from  Paradise,  must  be
thought  of  simply  as  a  symbol  It  contains  divine
mysteries  and  universal  meanings,  and  it  is  capable
of  marvellous  explanations.  Only  those  who  are  initi-
ated into  mysteries,  and  those  who  are  near  the  Court
of  the  All- Powerful,  are  aware  of  these  secrets.  Hence
these  verses  of  the  Bible  have  numerous  meanings.

We  will  explain  one  of  them,  and  we  will  say :  Adam
signifies  the  spirit  of  Adam,  and  Eve  his  soul.  For  in
some  passages  in  the  Holy  Books  where  women  are
mentioned,  they  represent  the  soul  of  man.  The  tree
of  good  and  evil  signifies  the  human  world;  for  the
spiritual  and  divine  world  is  purely  good  and  absolutely
luminous,  but  in  the  human  world  light  and  darkness,
good  and  evil,  exist  as  opposite  conditions.


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  141

The  meaning  of  the  serpent  is  attachment  to  the
human  world.  This  attachment  of  the  spirit  to  the
human  world  led  the  soul  and  spirit  of  Adam  from  the
world  of  freedom  to  the  world  of  bondage,  and  caused
him  to  turn  from  the  Kingdom  of  Unity  to  the
human  world.  When  the  soul  and  spirit  of  Adam
entered  the  human  world,  he  came  out  from  the
paradise  of  freedom  and  fell  into  the  world  of  bondage.
From  the  height  of  purity  and  absolute  goodness,  he
entered  into  the  world  of  good  and  evil.

The  tree  of  life  is  the  highest  degree  of  the  world  of
existence :  the  position  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  the
universal  Manifestation.  Therefore  that  position  has
been  preserved,  and,  at  the  appearance  of  the  most
noble  universal  Manifestation,  it  became  apparent  and
clear.  For  the  position  of  Adam,  with  regard  to  the
appearance  and  manifestation  of  the  divine  perfections,
was  in  the  embryonic  condition ;  the  position  of  Christ
was  the  condition  of  maturity,  and  the  age  of  reason,
and  the  rising  of  the  Greatest  Luminary,1  was  the  con-
dition of  the  perfection  of  the  essence  and  of  the
qualities.  This  is  why  in  the  supreme  Paradise  the
tree  of  life  is  the  expression  for  the  centre  of  absolutely
pure  sanctity — that  is  to  say,  of  the  Divine  Universal
Manifestation.  From  the  days  of  Adam  until  the  days  of
Christ,  they  spoke  little  of  eternal  life  and  the  heavenly
universal  perfections.  This  tree  of  life  was  the  position
of  the  Reality  of  Christ ;  through  his  manifestation  it
was  planted,  and  adorned  with  everlasting  fruits.

Now  consider  how  far  this  meaning  conforms  to  the
reality.  For  the  spirit  and  the  soul  of  Adam,  when

1  Baha'ullah.


142          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

they  were  attached  to  the  human  world,  passed  from
the  world  of  freedom  into  the  world  of  bondage,  and
his  descendants  continued  in  bondage.  This  attach-
ment of  the  soul  and  spirit  to  the  human  world,  which
is  sin,  was  inherited  by  the  descendants  of  Adam,  and
is  the  serpent  which  is  always  in  the  midst  of,  and  at
enmity  with,  the  spirits  of  the  descendants  of  Adam.
That  enmity  continues  and  endures.  For  attachment
to  the  world  has  become  the  cause  of  the  bondage  of
spirits,  and  this  bondage  is  identical  with  sin,  which
has  been  transmitted  from  Adam  to  his  posterity.  It
is  because  of  this  attachment  that  men  have  been  de-
prived of  essential  spirituality  and  exalted  position.

When  the  sanctified  breezes  of  Christ,  and  the  holy
light  of  the  Greatest  Luminary l  were  spread  abroad,
the  human  realities,  that  is  to  say,  those  who  turned
towards  the  Word  of  God  and  received  the  profusion  of
His  bounties,  were  saved  from  this  attachment  and  sin,
obtained  everlasting  life,  were  delivered  from  the  chains
of  bondage,  and  attained  to  the  world  of  liberty.  They
were  freed  from  the  vices  of  the  human  world,  and
were  blessed  by  the  virtues  of  the  Kingdom.  This  is
the  meaning  of  the  words  of  Christ, '  I  gave  my  blood
for  the  life  of  the  world ' ;  that  is  to  say :  I  have  chosen
all  these  troubles,  these  sufferings,  calamities,  and  even
the  greatest  martyrdom,  to  attain  this  object,  the
remission  of  sins :  that  is,  the  detachment  of  spirits  from
the  human  world,  and  their  attraction  to  the  divine
world;  in  order  that  souls  may  arise  who  will  be  the
very  essence  of  the  guidance  of  mankind,  and  the  mani-
festations of  the  perfections  of  the  Supreme  Kingdom.

1  Baha'u'llah.


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  143

Observe  that  if,  according  to  the  suppositions  of  the
People  of  the  Book,1  the  meaning  were  taken  in  its
exoteric  sense,  it  would  be  absolute  injustice  and  com-
plete predestination.  If  Adam  sinned  by  going  near
the  forbidden  tree,  what  was  the  sin  of  the  glorious
Abraham,  and  what  was  the  error  of  Moses  the  Inter-
locutor ?  What  was  the  crime  of  Noah  the  Prophet  ?
What  was  the  transgression  of  Joseph  the  Truthful?
What  was  the  iniquity  of  the  Prophets  of  God,  and
what  was  the  trespass  of  John  the  Chaste  ?  Would
the  justice  of  God  have  allowed  these  enlightened
Manifestations,  on  account  of  the  sin  of  Adam,  to  find
torment  in  hell,  until  Christ  came  and  by  the  sacrifice
of  himself  saved  them  from  excruciating  tortures?
Such  an  idea  is  beyond  every  law  and  rule,  and  cannot
be  accepted  by  any  intelligent  person.

No ;  it  means  what  has  been  already  said :  Adam  is
the  spirit  of  Adam,  and  Eve  is  his  soul ;  the  tree  is  the
human  world,  and  the  serpent  is  that  attachment  to
this  world  which  constitutes  sin,  and  which  has
infected  the  descendants  of  Adam.  Christ  by  his  holy
breezes  saved  men  from  this  attachment,  and  freed
them  from  this  sin.  The  sin  in  Adam  is  relative  to
his  position.  Although  from  this  attachment  there
proceed  results,  nevertheless,  attachment  to  the  earthly
world,  in  relation  to  attachment  to  the  spiritual  world,
is  considered  as  a  sin.  The  good  deeds  of  the  faithful
are  the  sins  of  the  Near  Ones.  This  is  established.
So  bodily  power  is  not  only  defective  in  relation
to  spiritual  power;  it  is  weakness  in  comparison.
In  the  same  way,  physical  life  in  comparison  with

1  Jews  and  Christians.


144          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

eternal  life  in  the  Kingdom,  is  considered  as  death.
So  Christ  called  the  physical  life  death,  and  said :  '  Let
the  dead  bury  their  dead.'  Though  those  souls  possessed
physical  life,  yet  in  his  eyes  that  life  was  death.

This  is  one  of  the  meanings  of  the  Biblical  story  of
Adam.  Reflect,  until  you  discover  the  others.

Salutations  be  upon  you.


XXXI

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  BLASPHEMY  AGAINST
THE  HOLY  SPIRIT

Question.  — '  Wherefore  I  say  unto  you,  All  manner
of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men :  but
the  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost  shall  not  be
forgiven  unto  men.  And  whosoever  speaketh  a  word
against  the  Son  of  man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him  :  but
whosoever  speaketh  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  shall
not  be  forgiven  him,  neither  in  this  world,  neither  in
the  world  to  come.' — (Matt.  xii.  31,  32.)

Answer. — The  holy  realities  of  the  Manifestations  of
God  have  two  spiritual  positions.  One  is  the  place  of
manifestation,  which  can  be  compared  to  the  position
of  the  globe  of  the  sun,  and  the  other  is  the  resplen-
dency of  the  manifestation  which  is  like  its  light  and
radiance;  these  are  the  perfections  of  God,  in  other
words,  the  Holy  Spirit.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the
divine  bounties  and  lordly  perfections ;  and  these
divine  perfections  are  as  the  rays  and  heat  of  the  sun.
The  brilliant  rays  of  the  sun  constitute  its  being,  and
without  them  it  would  not  be  the  sun.  If  the  mani-
festation and  the  reflection  of  the  divine  perfections
were  not  in  Christ,  Jesus  would  not  be  the  Messiah.
He  is  a  Manifestation  because  he  reflects  in  himself  the

K


146          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

divine  perfections.  The  Prophets  of  God  are  mani-
festations for  the  lordly  perfections ;  that  is,  the  Holy
Spirit  is  apparent  in  them.

If  a  soul  remains  far  from  the  Manifestation,  he  may
yet  be  awakened ;  for  he  did  not  recognise  the  Mani-
festation of  the  divine  perfections.  But  if  he  loathe
the  divine  perfections  themselves,  in  other  words  the
Holy  Spirit,  it  is  evident  that  he  is  like  a  bat  which
hates  the  light.

This  detestation  of  the  light  has  no  remedy,  and
cannot  be  forgiven ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  impossible  for
him  to  come  near  unto  God.  This  lamp  is  a  lamp
because  of  its  light :  without  the  light  it  would  not  be
a  lamp.  Now  if  a  soul  has  an  aversion  for  the  light
of  the  lamp,  he  is,  as  it  were,  blind,  and  cannot  compre-
hend the  light;  and  blindness  is  the  cause  of  ever-
lasting banishment  from  God.

It  is  evident  that  the  souls  receive  grace  from  the
bounty  of  the  Holy  Spirit  which  appears  in  the  Mani-
festations of  God,  and  not  from  the  personality  of  the
Manifestation.  Therefore,  if  a  soul  does  not  receive
grace  from  the  bounties  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  remains
deprived  of  the  divine  gift,  and  the  banishment  itself
puts  the  soul  beyond  the  reach  of  pardon.

This  is  why  many  people  who  were  the  enemies  of
the  Manifestations,  and  who  did  not  recognise  them,
when  once  they  had  known  them  became  their  friends.
So  enmity  towards  the  Manifestation  did  not  become
the  cause  of  perpetual  banishment;  for  they  who
indulged  in  it  were  the  enemies  of  the  light-holders,
not  knowing  that  they  were  the  shining  lights  of  God.
They  were  not  the  enemies  of  the  light,  and  when  once


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  147

they  understood  that  the  light-holder  was  the  place  of
manifestation  of  the  light,  they  became  sincere  friends
of  it.

The  meaning  is  this :  to  remain  far  from  the  light-
holder  does  not  entail  everlasting  banishment,  for  one
may  become  awakened  and  vigilant;  but  enmity
towards  the  light  is  the  cause  of  everlasting  banish-
ment, and  for  this  there  is  no  remedy.


XXXII

EXPLANATION  OF  ;THE  VERSE:  'FOR  MANY
ARE  CALLED  BUT  FEW  ARE  CHOSEN'

Question. — In  the  Gospel,  Christ  said :  '  Many  are
called  but  few  are  chosen,'  and  in  the  Quran  it  is
written :  '  He  will  confer  particular  mercy  on  whom
he  pleaseth.'  What  is  the  wisdom  of  this  ?

Answer. — Know  that  the  organisation  and  the  per-
fection of  the  whole  universe  requires  that  existence
should  appear  in  numberless  forms.  For  existing
beings  could  not  be  embodied  in  only  one  degree,
one  station,  one  kind,  one  species,  and  one  class;
undoubtedly  the  difference  of  degrees  and  distinction
of  forms,  and  the  variety  of  genus  and  species,  are
necessary.  That  is  to  say,  the  degree  of  mineral,
vegetable,  animal  substances,  and  of  man,  are  in-
evitable ;  for  the  world  could  not  be  arranged,  adorned,
organised,  and  perfected  with  man  alone.  In  the  same
way,  with  only  animals,  only  plants,  or  only  minerals,
this  world  could  not  show  forth  beautiful  scenery,
exact  organisation,  and  exquisite  adornment.  Without
doubt  it  is  because  of  the  varieties  of  degrees,  stations,
species,  and  classes,  that  existence  becomes  resplendent
with  utmost  perfection.

For  example,  if  this  tree  were  entirely  fruit,  the

148


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  149

vegetable  perfections  could  not  be  attained ;  for  leaves,
blossoms,  and  fruits  are  all  necessary,  so  that  the  tree
may  be  adorned  with  utmost  beauty  and  perfection.

In  the  same  way  consider  the  body  of  man ;  it  must
be  composed  of  different  organs,  parts,  and  members.
Human  beauty  and  perfection  require  the  existence
of  the  ear,  the  eye,  the  brain,  and  even  that  of  the
nails  and  hair;  if  man  were  all  brain,  eyes,  or  ears,
it  would  be  equivalent  to  imperfection.  So  the  absence
of  hair,  eyelashes,  teeth,  and  nails,  would  be  an  absolute
defect,  though  in  comparison  with  the  eye  they  are
without  feeling,  and  in  this  resemble  the  mineral  and
plant;  but  their  absence  in  the  body  of  man  is
necessarily  faulty  and  displeasing.

As  the  degrees  of  existence  are  different  and  various,
some  beings  are  higher  in  the  scale  than  others.
Therefore  it  is  by  the  will  and  wish  of  God  that  some
creatures  are  chosen  for  the  highest  degree,  as  man,
and  some  others  are  placed  in  the  middle  degree  as
the  vegetable,  and  some  are  left  in  the  lowest  degree
like  the  mineral.

It  is  from  the  bounty  of  God  that  man  is  selected
for  the  highest  degree;  and  the  differences  which
exist  between  men  in  regard  to  spiritual  progress  and
heavenly  perfections,  is  also  due  to  the  choice  of  the
Compassionate  One.  For  faith,  which  is  life  eternal,
is  the  sign  of  bounty,  and  not  the  result  of  justice.
The  flame  of  the  fire  of  love,  in  this  world  of  earth
and  water,  comes  through  the  power  of  attraction  and
not  by  effort  and  striving.  Nevertheless,  by  effort  and
perseverance,  knowledge,  science,  and  other  perfections
can  be  acquired;  but  only  the  light  of  the  Divine


150          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Beauty  can  transport  and  move  the  spirits  through  the
force  of  attraction.  Therefore  it  is  said :  '  Many  are
called  but  few  are  chosen.'

But  the  material  beings  are  not  despised,  judged,
and  held  responsible  for  their  own  degree  and  station.
For  example,  mineral,  vegetable,  and  animal  in  their
various  degrees  are  acceptable;  but  if  in  their  own
degree  they  remain  imperfect  they  are  blamable,  the
degree  itself  being  purely  perfect.

The  differences  among  mankind  are  of  two  sorts :  one
is  a  difference  of  station,  and  this  difference  is  not
blameworthy.  The  other  is  a  difference  of  faith  and
assurance;  the  loss  of  these  is  blameworthy;  for  then
the  soul  is  overwhelmed  by  his  desires  and  passions,
which  deprive  him  of  these  blessings  and  prevent  him
from  feeling  the  power  of  attraction  of  the  love  of
God.  Though  that  man  is  praiseworthy  and  acceptable
in  his  station,  yet  as  he  is  deprived  of  the  perfections
of  that  degree,  he  will  become  a  source  of  imperfections,
for  which  he  is  held  responsible.1

1  Cf.  '  The  Causes  of  Difference  in  the  Characters  of  Men,'  page  247.


XXXIII

THE  'RETURN'  SPOKEN  OF  BY  THE
PROPHETS

Question. — Will  you  explain  the  subject  of  Return  ?

Answer. — Baha'u'llah  has  explained  this  question
fully  and  clearly  in  the  Iqan : l  read  it,  and  the  truth
of  this  subject  will  become  apparent.  But,  since  you
have  asked  about  it,  I  will  explain  it  briefly.  We  will
begin  to  elucidate  it  from  the  Gospel,  for  there  it  is
plainly  said  that  when  John  the  son  of  Zacharias
appeared,  and  gave  to  men  the  glad  tidings  of  the
Kingdom  of  God,  they  asked  him : '  Who  art  thou  ?  Art
thou  the  promised  Messiah  ? '  He  replied :  '  I  am  not
the  Messiah.'  Then  they  asked  him :  '  Art  thou  Elijah  ? '
He  said : '  I  am  not.'  These  words  prove  and  show  that
John  the  son  of  Zacharias  was  not  the  promised  Elias.
But  on  the  day  of  the  transfiguration  on  Mount  Tabor,
Christ  said  plainly  that  John  the  son  of  Zacharias  was
the  promised  Elias.

In  chapter  9,  verses  11-13,  of  the  Gospel  of  Mark,
it  is  said :  '  And  they  asked  him,  saying,  Why  say  the
scribes  that  Elias  must  first  come  ?  And  he  answered
and  told  them,  Elias  verily  cometh  first,  and  restore th
all  things;  and  how  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,
that  he  must  suffer  many  things,  and  be  set  at  nought.

1  Cf.  page  126,  note  1.

161


152          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

But  I  say  unto  you,  That  Elias  is  indeed  come,  and
they  have  done  unto  him  whatsoever  they  listed,  as
it  is  written  of  him.'

In  chapter  17,  verse  13  of  Matthew,  it  is  said :
'Then  the  disciples  understood  that  he  spake  unto
them  of  John  the  Baptist.'

They  asked  John  the  Baptist :  '  Are  you  Elias  ? '  He
answered :  '  No,  I  am  not,'  although  it  is  said  in  the
Gospel  that  John  was  the  promised  Elias,  and  Christ
also  said  so  clearly.  Then  if  John  was  Elias,  why  did
he  say  '  I  am  not '  ?  and  if  he  was  not  Elias  why  did
Christ  say  that  he  was  ?

The  explanation  is  this:  not  the  personality,  but
the  reality  of  the  perfections,  is  meant ;  that  is  to  say,
the  same  perfections  that  were  in  Elias  existed  in
John  the  Baptist,  and  were  exactly  realised  in  him.
Therefore  John  the  Baptist  was  the  promised  Elias.
In  this  case  not  the  essence,1  but  the  qualities,  are
regarded.  For  example,  there  was  a  flower  last  year,
and  this  year  there  is  also  a  flower ;  I  say,  the  flower
of  last  year  has  returned.  Now,  I  do  not  mean  that
same  flower  in  its  exact  individuality  has  come  back ;
but  as  this  flower  has  the  same  qualities  as  that  of  last
year — as  it  has  the  same  perfume,  delicacy,  colour,
and  form — I  say,  the  flower  of  last  year  has  returned,
and  this  flower  is  the  former  flower.  When  spring
comes,  we  say  last  year's  spring  has  come  back,
because  all  that  was  found  in  last  year's  spring  exists
in  this  spring.  That  is  why  Christ  said:  You  will
see  all  that  happened  in  the  days  of  the  former
Prophets.

1  i.e.  the  individuality.


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  153

We  will  give  another  illustration:  the  seed  of  last
year  is  sown,  branches  and  leaves  grow  forth,  blossoms
and  fruits  appear,  and  all  has  again  returned  to  seed.
When  this  second  seed  is  planted  a  tree  will  grow  from
it,  and  once  more  those  branches,  leaves,  blossoms,  and
fruits  will  return,  and  that  tree  will  appear  in  perfec-
tion. As  the  beginning  was  a  seed  and  the  end  is
a  seed,  we  say  that  the  seed  has  returned.  When
we  look  at  the  substance  of  the  tree,  it  is  another
substance,  but  when  we  look  at  the  blossoms,  leaves,
and  fruits,  the  same  fragrance,  delicacy,  and  taste  are
produced.  Therefore  the  perfection  of  the  tree  has
returned  a  second  time.

In  the  same  way,  if  we  regard  the  return  of  the
individual,  it  is  another  individual;  but  if  we  regard
the  qualities  and  perfections,  the  same  have  returned.
Therefore  when  Christ  said :  '  This  is  Elias,'  he  meant :
this  person  is  a  manifestation  of  the  bounty,  the  per-
fections, the  character,  the  qualities,  and  the  virtues
of  Elias.  John  the  Baptist  said:  'I  am  not  Elias.'
Christ  considered  the  qualities,  the  perfections,  the
character,  and  the  virtues  of  both,  and  John  regarded
his  substance  and  individuality.  It  is  like  this  lamp :
it  was  here  last  night,  and  to-night  it  is  also  lighted,
and  to-morrow  night  it  will  also  shine.  We  say  that
the  lamp  of  this  night  is  the  same  light  as  that  of
last  night,  and  that  it  has  returned.  It  refers  to  the
light,  and  not  to  the  oil,  the  wick,  or  the  holder.

This  subject  is  fully  and  clearly  explained  in  the
Kitabu'l-Iqan.


XXXIV
PETER'S  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH

Question. — In  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew  it  is  said:
'Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my
church.'  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  verse  ?

Answer. — This  utterance  of  Christ  is  a  confirmation
of  the  statement  of  Peter,  when  Christ  asked :  Whom  do
you  believe  me  to  be?  and  Peter  answered:  I  believe
that '  Thou  art  the  Son  of  the  living  God.'  Then  Christ
said  to  him : '  Thou  art  Peter ' l — for  Cephas  in  Aramaic
means  rock — 'and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my
church.'  For  the  others  in  answer  to  Christ  said  that
he  was  Elias,  and  some  said  John  the  Baptist,  and
some  others  Jeremias  or  one  of  the  Prophets.

Christ  wished  by  suggestion,  or  an  allusion,  to
confirm  the  words  of  Peter;  so  on  account  of  the
suitability  of  his  name,  Peter,  he  said :  '  and  upon  this
rock  I  will  build  my  church,'  meaning,  thy  belief  that
Christ  is  the  son  of  the  living  God,  will  be  the  founda-
tion of  the  Religion  of  God ;  and  upon  this  belief  the
foundation  of  the  church  of  God — which  is  the  Law  of
God — shall  be  established.

1  It  is  well  known  that  Peter's  real  name  was  Simon,  but  Christ
called  him  Cephas,  which   corresponds   to  the  Greek  word  petras,
which  means  rock.
164


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  155

The  existence  of  the  tomb  of  Peter  in  Rome  is
doubtful;  it  is  not  authenticated;  some  say  it  is  in
Antioch.

Moreover,  let  us  compare  the  lives  of  some  of  the
Popes  with  the  religion  of  Christ.  Christ,  hungry  and
without  shelter,  ate  herbs  in  the  wilderness,  and  was
unwilling  to  hurt  the  feelings  of  any  one.  The  Pope
sits  in  a  carriage  covered  with  gold,  and  passes  his  time
in  the  utmost  splendour,  amidst  such  pleasures  and
luxuries,  such  riches  and  adoration,  as  kings  have  never
had.

Christ  hurt  no  one,  but  many  of  the  Popes  killed
innocent  people:  refer  to  history.  How  much  blood
the  Popes  have  shed  merely  to  retain  temporal  power !
For  mere  differences  of  opinion  they  arrested,  imprisoned
and  slew  thousands  of  the  servants  of  the  world  of
humanity  and  learned  men  who  had  discovered  the
secrets  of  nature.  To  what  a  degree  they  opposed  the
truth !

Reflect  upon  the  instructions  of  Christ,  and  investi-
gate the  habits  and  customs  of  the  Popes.  Consider :
is  there  any  resemblance  between  the  instructions  of
Christ  and  the  manner  of  government  of  the  Popes  ?
We  object  to  criticising,  but  the  history  of  the  Vatican
is  very  extraordinary.  The  purport  of  our  argument  is
this,  that  the  instructions  of  Christ  are  one  thing,  and
the  manner  of  the  Papal  government  is  quite  another :
they  do  not  agree.  See  how  many  Protestants  have
been  killed  by  the  order  of  the  Popes.  How  many
tyrannies  and  oppressions  have  been  countenanced,
and  how  many  punishments  and  tortures  have  been
inflicted  !  Can  any  of  the  sweet  fragrances  of  Christ  be


156          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

detected  in  these  actions  ?  No !  in  the  name  of  God  !
These  people  did  not  obey  Christ,  while  Saint  Barbara,
whose  picture  is  before  us,  did  obey  Christ,  and  followed
in  his  footsteps  and  put  his  commands  into  practice.
Among  the  Popes  there  are  also  some  blessed  souls
who  followed  in  the  footsteps  of  Christ,  particularly  in
the  first  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  when  temporal
things  were  lacking  and  the  tests  of  God  were  severe.
But  when  they,  came  into  possession  of  governmental
power,  and  worldly  honour  and  prosperity  were  gained,
the  Papal  government  entirely  forgot  Christ,  and  was
occupied  with  temporal  power,  grandeur,  comfort,  and
luxuries ;  it  killed  people,  opposed  the  diffusion  of
learning,  tormented  the  men  of  science,  obstructed  the
light  of  knowledge,  and  gave  the  order  to  slay  and  to
pillage.  Thousands  of  souls,  men  of  science  and  learn-
ing, and  sinless  ones,  perished  in  the  prisons  of  Rome.
With  all  these  proceedings  and  actions,  how  can  the
Vicarship  of  Christ  be  believed  in  ?

The  Papal  See  has  constantly  opposed  knowledge;
even  in  Europe  it  is  admitted  that  religion  is  the
opponent  of  science,  and  that  science  is  the  destroyer
of  the  foundations  of  religion.  While  the  Religion  of
God  is  the  promoter  of  truth,  the  founder  of  science
and  knowledge,  it  is  full  of  goodwill  for  learned  men ;
it  is  the  civiliser  of  mankind,  the  discoverer  of  the
secrets  of  nature,  and  the  enlightener  of  the  horizons  of
the  world.  Consequently,  how  can  it  be  said  to  oppose
knowledge  ?  God  forbid  !  Nay,  for  God,  knowledge  is
the  most  glorious  gift  of  man,  and  the  most  noble  of
human  perfections.  To  oppose  knowledge  is  ignorant,
and  he  who  detests  knowledge  and  science  is  not  a


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  157

man,  but  rather  an  animal  without  intelligence.  For
knowledge  is  light,  life,  felicity,  perfection,  beauty,  and
the  means  of  approaching  the  Threshold  of  Unity.  It
is  the  honour  and  glory  of  the  world  of  humanity,  and
the  greatest  bounty  of  God.  Knowledge  is  identical
with  guidance,  and  ignorance  is  real  error.

Happy  are  those  who  spend  their  days  in  gaining
knowledge,  in  discovering  the  secrets  of  nature,  and  in
penetrating  the  subtleties  of  pure  truth !  Woe  to  those
who  are  contented  with  ignorance,  whose  hearts  are
gladdened  by  thoughtless  imitation,  who  have  fallen
into  the  lowest  depths  of  ignorance  and  foolishness,
and  who  have  wasted  their  lives  !


XXXV
PREDESTINATION

Question. — If  God  has  knowledge  of  an  action  which
will  be  performed  by  some  one,  and  it  has  been  written
on  the  Tablet  of  Fate,  is  it  possible  to  resist  it  ?

Answer. — The  fore-knowledge  of  a  thing  is  not  the
cause  of  its  realisation ;  for  the  essential  knowledge  of
God  surrounds,  in  the  same  way,  the  realities  of  things,
before  as  well  as  after  their  existence,  and  it  does  not
become  the  cause  of  their  existence.  It  is  a  perfection
of  God.  But  that  which  was  prophesied  by  the  in-
spiration of  God  through  the  tongues  of  the  Prophets,
concerning  the  appearance  of  the  Promised  One  of  the
Bible,  was  not  the  cause  of  the  manifestation  of  Christ.

The  hidden  secrets  of  the  future  were  revealed  to  the
Prophets,  and  they  thus  became  acquainted  with  the
future  events  which  they  announced.  This  knowledge,
and  these  prophecies,  were  not  the  cause  of  the  occur-
rences. For  example,  to-night  every  one  knows  that
after  seven  hours  the  sun  will  rise;  but  this  general
fore-knowledge  does  not  cause  the  rising  and  appearance
of  the  sun.

Therefore  the  knowledge  of  God  in  the  realm  of
contingency  does  not  produce  the  forms  of  the  things :
on  the  contrary,  it  is  purified  from  the  past,  present,

168


SOME  CHRISTIAN  SUBJECTS  159

and  future.  It  is  identical  with  the  reality  of  the
things ;  it  is  not  the  cause  of  their  occurrence.

In  the  same  way,  the  record  and  the  mention  of  a
thing  in  the  Book  does  not  become  the  cause  of  its
existence.  The  Prophets,  through  the  divine  inspira-
tion, knew  what  would  come  to  pass.  For  instance,
through  the  divine  inspiration  they  knew  that  Christ
would  be  martyred,  and  they  announced  it.  Now,  was
their  knowledge  and  information  the  cause  of  the
martyrdom  of  Christ  ?  No ;  this  knowledge  is  a  perfec-
tion of  the  Prophets,  and  did  not  cause  the  martyrdom.

The  mathematicians  by  astronomical  calculations
know  that  at  a  certain  time  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  or
the  sun  will  occur.  Surely  this  discovery  does  not
cause  the  eclipse  to  take  place.  This  is,  of  course,  only
an  analogy,  and  not  an  exact  image.


PART  III

ON  THE  POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  THE
MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD


XXXVI
THE  FIVE  ASPECTS  OF  SPIRIT

KNOW  that,  speaking  generally,  there  are  five  divi-
sions of  the  spirit.  First  the  vegetable  spirit :  this  is  a
power  which  results  from  the  combination  of  elements
and  the  mingling  of  substances  by  the  decree  of  the
Supreme  God,  and  from  the  influence,  the  effect,  and
connection  of  other  existences.  When  these  substances
and  elements  are  separated  from  each  other,  the  power
of  growth  also  ceases  to  exist ;  so,  to  use  another  figure,
electricity  results  from  the  combination  of  elements,  and
when  these  elements  are  separated,  the  electric  force  is
dispersed  and  lost.  Such  is  the  vegetable  spirit.

After  this  is  the  animal  spirit,  which  also  results
from  the  mingling  and  combination  of  elements ;  but
this  combination  is  more  complete,  and  through  the
decree  of  the  Almighty  Lord  a  perfect  mingling  is
obtained,  and  the  animal  spirit,  in  other  words  the
power  of  the  senses,  is  produced.  It  will  perceive  the
reality  of  things  from  that  which  is  seen  and  visible,
audible,  edible,  tangible,  and  that  which  can  be  smelt.
After  the  dissociation  and  decomposition  of  the  com-
bined elements,  this  spirit  also  will  naturally  disappear.
It  is  like  this  lamp  which  you  see :  when  the  oil  and
wick  and  fire  are  brought  together,  light  is  the  result;

163


164          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

but  when  the  oil  is  finished  and  the  wick  consumed,
the  light  will  also  vanish  and  be  lost.

The  human  spirit  may  be  likened  to  the  bounty  of  the
sun  shining  on  crystal.  The  body  of  man,  which  is  com-
posed from  the  elements,  is  combined  and  mingled  in
the  most  perfect  form ;  it  is  the  most  solid  construction,
the  noblest  combination,  the  most  perfect  existence.  It
grows  and  develops  through  the  animal  spirit.  This
perfected  body  can  be  compared  to  a  crystal,  and  the
human  spirit  to  the  sun.  Nevertheless,  if  the  crystal
breaks,  the  bounty  of  the  sun  continues ;  and  if  the
crystal  is  destroyed  or  ceases  to  exist,  no  harm  will
happen  to  the  bounty  of  the  sun  which  is  everlasting.
This  spirit  has  the  power  of  discovery ;  it  encompasses
all  things.  All  these  wonderful  signs,  these  scientific
discoveries,  great  enterprises  and  important  historical
events  which  you  know,  are  due  to  it.  From  the  realm
of  the  invisible  and  hidden,  through  spiritual  power,
it  brought  them  to  the  plane  of  the  visible.  So,  man
is  upon  the  earth,  yet  he  makes  discoveries  in  the
heavens.  From  known  realities,  that  is  to  say  from
the  things  which  are  known  and  visible,  he  discovers
unknown  things.  For  example,  man  is  in  this  hemi-
sphere, but,  like  Columbus,  through  the  power  of  his
reason  he  discovers  another  hemisphere,  that  is
America,  which  was  until  then  unknown.  His  body  is
heavy,  but  through  the  help  of  an  instrument  which
he  invents,  he  is  able  to  soar  aloft.  He  is  slow  of
movement,  but  by  an  instrument  which  he  invents  he
travels  to  the  East  and  West  with  extreme  rapidity.
Briefly,  this  power  embraces  all  things.

But  the  spirit  of  man  has  two  aspects :  one  divine,


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         165

one  satanic ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  capable  of  the  utmost
perfection,  or  it  is  capable  of  the  utmost  imperfection.
If  it  acquires  virtues  it  is  the  most  noble  of  the  existing
beings,  and  if  it  acquires  vices  it  becomes  the  most
degraded  existence.

The  fourth  degree  of  spirit  is  the  heavenly  spirit ;  it
is  the  spirit  of  faith  and  the  bounty  of  God ;  it  comes
from  the  breath  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  by  the  divine
power  it  becomes  the  cause  of  eternal  life.  It  is  the
power  which  makes  the  earthly  man  heavenly,  and  the
imperfect  man  perfect.  It  makes  the  impure  to  be
pure,  the  silent  eloquent;  it  purifies  and  sanctifies
those  made  captive  by  carnal  desires;  it  makes  the
ignorant  wise.

The  fifth  spirit  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  Holy  Spirit
is  the  mediator  between  God  and  His  creatures.  It  is
like  a  mirror  facing  the  sun.  As  the  pure  mirror
receives  light  from  the  sun  and  transmits  this  bounty
to  others,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  mediator  of  the
Holy  Light  from  the  Sun  of  Keality,  which  it  gives  to
the  sanctified  realities.  It  is  adorned  with  all  the
divine  perfections.  Every  time  it  appears  the  world  is
renewed,  and  a  new  cycle  is  founded.  The  body  of  the
world  of  humanity  puts  on  a  new  garment.  It  can  be
compared  to  the  spring ;  whenever  it  comes,  the  world
passes  from  one  condition  to  another.  Through  the
advent  of  the  season  of  spring  the  black  earth  and  the
fields  and  wildernesses  will  become  verdant  and  bloom-
ing, and  all  sorts  of  flowers  and  sweet-scented  herbs
will  grow ;  the  trees  will  have  new  life,  and  new  fruits
will  appear,  and  a  new  cycle  is  founded.  The  appear-
ance of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  like  this.  Whenever  it


166          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

appears,  it  renews  the  world  of  humanity  and  gives  a
new  spirit  to  the  human  realities :  it  arrays  the  world
of  existence  in  a  praiseworthy  garment,  dispels  the
darkness  of  ignorance,  and  causes  the  radiation  of  the
light  of  perfections.  Christ  with  this  power  has
renewed  this  cycle;  the  heavenly  spring  with  the
utmost  freshness  and  sweetness  spread  its  tent  in  the
world  of  humanity,  and  the  life-giving  breeze  perfumed
the  nostrils  of  the  enlightened  ones.

In  the  same  way,  the  appearance  of  Baha'u'llah  was
like  a  new  springtime  which  appeared  with  holy
breezes,  with  the  hosts  of  everlasting  life,  and  with
heavenly  power.  It  established  the  Throne  of  the
Divine  Kingdom  in  the  centre  of  the  world,  and  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  revived  souls  and  established
a  new  cycle.


XXXVII

THE  DIVINITY  CAN  ONLY  BE  COMPRE-
HENDED THROUGH  THE  DIVINE  MANI-
FESTATIONS

Question.  —  What  connection  has  the  Reality  of
Divinity  with  the  Lordly  Rising-places  and  the  Divine
Dawning-points  ?

Answer. — Know  that  the  Reality  of  Divinity  or  the
substance  of  the  Essence  of  Oneness  is  pure  sanctity
and  absolute  holiness :  that  is  to  say,  it  is  sanctified  and
exempt  from  all  praise.  The  whole  of  the  supreme
attributes  of  the  degrees  of  existence,  in  reference  to
this  plane,  are  only  imaginations.  It  is  invisible,  in-
comprehensible, inaccessible,  a  pure  essence  which
cannot  be  described ;  for  the  Divine  Essence  surrounds
all  things.  Verily  that  which  surrounds  is  greater  than
the  surrounded,  and  the  surrounded  cannot  contain
that  by  which  it  is  surrounded,  nor  comprehend  its
reality.  However  far  mind  may  progress,  though  it
may  reach  to  the  final  degree  of  comprehension,  the
limit  of  understanding,  it  beholds  the  divine  signs  and
attributes  in  the  world  of  creation,  and  not  in  the
world  of  God.  For  the  essence  and  the  attributes  of
the  Lord  of  Unity  are  in  the  heights  of  sanctity,  and
for  the  minds  and  understandings  there  is  no  way  to


167


168          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

approach  that  position.  '  The  way  is  closed  and  seek-
ing is  forbidden.'

It  is  evident  that  the  human  understanding  is  a
quality  of  the  existence  of  man,  and  that  man  is  a  sign
of  God :  how  can  the  quality  of  the  sign  surround  the
creator  of  the  sign  ?  that  is  to  say,  how  can  the  under-
standing, which  is  a  quality  of  the  existence  of  man,
comprehend  God?  Therefore  the  Reality  of  the
Divinity  is  hidden  from  all  comprehension,  and  con-
cealed from  the  minds  of  all  men.  It  is  absolutely
impossible  to  ascend  to  that  plane.  We  see  that  every-
thing which  is  lower  is  powerless  to  comprehend  the
reality  of  that  which  is  higher.  So  the  stone,  the
earth,  the  tree,  however  much  they  may  evolve,  cannot
comprehend  the  reality  of  man,  and  cannot  imagine
the  powers  of  sight,  of  hearing,  and  of  the  other  senses,
although  they  are  all  alike  created.  Therefore  how
can  man,  the  created,  understand  the  reality  of  the
pure  Essence  of  the  Creator  ?  This  plane  is  unapproach-
able by  the  understanding,  no  explanation  is  sufficient
of  its  comprehension,  and  there  is  no  power  to  indicate
it.  What  has  an  atom  of  dust  to  do  with  the  pure
world,  and  what  relation  is  there  between  the  limited
mind  and  the  infinite  world  ?  Minds  are  powerless  to
comprehend  God,  and  the  souls  become  bewildered  in
explaining  Him.  '  The  eyes  see  Him  not,  but  He  seeth
the  eyes.  He  is  the  Omniscient,  the  Knower.' x

Consequently,  with  reference  to  this  plane  of  exist-
ence, every  statement  and  elucidation  is  defective,  all
praise  and  all  description  are  unworthy,  every  concep-
tion is  vain,  and  every  meditation  is  futile.  But  for

1  Quran,  Sura  6.


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD  169

this  Essence  of  the  essences,  this  Truth  of  truths,  this
Mystery  of  mysteries,  there  are  reflections,  auroras,
appearances  and  resplendencies,  in  the  world  of  exist-
ence. The  dawning-place  of  these  splendours,  the
place  of  these  reflections,  and  the  appearance  of  these
manifestations,  are  the  Holy  Dawning-places,  the  Uni-
versal Realities  and  the  Divine  Beings,  who  are  the
true  mirrors  of  the  sanctified  Essence  of  God.  All  the
perfections,  the  bounties,  the  splendours  which  come
from  God,  are  visible  and  evident  in  the  Reality  of  the
Holy  Manifestations,  like  the  sun  which  is  resplendent
in  a  clear  polished  mirror  with  all  its  perfections  and
bounties.  If  it  be  said  that  the  mirrors  are  the  mani-
festations of  the  sun  and  the  dawning-places  of  the
rising  star,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  sun  has
descended  from  the  height  of  its  sanctity  and  become
incorporated  in  the  mirror,  nor  that  the  Unlimited
Reality  is  limited  to  this  place  of  appearance.  God
forbid !  This  is  the  belief  of  the  adherents  of  anthro-
pomorphism. No ;  all  the  praises,  the  descriptions  and
exaltations  refer  to  the  Holy  Manifestations.  That  is
to  say,  all  the  descriptions,  the  qualities,  the  names
and  the  attributes  which  we  mention,  return  to  the
Divine  Manifestations ;  but  as  no  one  has  attained  to
the  reality  of  the  Essence  of  Divinity,  so  no  one  is
able  to  describe,  explain,  praise  or  glorify  it.  Therefore
all  that  the  human  reality  knows,  discovers,  and  under-
stands of  the  names,  the  attributes,  and  the  perfections
of  God,  refer  to  these  Holy  Manifestations.  There  is  no
access  to  anything  else :  '  the  way  is  closed,  and  seeking
is  forbidden.'

Nevertheless  we  speak  of  the  names  and  attributes


170          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  the  Divine  Reality,  and  we  praise  Him  by  attribut-
ing to  Him  sight,  hearing,  power,  life,  and  knowledge.
We  affirm  these  names  and  attributes,  not  to  prove  the
perfections  of  God,  but  to  deny  that  He  is  capable  of
imperfections.  When  we  look  at  the  existing  world,
we  see  that  ignorance  is  imperfection  and  knowledge  is
perfection,  therefore  we  say  that  the  sanctified  Essence
of  God  is  wisdom.  Weakness  is  imperfection  and
power  is  perfection;  consequently  we  say  that  the
sanctified  Essence  of  God  is  the  acme  of  power.  It  is
not  that  we  can  comprehend  His  knowledge,  His  sight,
His  power  and  life,  for  it  is  beyond  our  comprehension ;
for  the  essential  names  and  attributes  of  God  are
identical  with  His  Essence,  and  His  Essence  is  above
all  comprehension.  If  the  attributes  are  not  identical
with  the  Essence,  there  must  also  be  a  multiplicity  of
pre-existences,  and  differences  between  the  attributes
and  the  Essence  must  also  exist :  and  as  Pre-existence
is  necessary,  therefore  the  sequence  of  pre-existences
would  become  infinite.  This  is  an  evident  error.

Accordingly  all  these  attributes,  names,  praises,  and
eulogies  apply  to  the  Places  of  Manifestation ;  and  all
that  we  imagine  and  suppose  beside  them  is  mere
imagination,  for  we  have  no  means  of  comprehending
that  which  is  invisible  and  inaccessible.  This  is  why
it  is  said : '  All  that  you  have  distinguished  through  the
illusion  of  your  imagination  in  your  subtle  mental
images,  is  but  a  creation  like  unto  yourself,  and  returns
to  you.' l  It  is  clear  that  if  we  wish  to  imagine  the
Reality  of  Divinity,  this  imagination  is  the  surrounded,
and  we  are  the  surrounding  one ;  and  it  is  sure  that  the

1  From  a  Hadith.


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD          171

one  who  surrounds  is  greater  than  the  surrounded.
From  this  it  is  certain  and  evident  that  if  we  imagine
a  Divine  Reality  outside  of  the  Holy  Manifestations,
it  is  pure  imagination ;  for  there  is  no  way  to  approach
the  Reality  of  Divinity  which  is  not  cut  off  to  us,  and
all  that  we  imagine  is  mere  supposition.

Therefore  reflect  that  different  peoples  of  the  world  are
revolving  around  imaginations,  and  are  worshippers  of
the  idols  of  thoughts  and  conjectures.  They  are  not
aware  of  this ;  they  consider  their  imaginations  to  be
the  Reality  which  is  withdrawn  from  all  comprehen-
sion, and  purified  from  all  descriptions.  They  regard
themselves  as  the  people  of  Unity,  and  the  others  as
worshippers  of  idols ;  but  idols  at  least  have  a  mineral
existence,  while  the  idols  of  thoughts  and  the  imagina-
tions of  man  are  but  fancies;  they  have  not  even
mineral  existence.  'Take  warning,  O  possessors  of
perception ! '

Know  that  the  attributes  of  perfection,  the  splendour
of  the  divine  bounties,  and  the  lights  of  inspiration,
are  visible  and  evident  in  all  the  Holy  Manifestations ;
but  the  glorious  Word  of  God,  Christ,  and  the  Greatest
Name,  Baha'u'llah,  are  manifestations  and  evidences
which  are  beyond  imagination ;  for  they  possess  all  the
perfections  of  the  former  Manifestations,  and  more  than
that,  they  possess  some  perfections  which  make  the
other  Manifestations  dependent  upon  them.  So  all  the
Prophets  of  Israel  were  centres  of  inspiration;  Christ
also  was  a  receiver  of  inspiration;  but  what  a  differ-
ence between  the  inspiration  of  the  Word  of  God  and
the  revelations  of  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Elijah !

Reflect  that  light  is  the  expression  of  the  vibrations


172          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  the  etheric  matter:  the  nerves  of  the  eye  are  affected
by  these  vibrations,  and  sight  is  produced.  The  light
of  the  lamp  exists  through  the  vibration  of  the  etheric
matter,  so  also  does  that  of  the  sun ;  but  what  a  differ-
ence between  the  light  of  the  sun  and  that  of  the
stars  or  the  lamp !

The  spirit  of  man  appears  and  is  manifest  in  the
embryonic  condition,  and  also  in  that  of  childhood  and
of  maturity,  and  it  is  resplendent  and  evident  in  the
condition  of  perfection.  The  spirit  is  one,  but  in  the
embryonic  condition  the  power  of  sight  and  of  hearing
is  lacking.  In  the  state  of  maturity  and  perfection  it
appears  in  the  utmost  splendour  and  brilliance.  In  the
same  way  the  seed  in  the  beginning  becomes  leaves,
and  is  the  place  where  the  vegetable  spirit  appears ;  in
the  condition  of  fruit  it  manifests  the  same  spirit,  that
is  to  say,  the  power  of  growth  appears  in  the  utmost
perfection:  but  what  a  difference  between  the  con-
dition of  the  leaves  and  that  of  the  fruit !  For  from
the  fruit  a  hundred  thousand  leaves  appear,  though
they  all  grow  and  develop  through  the  same  vegetable
spirit.  Notice  the  difference  between  the  virtues  and
perfections  of  Christ,  the  splendours  and  brilliance  of
Baha'u'llah,  and  the  virtues  of  the  Prophets  of  Israel,
such  as  Ezekiel  or  Samuel.  All  were  the  manifesta-
tions of  inspiration,  but  between  them  there  is  an
infinite  difference.  Salutations !


XXXVIII

THE  THREE  STATIONS  OF  THE
DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS

KNOW  that  the  Holy  Manifestations,  though  they
have  the  degrees  of  endless  perfections,  yet,  speaking
generally,  have  only  three  stations.  The  first  station
is  the  physical ;  the  second  station  is  the  human,  which
is  that  of  the  rational  soul;  the  third  is  that  of  the
divine  appearance  and  the  heavenly  splendour.

The  physical  station  is  phenomenal ;  it  is  composed
of  elements,  and  necessarily  everything  that  is  com-
posed is  subject  to  decomposition:  it  is  not  possible
that  a  composition  should  not  be  disintegrated.

The  second  is  the  station  of  the  rational  soul,  which
is  the  human  reality ;  this  also  is  phenomenal,  and  the
Holy  Manifestations  share  it  with  all  mankind.

Know  that,  although  the  human  soul  has  existed  on
the  earth  for  prolonged  times  and  ages,  yet  it  is  pheno-
menal1 As  it  is  a  divine  sign,  when  once  it  has  come
into  existence  it  is  eternal.  The  spirit  of  man  has  a
beginning,  but  it  has  no  end ;  it  continues  eternally.  In
the  same  way  the  species  existing  on  this  earth  are
phenomenal,  for  it  is  established  that  there  was  a  time
when  these  species  did  not  exist  on  the  surface  of  the

1  i.e.  at  its  birth.

178


174         SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

earth.  Moreover,  the  earth  has  not  always  existed,
but  the  world  of  existence  has  always  been;  for  the
universe  is  not  limited  to  this  terrestrial  globe.  The
meaning  of  this  is,  that  although  human  souls  are
phenomenal,  they  are  nevertheless  immortal,  everlast-
ing, and  perpetual ;  for  the  world  of  things  is  the  world
of  imperfection  in  comparison  with  that  of  man,  and
the  world  of  man  is  the  world  of  perfection  in  com-
parison with  that  of  things.  When  imperfections  reach
the  station  of  perfection,  they  become  eternal.1  This
is  an  example  of  which  you  must  comprehend  the
meaning.

The  third  station  is  that  of  the  divine  appearance
and  heavenly  splendour:  it  is  the  Word  of  God,  the
Eternal  Bounty,  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  has  neither
beginning  nor  end,  for  these  things  are  related  to  the
world  of  contingencies,  and  not  to  the  divine  world.
For  God,  the  end  is  the  same  thing  as  the  beginning.
So  the  reckoning  of  days,  weeks,  months,  and  years,  of
yesterday  and  to-day,  is  connected  with  the  terrestrial
globe;  but  in  the  sun  there  is  no  such  thing — there
is  neither  yesterday,  to-day,  nor  to-morrow,  neither
months  nor  years — all  are  equal.  In  the  same  way  the
Word  of  God  is  purified  from  all  these  conditions  and
is  exempt  from  the  boundaries,  the  laws,  and  the  limits
of  the  world  of  contingency.  Therefore  the  reality  of
prophethood,  which  is  the  Word  of  God  and  the  perfect
state  of  manifestation,  did  not  have  any  beginning,  and
will  not  have  any  end ;  its  rising  is  different  from  all

i  ».  e.  in  the  kingdom  of  man,  where  alone  the  Spirit  manifests  im-
mortality. Cf.  'Five  Aspects  of  Spirit,'  page  163;  '  The  State  of
Man  and  his  Progress  after  Death,'  page  272,  etc.


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD  175

others,  and  is  like  that  of  the  sun.  For  example,  its
dawning  in  the  sign  of  Christ  was  with  the  utmost
splendour  and  radiance,  and  this  is  eternal  and  ever-
lasting. See  how  many  conquering  kings  there  have
been,  how  many  statesmen  and  princes,  powerful
organisers,  all  of  whom  have  disappeared,  whereas  the
breezes  of  Christ  are  still  blowing,  his  light  is  still
shining,  his  melody  is  still  resounding,  his  standard
is  still  waving,  his  armies  are  still  fighting,  his
heavenly  voice  is  still  sweetly  melodious,  his  clouds
are  still  showering  gems,  his  lightning  is  still  flashing,
his  reflection  is  still  clear  and  brilliant,  his  splendour
is  still  radiating  and  luminous;  and  it  is  the  same
with  those  souls  who  are  under  his  protection  and  are
shining  with  his  light.

Then  it  is  evident  that  the  Manifestations  possess
three  conditions :  the  physical  condition,  the  condition
of  the  rational  soul,  and  the  condition  of  the  divine
appearance  and  heavenly  splendour.  The  physical
condition  will  certainly  become  decomposed,  but  the
condition  of  the  rational  soul,  though  it  has  a  be-
ginning, has  no  end :  nay,  it  is  endowed  with  ever-
lasting life.  But  the  Holy  Reality,  of  which  Christ
says  '  The  Father  is  in  the  Son,'  has  neither  beginning
nor  end.  When  beginning  is  spoken  of,  it  signifies  the
state  of  manifesting;  and  symbolically,  the  condition
of  silence  is  compared  to  sleep.  For  example,  a  man  is
sleeping — when  he  begins  to  speak  he  is  awake — but  it
is  always  the  same  individual,  whether  he  be  asleep  or
awake;  no  difference  has  occurred  in  his  station,  his
elevation,  his  glory,  his  reality,  or  his  nature.  The
state  of  silence  is  compared  to  sleep,  and  that  of  mani-


\


176          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

festation  to  wakefulness.  A  man  sleeping  or  waking  is
the  same  man ;  sleep  is  one  state,  and  wakefulness  is
another.  The  time  of  silence  is  compared  to  sleep,
and  manifestation  and  guidance  are  compared  to
wakefulness.

In  the  Gospel  it  is  said,  '  In  the  beginning  was  the
Word,  and  the  Word  was  with  God.'  Then  it  is  evident
and  clear  that  Christ  did  not  reach  to  the  station  of
Messiahship  and  its  perfections  at  the  time  of  baptism,
when  the  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  him  in  the  like-
ness of  a  dove.  Nay,  the  Word  of  God  from  all  eternity
has  always  been,  and  will  be,  in  the  exaltation  of
sanctification.


XXXIX

THE  HUMAN  CONDITION  AND  THE  SPIRITUAL
CONDITION  OF  THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS

WE  said  that  the  Manifestations  have  three  planes.
First,  the  physical  reality,  which  depends  upon  the
body;  secondly,  the  individual  reality,  that  is  to  say,
the  rational  soul;  thirdly,  the  divine  appearance,
which  is  the  divine  perfections,  the  cause  of  the  life  of
existence,  of  the  education  of  souls,  of  the  guidance  of
people,  and  of  the  enlightenment  of  the  contingent
world.

The  physical  state  is  the  human  state  which  perishes,
because  it  is  composed  of  elements;  and  all  that  is
composed  of  elements  will  necessarily  be  decomposed
and  dispersed.

But  the  individual  reality  of  the  Manifestations  of
God  is  a  holy  reality,  and  for  that  reason  it  is  sancti-
fied, and  in  that  which  concerns  its  nature  and  quality,
is  distinguished  from  all  other  things.  It  is  like  the
sun,  which  by  its  essential  nature  produces  light,  and
cannot  be  compared  to  the  moon,  just  as  the  particles
that  compose  the  globe  of  the  sun  cannot  be  compared
with  those  which  compose  the  moon.  The  particles
and  organisation  of  the  former  produce  rays,  but  the
particles  of  which  the  moon  is  composed  do  not

M


178          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

produce  rays,  but  need  to  borrow  light.  So  other
human  realities  are  those  souls  who,  like  the  moon,
take  light  from  the  sun ;  but  that  holy  reality  is  lumi-
nous in  himself.

The  third  plane  of  that  Being l  is  the  Divine  Bounty,
the  splendour  of  the  Pre- existent  Beauty,  and  the
radiance  of  the  light  of  the  Almighty.  The  individual
realities  of  the  Divine  Manifestations  have  no  separa-
tion from  the  Bounty  of  God  and  the  Lordly  Splendour.
In  the  same  way  the  orb  of  the  sun  has  no  separation
from  the  light.  Therefore  it  may  be  said  that  the
ascension  of  the  Holy  Manifestation  is  simply  the
leaving  of  this  elemental  form.  For  example,  if  a
lamp  illumines  this  niche,  and  if  its  light  ceases  to
illuminate  it  because  the  niche  is  destroyed,  the  bounty
of  the  lamp  is  not  cut  off.  Briefly,  in  the  Holy  Mani-
festations the  Pre-existent  Bounty  is  like  the  light,  the
individuality  is  represented  by  the  glass  globe,  and  the
human  body  is  like  the  niche  :  if  the  niche  is  destroyed,
the  lamp  continues  to  burn.  The  Divine  Manifesta-
tions are  so  many  different  mirrors,  because  they  have
a  special  individuality,  but  that  which  is  reflected  in
the  mirrors  is  one  sun.  It  is  clear  that  the  reality  of
Christ  is  different  from  that  of  Moses.

Verily  from  the  beginning  that  Holy  Reality 1  is  con-
scious of  the  secret  of  existence,  and  from  the  age  of  child-
hood signs  of  greatness  appear  and  are  visible  in  him.
Therefore  how  can  it  be  that  with  all  these  bounties
and  perfections  he  should  have  no  consciousness  ?

We  have  mentioned  that  the  Holy  Manifestations
have  three  planes.  The  physical  condition,  the  indi-

1  The  Manifestation.


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         179

vidual  reality,  and  the  centre  of  the  appearance  of  per-
fection :  it  is  like  the  sun,  its  heat  and  its  light.  Other
individuals  have  the  physical  plane,  the  plane  of  the
rational  soul — the  spirit  and  mind.1  So  the  saying, '  I
was  asleep  and  the  divine  breezes  passed  over  me  and
I  awoke,'  is  like  Christ's  saying :  '  The  body  is  sad  and
the  spirit  is  happy,'  or  again :  '  I  am  afflicted,  or  I  am
at  ease,  or  I  am  troubled ' — these  refer  to  the  physical
condition,  and  have  no  reference  to  the  individual
reality  nor  to  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Reality.
Thus  consider  what  thousands  of  vicissitudes  can
happen  to  the  body  of  man,  but  the  spirit  is  not
affected  by  them ;  it  may  even  be  that  some  members
of  the  body  are  entirely  crippled,  but  the  essence  of  the
mind  remains  and  is  everlasting.  A  thousand  accidents
may  happen  to  a  garment,  but  for  the  wearer  of  it
there  is  no  danger.  These  words  which  Baha'u'llah
said :  '  I  was  asleep,  and  the  breeze  passed  over  me  and
awakened  me/  refer  to  the  body.

In  the  world  of  God  there  is  no  past,  no  future,  and
no  present ;  all  are  one.  So  when  Christ  said :  '  In  the
beginning  was  the  Word ' — that  means  it  was,  is,  and
shall  be;  for  in  the  world  of  God  there  is  no  tune.
Time  has  sway  over  creatures,  but  not  over  God.  For
example,  in  the  prayer  he  says : '  Thy  name  is  hallowed ' ;
the  meaning  is  that  Thy  name  was,  is,  and  shall  be
hallowed.  Morning,  noon,  and  evening  are  related  to
this  earth,  but  in  the  sun  there  is  neither  morning,
noon,  nor  evening.

1  Cf.  '  Soul,  Spirit,  and  Mind,'  page  243.


XL

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE  DIVINE
MANIFESTATIONS

Question.  —  One  of  the  powers  possessed  by  the
Divine  Manifestations  is  knowledge:  to  what  extent
is  it  limited  ?

Answer. — Knowledge  is  of  two  kinds:  one  is  sub-
jective, and  the  other  objective  knowledge;  that  is  to
say,  an  intuitive  knowledge  and  a  knowledge  derived
from  perception.

The  knowledge  of  things  which  men  universally
have,  is  gained  by  reflection  or  by  evidence :  that  is  to
say,  either  by  the  power  of  the  mind  the  conception  of
an  object  is  formed,  or  from  beholding  an  object  the
form  is  produced  in  the  mirror  of  the  heart.  The
circle  of  this  knowledge  is  very  limited,  because  it
depends  upon  effort  and  attainment.

But  the  second  sort  of  knowledge,  which  is  the  know-
ledge of  being,  is  intuitive,  it  is  like  the  cognisance  and
consciousness  that  man  has  of  himself.

For  example,  the  mind  and  the  spirit  of  man  are
cognisant  of  the  conditions  and  states  of  the  members
and  component  parts  of  the  body,  and  are  aware  of  all
the  physical  sensations;  in  the  same  way  they  are
aware  of  their  power,  of  their  feelings,  and  of  their


180


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD          181

spiritual  conditions.  This  is  the  knowledge  of  being
which  man  realises  and  perceives;  for  the  spirit
surrounds  the  body,  and  is  aware  of  its  sensations  and
powers.  This  knowledge  is  not  the  outcome  of  effort
and  study;  it  is  an  existing  thing,  it  is  an  absolute
gift.

Since  the  Sanctified  Realities,  the  universal  Manifes-
tations of  God,  surround  the  essence  and  qualities  of
the  creatures,  transcend  and  contain  existing  realities
and  understand  all  things,  therefore  their  knowledge  is

,    divine  knowledge,  and  not  acquired :  that  is  to  say,  it

\  is  a  holy  bounty,  it  is  a  divine  revelation.

We  will  mention  an  example,  expressly  for  the
purpose  of  comprehending  this  subject.  The  most
noble  being  on  the  earth  is  man.  He  embraces  the
animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms:  that  is  to
say,  these  conditions  are  contained  in  him  to  such  an
extent  that  he  is  the  possessor  of  these  conditions  and
states ;  he  is  aware  of  their  mysteries  and  of  the  secrets
of  their  existence.  This  is  simply  an  example,  and  not
an  analogy.  Briefly,  the  universal  Manifestations  of
God  are  aware  of  the  reality  of  the  mysteries  of  beings,
therefore  they  establish  laws  which  are  suitable  and
adapted  to  the  state  of  the  world  of  man ;  for  religion
is  the  essential  connection  which  proceeds  from  the
realities  of  things.  The  Manifestation,  that  is  the  Holy
Lawgiver,  unless  he  is  aware  of  the  realities  of  beings,
will  not  comprehend  the  essential  connection  which
proceeds  from  the  realities  of  things,  and  he  will
certainly  not  be  able  to  establish  a  religion  conformable
to  the  facts  and  suited  to  the  conditions.  The  Prophets
of  God,  the  universal  Manifestations,  are  like  skilled


182          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

physicians,  and  the  contingent  world  is  like  the  body
of  man :  the  divine  laws  are  the  remedy  and  treatment.
Consequently  the  doctor  must  be  aware  of,  and  know,
all  the  members  and  parts,  as  well  as  the  constitution
and  state  of  the  patient,  so  that  he  can  prescribe  a
medicine  which  will  be  beneficial  against  the  violent
poison  of  the  disease.  In  reality  the  doctor  deduces
from  the  disease  itself  the  treatment  which  is  suited  to
the  patient,  for  he  diagnoses  the  malady,  and  afterwards
prescribes  the  remedy  for  the  illness.  Until  the  malady
be  discovered,  how  can  the  remedy  and  treatment  be
prescribed?  The  doctor  then  must  have  a  thorough
knowledge  of  the  constitution,  members,  organs,  and
state  of  the  patient,  and  be  acquainted  with  all  dis-
eases and  all  remedies,  in  order  to  prescribe  a  fitting
medicine.

Religion,  then,  is  the  necessary  connection  which
emanates  from  the  reality  of  things;  and  as  the
universal  Manifestations  of  God  are  aware  of  the
mysteries  of  beings,  therefore  they  understand  this
essential  connection,  and  by  this  knowledge  establish
the  Law  of  God.


XLI
THE  UNIVERSAL  CYCLES

Question. — What  is  the  real  explanation  of  the  cycles
which  occur  in  the  world  of  existence  ?

Answer. — Each  one  of  the  luminous  bodies  in  this
limitless  firmament  has  a  cycle  of  revolution  which  is
of  a  different  duration,  and  every  one  revolves  in  its
own  orbit,  and  again  begins  a  new  cycle.  So  the  earth,
every  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days,  five  hours,
forty-eight  minutes  and  a  fraction,  completes  a  revolu-
tion ;  and  then  it  begins  a  new  cycle,  that  is  to  say,  the
first  cycle  is  again  renewed.  In  the  same  way,  for  the
whole  universe,  whether  for  the  heavens  or  for  men,
there  are  cycles  of  great  events,  of  important  facts  and
occurrences.  When  a  cycle  is  ended,  a  new  cycle
begins,  and  the  old  one,  on  account  of  the  great  events
which  take  place,  is  completely  forgotten,  and  not  a
trace  or  record  of  it  will  remain.  As  you  see,  we  have
no  records  of  twenty  thousand  years  ago,  although  we
have  before  proved  by  argument  that  life  on  this  earth
is  very  ancient.  It  is  not  one  hundred  thousand,  or
two  hundred  thousand,  or  one  million  or  two  million
years  old;  it  is  very  ancient,  and  the  ancient  records
and  traces  are  entirely  obliterated.

Each  of  the  Divine  Manifestations  has  likewise  a

183


cycle,  and  during  the  cycle  his  laws  and  command-
ments prevail  and  are  performed.  When  his  cycle  is
completed  by  the  appearance  of  a  new  Manifestation,  a
new  cycle  begins.  In  this  way  cycles  begin,  end,  and
are  renewed,  until  a  universal  cycle  is  completed  in  the
world,  when  important  events  and  great  occurrences
will  take  place  which  entirely  efface  every  trace  and
every  record  of  the  past;  then  a  new  universal  cycle
begins  in  the  world,  for  this  universe  has  no  beginning.
We  have  before  stated  proofs  and  evidences  concerning
this  subject;  there  is  no  need  of  repetition.

Briefly,  we  say  a  universal  cycle  in  the  world  of
existence  signifies  a  long  duration  of  time,  and  in-
numerable and  incalculable  periods  and  epochs.  In
such  a  cycle  the  Manifestations  appear  with  splendour
in  the  realm  of  the  visible,  until  a  great  and  universal
Manifestation  makes  the  world  the  centre  of  his
radiance.  His  appearance  causes  the  world  to  attain  to
maturity,  and  the  extension  of  his  cycle  is  very  great.
Afterwards  other  Manifestations  will  arise  under  his
shadow,  who  according  to  the  needs  of  the  time  will
renew  certain  commandments  relating  to  material
questions  and  affairs,  while  remaining  under  his
shadow.

We  are  in  the  cycle  which  began  with  Adam,  and  its
universal  Manifestation  is  Baha'u'llah.


XLII

THE  POWER  AND  INFLUENCE  OF  THE
DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS

Question. — What  is  the  degree  of  the  power  and  the
perfections  of  the  Thrones  of  Reality,  the  Manifesta-
tions of  God,  and  what  is  the  limit  of  their  influence  ?

Answer. — Consider  the  world  of  existence,  that  is  to
say,  the  world  of  material  things.  The  solar  system  is
dark  and  obscure,  and  in  it  the  sun  is  the  centre  of  light,
and  all  the  planets  of  the  system  revolve  around  its
might  and  are  partakers  of  its  bounty.  The  sun  is  the
cause  of  life  and  illumination,  and  the  means  of  the
growth  and  development  of  all  the  beings  of  the  solar
system;  for  without  the  bounty  of  the  sun  no  living
being  could  exist:  all  would  be  dark  and  destroyed.
Therefore  it  is  evident  and  clear  that  the  sun  is  the
centre  of  lights,  and  the  cause  of  the  life  of  the  beings
of  the  solar  system.

In  like  manner,  the  Holy  Manifestations  of  God  are
the  centres  of  the  light  of  Reality,  of  the  source  of
Mysteries,  and  of  the  bounties  of  Love.  They  are
resplendent  in  the  world  of  hearts  and  thoughts,  and
shower  eternal  graces  upon  the  world  of  spirits ;  they
give  spiritual  life,  and  are  shining  with  the  light  of
realities  and  meanings.  The  enlightenment  of  the

186


186          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

world  of  thought  comes  from  these  centres  of  light
and  sources  of  mysteries.  Without  the  bounty  of  the
splendour,  and  the  instructions  of  these  Holy  Beings,
the  world  of  souls  and  thoughts  would  be  opaque
darkness.  Without  the  irrefutable  teachings  of  those
Sources  of  mysteries,  the  human  world  would  become
the  pasture  of  animal  appetites  and  qualities,  the  exist-
ence of  everything  would  be  unreal,  and  there  would  be
no  true  life.  That  is  why  it  is  said  in  the  Gospel :  '  In
the  beginning  was  the  Word ' ;  meaning  that  it  became
the  cause  of  all  life.

Now  consider  the  influence  of  the  sun  upon  the
earthly  beings :  what  signs  and  results  become  evident
and  clear  from  its  nearness  and  remoteness,  from  its
rising  or  its  setting.  At  one  time  it  is  autumn,  at
another  time  spring ;  or  again  it  is  summer  or  winter.
When  the  sun  passes  the  line  of  the  Equator,  the
life-giving  spring  will  become  manifest  in  splendour,
and  when  it  is  in  the  summer  solstice  the  fruits  will
attain  to  the  acme  of  perfection,  grains  and  plants  will
yield  their  produce,  and  earthly  beings  will  attain  their
most  complete  development  and  growth.

In  like  manner  when  the  Holy  Manifestation  of  God,
who  is  the  sun  of  the  world  of  his  creation,  shines
upon  the  worlds  of  spirits,  of  thoughts,  and  of  hearts,
then  the  spiritual  spring  and  new  life  appear,  the  power
of  the  wonderful  springtime  becomes  visible,  and  mar-
vellous benefits  are  apparent.  As  you  have  observed,
at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of  each  Manifestation  of
God,  extraordinary  progress  has  occurred  in  the  world
of  minds,  thoughts,  and  spirits.  For  example,  in  this
divine  age  see  what  development  has  been  attained  in


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         187

the  world  of  minds  and  thoughts,  and  it  is  now  only
the  beginning  of  its  dawn.  Before  long  you  will  see
that  new  bounties  and  divine  teachings  will  illuminate
this  dark  world,  and  will  transform  these  sad  regions
into  the  paradise  of  Eden.

If  we  were  to  explain  the  signs  and  bounties  of  each
of  the  Holy  Manifestations,  it  would  take  too  long.
Think  and  reflect  upon  it  yourself,  and  then  you  will
attain  to  the  truth  of  this  subject.


XLIII
THE  TWO  CLASSES  OF  PROPHETS

Question. — How  many  kinds  of  Prophets  are  there  ?

Answer. — Universally,  the  Prophets  are  of  two  kinds.
One  are  the  independent  Prophets  who  are  followed;
the  other  kind  are  not  independent,  and  are  themselves
followers.

The  independent  Prophets  are  the  lawgivers  and  the
founders  of  a  new  cycle.  Through  their  appearance
the  world  puts  on  a  new  garment,  the  foundations  of
religion  are  established,  and  a  new  book  is  revealed.
Without  an  intermediary  they  receive  bounty  from  the
Reality  of  the  Divinity,  and  then*  illumination  is  an
essential  illumination.  They  are  like  the  sun  which
is  luminous  in  itself:  the  light  is  its  essential  necessity ;
it  does  not  receive  light  from  any  other  star.  These
Dawning- places  of  the  morn  of  Unity  are  the  sources
of  Bounty,  and  the  mirrors  of  the  Essence  of  Reality.

The  other  Prophets  are  followers  and  promoters,  for
they  are  branches  and  not  independent;  they  receive
the  Bounty  of  the  independent  Prophets,  and  they
profit  by  the  light  of  the  Guidance  of  the  universal
Prophets.  They  are  like  the  moon,  which  is  not
luminous  and  radiant  in  itself,  but  receives  its  light
from  the  sun.

188


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         189

The  Manifestations  of  universal  Prophethood  who
appeared  independently  are,  for  example,  Abraham,
Moses,  Christ,  Muhammad,  the  Bab,  and  Baha'u'llah.
But  the  others  who  are  followers  and  promoters  are
like  Solomon,  David,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel.
For  the  independent  Prophets  are  founders;  they
establish  a  new  religion  and  make  new  creatures  of
men;  they  change  the  general  morals,  promote  new
customs  and  rules,  renew  the  cycle  and  the  Law.  Their
appearance  is  like  the  season  of  spring,  which  arrays
all  earthly  beings  in  a  new  garment,  and  gives  them  a
new  life.

With  regard  to  the  second  sort  of  Prophets  who  are
followers,  these  also  promote  the  Law  of  God,  make
known  the  Religion  of  God,  and  proclaim  His  word.
Of  themselves  they  have  no  power  and  might,  except
what  they  receive  from  the  independent  Prophets.

Question. — To  which  category  do  Buddha  and
Confucius  belong  ?

Answer. — Buddha  also  established  a  new  religion,  and
Confucius  renewed  morals  and  ancient  virtues,  but  their
institutions  have  been  entirely  destroyed.  The  beliefs
and  rites  of  the  Buddhists  and  Confucianists  have
not  continued  in  accordance  with  their  fundamental
teachings.  The  founder  of  Buddhism  was  a  wonderful
soul.  He  established  the  Oneness  of  God,  but  later
the  original  principles  of  his  doctrines  gradually  dis-
appeared, and  ignorant  customs  and  ceremonials  arose
and  increased,  until  they  finally  ended  in  the  worship
of  statues  and  images.

Now,  consider:  Christ  frequently  repeated  that  the  ten
commandments  in  the  Pentateuch  were  to  be  followed,


190          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  he  insisted  that  they  should  be  maintained.
Among  the  ten  commandments  is  one  which  says :  '  Do
not  worship  any  picture  or  image.'  At  present  in  some
of  the  Christian  churches  many  pictures  and  images
exist.  It  is  therefore  clear  and  evident  that  the
Religion  of  God  does  not  maintain  its  original  principles
among  the  people,  but  that  it  has  gradually  changed
and  altered  until  it  has  been  entirely  destroyed  and
annihilated.  Because  of  this  the  manifestation  is
renewed,  and  a  new  religion  established.  But  if
religions  did  not  change  and  alter,  there  would  be  no
need  of  renewal.

In  the  beginning  the  tree  was  in  all  its  beauty,  and
full  of  blossoms  and  fruits,  but  at  last  it  became  old
and  entirely  fruitless,  and  it  withered  and  decayed.
This  is  why  the  True  Gardener  plants  again  an  in-
comparable young  tree  of  the  same  kind  and  species,
which  grows  and  develops  day  by  day,  and  spreads  a
wide  shadow  in  the  divine  garden,  and  yields  admirable
fruit.  So  it  is  with  religions ;  through  the  passing  of
time  they  change  from  their  original  foundation,  the
truth  of  the  Religion  of  God  entirely  departs,  and  the
spirit  of  it  does  not  stay;  heresies  appear,  and  it
becomes  a  body  without  a  soul.  That  is  why  it  is
renewed.

The  meaning  is  that  the  Buddhists  and  Confucianists
now  worship  images  and  statues.  They  are  entirely
heedless  of  the  Oneness  of  God,  and  believe  in
imaginary  gods  like  the  ancient  Greeks.  But  in  the
beginning  it  was  not  so ;  there  were  different  principles
and  other  ordinances.

Again,  consider  how  much  the  principles  of  the


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         191

religion  of  Christ  have  been  forgotten,  and  how  many
heresies  have  appeared.  For  example,  Christ  forbade
revenge  and  transgression ;  furthermore,  he  commanded
benevolence  and  mercy  in  return  for  injury  and  evil.
Now  reflect :  among  the  Christian  nations  themselves
how  many  sanguinary  wars  have  taken  place,  and  how
much  oppression,  cruelty,  rapacity,  and  bloodthirstiness
have  occurred!  Many  of  these  wars  were  carried  on
by  command  of  the  Popes.  It  is  then  clear  and  evident
that  in  the  passage  of  time  religions  become  entirely
changed  and  altered.  Therefore  they  are  renewed.


XLIV

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  REBUKES  ADDRESSED
BY  GOD  TO  THE  PROPHETS

Question.  —  In  the  Holy  Books  there  are  some
addresses  of  reproach  and  rebuke  directed  to  the
Prophets.  Who  is  addressed,  and  for  whom  is  the
rebuke  ?

Answer. — All  the  divine  discourses  containing  re-
proof, though  apparently  addressed  to  the  Prophets,  in
reality  are  directed  to  the  people,  through  a  wisdom
which  is  absolute  mercy,  in  order  that  the  people  may
not  be  discouraged  and  disheartened.  They  therefore
appear  to  be  addressed  to  the  Prophets;  but  though
outwardly  for  the  Prophets,  they  are  in  truth  for  the
people  and  not  for  the  Prophets.

Moreover,  the  powerful  and  independent  king  repre-
sents his  country :  that  which  he  says  is  the  word  of
all,  and  every  agreement  that  he  makes,  is  the  agree-
ment of  all,  for  the  wishes  and  desires  of  all  his  subjects
are  included  in  his  wishes  and  desires.  In  the  same
way,  every  Prophet  is  the  expression  of  the  whole  of
the  people.  So  the  promise  and  speech  of  God
addressed  to  him  is  addressed  to  all.  Generally  the
speech  of  reproach  and  rebuke  is  rather  too  severe  for
the  people,  and  would  be  heart-breaking  to  them.  So

192


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         193

the  Perfect  Wisdom  makes  use  of  this  form  of  address,
as  is  clearly  shown  in  the  Bible  itself,  as,  for  example,
when  the  children  of  Israel  rebelled  and  said  to  Moses :
'We  cannot  fight  with  the  Amalekites,  for  they  are
powerful,  mighty,  and  courageous.'  God  then  rebuked
Moses  and  Aaron,  though  Moses  was  in  complete
obedience  and  not  in  rebellion.  Surely  such  a  great
man,  who  is  the  mediator  of  the  Divine  Bounty  and
the  deliverer  of  the  Law,  must  necessarily  obey  the
commands  of  God.  These  Holy  Souls  are  like  the
leaves  of  a  tree,  which  are  put  in  motion  by  the
blowing  of  the  wind,  and  not  by  their  own  desire ;  for
they  are  attracted  by  the  breeze  of  the  love  of  God,
and  their  will  is  absolutely  submissive.  Their  word  is
the  word  of  God,  their  commandment  is  the  command-
ment of  God,  their  prohibition  is  the  prohibition  of
God.  They  are  like  the  glass  globe  which  receives  light
from  the  lamp.  Although  the  light  appears  to  emanate
from  the  glass,  in  reality  it  is  shining  from  the  lamp :
in  the  same  way  for  the  Prophets  of  God,  the  centres  of
manifestation,  their  movement  and  repose  come  from
divine  inspiration,  not  from  human  passions.  If  it
were  not  so,  how  could  the  Prophet  be  worthy  of  trust,
and  how  could  he  be  the  Messenger  of  God,  delivering
the  commands  and  the  prohibitions  of  God  ?  All  the
defects  that  are  mentioned  in  the  Holy  Books  with
reference  to  the  Manifestations,  refer  to  questions  of
this  kind.

Praise  be  to  God  that  you  have  come  here,  and  have
met  the  servants  of  God !  Have  you  perceived  in  them
anything  except  the  fragrance  of  the  pleasure  of  God  ?
Indeed,  no.  You  have  seen  with  your  own  eyes  that

N


194          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

day  and  night  they  endeavour  and  strive,  and  that
they  have  no  aim  except  the  exaltation  of  the  word  of
God,  the  education  of  men,  the  improvement  of  the
masses,  spiritual  progress,  the  promulgation  of  uni-
versal peace,  goodwill  to  all  mankind,  and  kindness
towards  all  nations.  Sacrificing  themselves  for  the
good  of  humanity,  they  are  detached  from  material
advantages,  and  labour  to  give  virtues  to  mankind.

But  let  us  return  to  our  subject.  For  example,  in
the  Old  Testament  it  is  said  in  the  Book  of  Isaiah,
chapter  48,  verse  12  :  '  Hearken  unto  Me,  O  Jacob  and
Israel,  My  called,  I  am  He ;  I  am  the  first,  I  also  am
the  last.'  It  is  evident  that  it  does  not  mean  Jacob
who  was  Israel,  but  the  people  of  Israel.  Also  in  the
Book  of  Isaiah,  chapter  43,  verse  1,  it  is  said :  '  But  now
thus  saith  the  Lord  that  created  thee,  O  Jacob,  and  He
that  formed  thee,  0  Israel,  Fear  not:  for  I  have  re-
deemed thee,  I  have  called  thee  by  thy  name;  thou
art  Mine.'

Furthermore,  in  Numbers,  chapter  20,  verse  23 :  'And
the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  Aaron  in  Mount  Hor,
by  the  coast  of  the  land  of  Edom,  saying,  Aaron  shall
be  gathered  unto  his,  people :  for  he  shall  not  enter  into
the  land  which  I  have  given  unto  the  children  of  Israel,
because  ye  rebelled  against  My  word  at  the  water  of
Meribah';  and  in  verse  13:  'This  is  the  water  of
Meribah;  because  the  children  of  Israel  strove  with
the  Lord,  and  He  was  sanctified  in  them.'

Observe  :  the  people  of  Israel  rebelled,  but  apparently
the  reproach  was  for  Moses  and  Aaron.  As  it  is  said  in
the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  chapter  3,  verse  26  :  '  But  the
Lord  was  wroth  with  me  for  your  sakes,  and  would  not


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         195

hear  me:  and  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Let  it  suffice
thee,  speak  no  more  unto  Me  of  this  matter.'

Now  this  discourse  and  reproach  really  refer  to  the
children  of  Israel,  who,  for  having  rebelled  against  the
command  of  God,  were  held  captive  a  long  time  in
the  arid  desert,  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  until  the
time  of  Joshua — upon  him  be  salutations.  This  address
and  reproach  appeared  to  be  for  Moses  and  Aaron,  but
in  reality  they  were  for  the  people  of  Israel.

In  the  same  way  in  the  Quran  it  is  said  to  Muham-
mad: 'We  have  granted  thee  a  manifest  victory,  so
that  God  may  forgive  thee  thy  preceding  and  sub-
sequent sin.'1  This  address,  although  apparently
directed  to  Muhammad,  was  in  reality  for  all  the
people.  This  mode  of  address,  as  before  said,  was  used
by  the  perfect  wisdom  of  God,  so  that  the  hearts  of
the  people  might  not  be  troubled,  anxious,  and
tormented.

How  often  the  Prophets  of  God  and  His  universal
Manifestations  in  their  prayers  confess  their  sins  and
faults !  This  is  only  to  teach  other  men,  to  encourage
and  incite  them  to  humility  and  meekness,  and  to
induce  them  to  confess  their  sins  and  faults.  For
these  Holy  Souls  are  pure  from  every  sin,  and  sancti-
fied from  faults.  In  the  Gospel  it  is  said  that  a  man
came  to  Christ  and  called  him  '  Good  Master.'  Christ
answered :  '  Why  callest  thou  me  good  ?  there  is  none
good  but  one,  that  is  God.'  This  did  not  mean — God
forbid ! — that  Christ  was  a  sinner ;  but  the  intention
was  to  teach  submission,  humility,  meekness,  and
modesty  to  the  man  to  whom  he  spoke.  These  Holy

1  Quran,  Sura  48.


196          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Beings  are  lights,  and  light  does  not  unite  itself  with
darkness.  They  are  life,  and  life  and  death  are  not
confounded ;  they  are  for  guidance,  and  guidance  and
error  cannot  be  together;  they  are  the  essence  of
obedience,  and  obedience  cannot  exist  with  rebellion.

To  conclude,  the  addresses  in  the  form  of  reproach
which  are  in  the  Holy  Books,  though  apparently
directed  to  the  Prophets,  that  is  to  say  to  the  Manifes-
tations of  God,  in  reality  are  intended  for  the  people.
This  will  become  evident  and  clear  to  you  when  you
have  diligently  examined  the  Holy  Books.

Salutations  be  upon  you.


XLV

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  VERSE  OF  THE
KITABU'L-AQDAS,  'THERE  IS  NO  ASSO-
CIATE FOR  THE  DAWNING  -  PLACE  OF
COMMAND  IN  THE  SUPREME  SINLESS-
NESS'

IT  is  said  in  the  holy  verse :  '  There  is  no  associate  for
the  Dawning  -  place  of  Command1  in  the  Supreme
Sinlessness.  In  truth  he  is  the  Manifestor  of  "  He
does  what  He  wishes"  in  the  kingdom  of  creation.
Verily  God  has  reserved  this  station  for  Himself,  and
has  not  left  to  any  one  a  share  of  this  inviolable
condition.' 2

Know  that  sinlessness  is  of  two  kinds :  essential  sin-
lessness  and  acquired  sinlessness.  In  like  manner
there  is  essential  knowledge  and  acquired  knowledge ;
and  so  it  is  with  other  names  and  attributes.
Essential  sinlessness  is  peculiar  to  the  universal  Mani-
festation, for  it  is  his  essential  requirement,  and  an
essential  requirement  cannot  be  separated  from  the
thing  itself.  The  rays  are  the  essential  necessity  of  the
sun,  and  are  inseparable  from  it.  Knowledge  is  an
essential  necessity  of  God,  and  is  inseparable  from  Him.

1  The  Manifestation  of  God.

2  Kitabu'l-Aqdas :  i.e.  The  Most  Holy  Book.     The  principal  work
of  Baha'u'llah,  which  contains  the  greater  part  of  the  commandments.
It  is  the  basis  of  the  principles  of  Bahaism.

m


198          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Power  is  an  essential  necessity  of  God,  and  is  insepar-
able from  Him.  If  it  could  be  separated  from  Him,
He  would  not  be  God.  If  the  rays  could  be  separated
from  the  sun,  it  would  not  be  the  sun.  Therefore  if
one  imagines  separation  of  the  Supreme  Sinlessness
from  the  universal  Manifestation,  he  would  not  be  the
universal  Manifestation,  and  he  would  lack  the  essen-
tial perfections.

But  acquired  sinlessness  is  not  a  natural  necessity ;
on  the  contrary,  it  is  a  ray  of  the  bounty  of  Sinlessness
which  shines  from  the  Sun  of  Reality  upon  hearts,  and
grants  a  share  and  portion  of  itself  to  souls.  Although
these  souls  have  not  essential  sinlessness,  still  they  are
under  the  protection  of  God :  that  is  to  say,  God  pre-
serves them  from  sin.  Thus  many  of  the  holy  beings
who  were  not  dawning-points  of  the  Supreme  Sinless-
ness,  were  yet  kept  and  preserved  from  sin  under  the
shadow  of  the  protection  and  guardianship  of  God ;  for
they  were  the  mediators  of  grace  between  God  and
men.  If  God  did  not  protect  them  from  error,  their
error  would  cause  believing  souls  to  fall  into  error,  and
thus  the  foundation  of  the  Religion  of  God  would  be
overturned,  which  would  not  be  fitting  nor  worthy  of
God.

To  epitomise :  essential  sinlessness  belongs  especially
to  the  universal  Manifestations,  and  the  acquired  sin-
lessness is  granted  to  every  holy  soul.  For  instance,
the  General  House  of  Justice,1  if  it  be  established  under
the  necessary  conditions — with  members  elected  from

1  Baitu'l-'Adl,  i.e.  the  House  of  Justice,  is  an  institution  designed
by  Baha'u'llah  for  the  administration  of  the  future  city.  The  General
House  of  Justice  will  determine  the  laws  of  the  nation,  and  the
International  House  of  Justice  will  act  as  a  tribunal  of  arbitration.


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         199

all  the  people — that  House  of  Justice  will  be  under  the
protection  and  the  guardianship  of  God.  If  that  House
of  Justice  shall  decide  unanimously,  or  by  a  majority,
upon  any  question  not  mentioned  in  the  Book,1  that
decision  and  command  will  be  guarded  from  mistake.
Now  the  members  of  the  House  of  Justice  have  not,
individually,  essential  sinlessness ;  but  the  body  of  the
House  of  Justice  is  under  the  protection  of  God :  this
is  called  conferred  infallibility.

Briefly,  it  is  said  that  the  '  Rising-place  of  Command '
is  the  manifestation  of  these  words, '  He  does  what  He
wishes ' ;  this  condition  is  peculiar  to  that  Holy  Being,
and  others  have  no  share  of  this  essential  perfection.
That  is  to  say,  that  as  the  universal  Manifestations
certainly  possess  essential  sinlessness,  therefore  what-
ever emanates  from  them  is  identical  with  the  truth,
and  comforraable  to  the  reality.  They  are  not  under
the  shadow  of  the  former  laws.  Whatever  they  say  is
the  word  of  God,  and  whatever  they  perform  is  an
upright  action,  No  believer  has  any  right  to  criticise ;
his  condition  must  be  one  of  absolute  submission,  for
the  Manifestation  arises  with  perfect  wisdom.

So  that  whatever  the  universal  Manifestation  says
and  does  is  absolute  wisdom,  and  is  in  accordance  with
the  reality.  If  some  people  do  not  understand  the  hidden
secret  of  one  of  his  commands  and  actions,  they  ought
not  to  oppose  it,  for  the  universal  Manifestation  does
what  he  wishes.  How  often  it  has  occurred,  when
an  act  has  been  performed  by  a  wise,  perfect,  intelli-
gent man,  that  others  incapable  of  comprehending  its
wisdom  have  objected  to  it,  and  been  amazed  that  this

1  Kitabu'l-Aqdas.


200          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

wise  man  could  say  or  do  such  a  thing.  This  opposition
comes  from  their  ignorance,  and  the  wisdom  of  the
sage  is  pure  and  exempt  from  sin.  In  the  same  way,
the  skilled  doctor  in  treating  the  patient '  does  what  he
wishes,'  and  the  patient  has  no  right  to  object;  what-
ever the  doctor  says  and  does  is  right;  all  ought  to
consider  him  the  manifestation  of  these  words, '  He  does
what  he  wishes,  and  commands  whatever  he  desires.'
It  is  certain  that  the  doctor  will  use  some  medicine
contrary  to  the  ideas  of  other  people ;  now  opposition
is  not  permitted  to  those  who  have  not  the  advantage
of  science  and  the  medical  art.  No,  in  the  name  of
God !  on  the  contrary,  all  ought  to  be  submissive  and
to  perform  whatever  the  skilled  doctor  says.  There-
fore the  clever  doctor  '  does  what  he  wishes,'  and  the
patients  have  no  share  in  this  right.  The  skill  of  the
doctor  must  be  first  ascertained ;  but  when  the  skill  of
the  doctor  is  once  established, '  he  does  what  he  wishes.'

So  also,  when  the  head  of  the  army  is  unrivalled  in
the  art  of  war,  in  what  he  says  and  commands  '  he  does
what  he  wishes.'  When  the  captain  of  a  ship  is  pro-
ficient in  the  art  of  navigation,  in  whatever  he  says  and
commands, '  he  does  what  he  wishes ' ;  and  as  the  real
educator  is  the  Perfect  Man,  in  whatever  he  says  and
commands, '  he  does  what  he  wishes.'

In  short,  the  meaning  of  '  He  does  what  He  wishes '
is  that  if  the  Manifestation  says  something,  or  gives  a
command,  or  performs  an  action,  and  believers  do  not
understand  its  wisdom,  they  still  ought  not  to  oppose
it  by  a  single  thought,  seeking  to  know  why  he  spoke
so,  or  why  he  did  such  a  thing.  The  other  souls  who
are  under  the  shadow  of  the  universal  Manifestations,


THE  MANIFESTATIONS  OF  GOD         201

are  submissive  to  the  commandments  of  the  Law  of  God,
and  are  not  to  deviate  as  much  as  a  hairsbreadth  from
it ;  they  must  conform  their  acts  and  words  to  the  Law
of  God.  If  they  do  deviate  from  it,  they  will  be  held
responsible  and  reproved  in  the  presence  of  God.  It  is
certain  that  they  have  no  share  in  the  permission  '  He
does  what  He  wishes,'  for  this  condition  is  peculiar  to
the  universal  Manifestations.

So  Christ — may  my  spirit  be  sacrificed  to  him ! — was
the  manifestation  of  these  words,  'He  does  what  He
wishes,'  but  the  disciples  were  not  partakers  of  this
condition ;  for  as  they  were  under  the  shadow  of  Christ,
they  could  not  deviate  from  his  command  and  will.


PART  IV

ON  THE  ORIGIN,  POWERS,  AND
CONDITIONS  OF  MAN


XLVI
MODIFICATION  OF  SPECIES

WE  have  now  come  to  the  question  of  the  modification
of  species  and  of  organic  development :  that  is  to  say,
to  the  point  of  inquiring  whether  man's  descent  is
from  the  animal.

This  theory  has  found  credence  in  the  minds  of  some
European  philosophers,  and  it  is  now  very  difficult  to
make  its  falseness  understood,  but  in  the  future  it  will
become  evident  and  clear,  and  the  European  philoso-
phers will  themselves  realise  its  untruth.  For  verily  it
is  an  evident  error.  When  man  looks  at  the  beings
with  a  penetrating  regard,  and  attentively  examines
the  condition  of  existences,  and  when  he  sees  the  state,
the  organisation,  and  the  perfection  of  the  world,  he
will  be  convinced  that  in  the  possible  world  there  is
nothing  more  wonderful  than  that  which  already  exists.
For  all  existing  beings,  terrestrial  and  celestial,  as  well
as  this  limitless  space  and  all  that  is  in  it,  have  been
created  and  organised,  composed,  arranged,  and  per-
fected as  they  ought  to  be  ;  the  universe  has  no  imper-
fection ;  so  that  if  all  beings  became  pure  intelligence  and
reflected  for  ever  and  ever,  it  is  impossible  that  they
could  imagine  anything  better  than  that  which  exists.

If,  however,  the  creation  in  the  past  had  not  been

206


206          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

adorned  with,  utmost  perfection,  then  existence  would
have  been  imperfect  and  meaningless,  and  in  this  case
creation  would  have  been  incomplete.  This  question
needs  to  be  considered  with  the  greatest  attention  and
thought.  For  example,  imagine  that  the  world  of
possibility — that  is,  the  world  of  existence — resembles
in  a  general  way  the  body  of  man.  If  this  composition,
organisation,  perfection,  beauty,  and  completeness  which
now  exist  in  the  human  body  were  different,  it  would
be  absolute  imperfection.  Now,  if  we  imagine  a  time
when  man  belonged  to  the  animal  world,  or  when  he
was  merely  an  animal,  we  shall  find  that  existence
would  have  been  imperfect ;  that  is  to  say,  there  would
have  been  no  man,  and  this  chief  member,  which  in  the
body  of  the  world  is  like  the  brain  and  mind  in  man,
would  have  been  missing.  The  world  would  then  have
been  quite  imperfect.  It  is  thus  proved  that  if  there
had  been  a  time  when  man  was  in  the  animal  kingdom,
the  perfection  of  existence  would  have  been  destroyed ;
for  man  is  the  greatest  member  of  this  world,  and  if
the  body  was  without  this  chief  member,  surely  it
would  be  imperfect.  We  consider  man  as  the  greatest
member  because,  among  the  creatures,  he  is  the  sum
of  all  existing  perfections.  When  we  speak  of  man,  we
mean  the  perfect  one,  the  foremost  individual  in  the
world,  who  is  the  sum  of  spiritual  and  apparent  per-
fections, and  who  is  like  the  sun  among  the  beings.
Then  imagine  that  at  one  time  the  sun  did  not  exist,
but  that  it  was  a  planet — surely  at  such  a  time  the
relations  of  existence  would  be  disordered.  How  can
such  a  thing  be  imagined  ?  To  a  man  who  examines
the  world  of  existence,  what  we  have  said  is  sufficient.


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    207

There  is  another  more  subtle  proof:  all  these  endless
beings  which  inhabit  the  world,  whether  man,  animal,
vegetable,  mineral — whatever  they  may  be — are  surely,
each  one  of  them,  composed  of  elements.  There  is  no
doubt  that  this  perfection  which  is  in  all  beings,  is
caused  by  the  creation  of  God  from  the  composing
elements,  by  their  appropriate  mingling  and  propor-
tionate quantities,  the  mode  of  their  composition,  and
the  influence  of  other  beings.  For  all  beings  are  con-
nected together  like  a  chain,  and  reciprocal  help,  assist-
ance, and  influence  belonging  to  the  properties  of
things,  are  the  causes  of  the  existence,  development,
and  growth  of  created  beings.  It  is  confirmed  through
evidences  and  proofs  that  every  being  universally  acts
upon  other  beings,  either  absolutely  or  through  associa-
tion. Finally,  the  perfection  of  each  individual  being,
that  is  to  say  the  perfection  which  you  now  see  in
man  or  apart  from  him,  with  regard  to  their  atoms,
members,  or  powers,  is  due  to  the  composition  of  the
elements,  to  their  measure,  to  their  balance,  to  the
mode  of  their  combination,  and  to  mutual  influence.
When  all  these  are  gathered  together,  then  man  exists.

As  the  perfection  of  man  is  entirely  due  to  the  com-
position of  the  atoms  of  the  elements,  to  their  measure,
to  the  method  of  their  combination,  and  to  the  mutual
influence  and  action  of  the  different  beings — then,  since
man  was  produced  ten  or  a  hundred  thousand  years
ago  from  these  earthly  elements  with  the  same  measure
and  balance,  the  same  method  of  combination  and
mingling,  and  the  same  influence  of  the  other  beings,
exactly  the  same  man  existed  then  as  now.  This  is
evident  and  not  worth  debating.  A  thousand  million


208          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

years  hence,  if  these  elements  of  man  are  gathered
together  and  arranged  in  this  special  proportion,  and
if  the  elements  are  combined  according  to  the  same
method,  and  if  they  are  affected  by  the  same  influence
of  other  beings,  exactly  the  same  man  will  exist.  For
example,  if  after  a  hundred  thousand  years  there  is  oil,
fire,  a  wick,  a  lamp,  and  the  lighter  of  the  lamp —
briefly,  if  there  are  all  the  necessaries  which  now  exist,
exactly  the  same  lamp  will  be  obtained.

These  are  conclusive  and  evident  facts.  But  the
arguments  which  these  European  philosophers  have
used  raise  doubtful  proofs  and  are  not  conclusive.


XLVII
THE  UNIVERSE  IS  WITHOUT  BEGINNING

THE   ORIGIN   OF  MAN

KNOW  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  abstruse  spiritual
truths  that  the  world  of  existence,  that  is  to  say  this
endless  universe,  has  no  beginning.

We  have  already  explained  that  the  names  and
attributes  of  the  Divinity  themselves  require  the
existence  of  beings.  Although  this  subject  has
been  explained  in  detail,  we  will  speak  of  it  again
briefly.  Know  that  an  educator  without  pupils  cannot
be  imagined,  a  monarch  without  subjects  could  not
exist,  a  master  without  scholars  cannot  be  appointed,
a  creator  without  a  creature  is  impossible,  a  provider
without  those  provided  for  cannot  be  conceived;  for
all  the  divine  names  and  attributes  demand  the  exist-
ence of  beings.  If  we  could  imagine'  a  time  when  no
beings  existed,  this  imagination  would  be  the  denial  of
the  Divinity  of  God.  Moreover,  absolute  non-existence
cannot  become  existence.  If  the  beings  were  absolutely
non-existent,  existence  would  not  have  come  into  being.
Therefore,  as  the  Essence  of  Unity,  that  is  the  existence
of  God,  is  everlasting  and  eternal — that  is  to  say,  it
has  neither  beginning  nor  end — it  is  certain  that  this
world  of  existence,  this  endless  universe,  has  neither

o


210          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

beginning  nor  end.  Yes,  it  may  be  that  one  of  the
parts  of  the  universe,  one  of  the  globes,  for  example,
may  come  into  existence,  or  may  be  disintegrated,  but
the  other  endless  globes  are  still  existing ;  the  universe
would  not  be  disordered  nor  destroyed;  on  the  con-
trary, existence  is  eternal  and  perpetual.  As  each
globe  has  a  beginning,  necessarily  it  has  an  end,
because  every  composition,  collective  or  particular,
must  of  necessity  be  decomposed ;  the  only  difference
is  that  some  are  quickly  decomposed,  and  others  more
slowly,  but  it  is  impossible  that  a  composed  thing
should  not  eventually  be  decomposed.

It  is  necessary,  therefore,  that  we  should  know  what
each  of  the  important  existences  was  in  the  beginning
— for  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  beginning  the
origin  was  one :  the  origin  of  all  numbers  is  one  and
not  two.  Then  it  is  evident  that  in  the  beginning
matter  was  one,  and  that  one  matter  appeared  in
different  aspects  in  each  element ;  thus  various  forms
were  produced,  and  these  various  aspects  as  they  were
produced  became  permanent,  and  each  element  was
specialised.  But  this  permanence  was  not  definite,
and  did  not  attain  realisation  and  perfect  existence
until  after  a  very  long  time.  Then  these  elements
became  composed,  and  organised  and  combined  in
infinite  forms;  or  rather  from  the  composition  and
combination  of  these  elements  innumerable  beings
appeared.

This  composition  and  arrangement  through  the
wisdom  of  God  and  His  pre-existent  might,  were
produced  from  one  natural  organisation,  which  was
composed  and  combined  with  the  greatest  strength,


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    211

conformably  to  wisdom,  and  according  to  a  universal
law.  From  this  it  is  evident  that  it  is  the  creation  of
God,  and  is  not  a  fortuitous  composition  and  arrange-
ment. This  is  why  from  every  natural  composition  a
being  can  come  into  existence,  but  from  an  accidental
composition  no  being  can  come  into  existence.  For
example,  if  a  man  of  his  own  mind  and  intelligence
collects  some  elements  and  combines  them,  a  living
being  will  not  be  brought  into  existence,  since  the
system  is  unnatural.  This  is  the  answer  to  the  implied
question,  that,  since  beings  are  made  by  the  com-
position and  the  combination  of  elements,  why  is
it  not  possible  for  us  to  gather  elements  and  mingle
them  together,  and  so  create  a  living  being.  This  is
a  false  supposition,  for  the  origin  of  this  composition
is  from  God ;  it  is  God  who  makes  the  combination,
and  as  it  is  done  according  to  the  natural  system,  from
each  composition  one  being  is  produced,  and  an
existence  is  realised.  A  composition  made  by  man
produces  nothing,  because  man  cannot  create.

Briefly,  we  have  said  that  from  the  composition  and
combination  of  elements,  from  their  decomposition,
from  their  measure,  and  from  the  effect  of  other  beings
upon  them,  resulted  forms,  endless  realities,  and  in-
numerable beings.  But  it  is  clear  that  this  terrestrial
globe  in  its  present  form  did  not  come  into  existence
all  at  once ;  but  that  this  universal  existence  gradually
passed  through  different  phases  until  it  became  adorned
with  its  present  perfection.  Universal  beings  resemble
and  can  be  compared  to  particular  beings,  for  both  are
subjected  to  one  natural  system,  one  universal  law  and
divine  organisation.  So  you  will  find  the  smallest


212          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

atoms  in  the  universal  system  are  similar  to  the
greatest  beings  of  the  universe.  It  is  clear  that  they
come  into  existence  from  one  laboratory  of  might
under  one  natural  system,  and  one  universal  law;
therefore  they  may  be  compared  to  one  another.  Thus
the  embryo  of  man  in  the  womb  of  the  mother  gradu-
ally grows  and  develops,  and  appears  in  different  forms
and  conditions,  until  in  the  degree  of  perfect  beauty  it
reaches  maturity,  and  appears  in  a  perfect  form  with
the  utmost  grace.  And  in  the  same  way,  the  seed  of
this  flower  which  you  see  was  in  the  beginning  an
insignificant  thing,  and  very  small;  and  it  grew  and
developed  in  the  womb  of  the  earth,  and  after  appearing
in  various  forms,  came  forth  in  this  condition  with
perfect  freshness  and  grace.  In  the  same  manner  it  is
evident  that  this  terrestrial  globe  having  once  found
existence,  grew  and  developed  in  the  matrix  of  the
universe,  and  came  forth  in  different  forms  and  con-
ditions, until  gradually  it  attained  this  present  perfec-
tion, and  became  adorned  with  innumerable  beings,
and  appeared  as  a  finished  organisation.

Then  it  is  clear  that  original  matter,  which  is  in
the  embryonic  state,  and  the  mingled  and  composed
elements  which  were  its  earliest  forms,  gradually  grew
and  developed  during  many  ages  and  cycles,  passing
from  one  shape  and  form  to  another,  until  they
appeared  in  this  perfection,  this  system,  this  organisa-
tion and  this  establishment,  through  the  supreme
wisdom  of  God.

Let  us  return  to  our  subject  that  man,  in  the  be-
ginning of  his  existence  and  in  the  womb  of  the  earth,
like  the  embryo  in  the  womb  of  the  mother,  gradually


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    213

grew  and  developed,  and  passed  from  one  form  to
another,  from  one  shape  to  another,  until  he  appeared
with  this  beauty  and  perfection,  this  force  and  this
power.  It  is  certain  that  in  the  beginning  he  had  not
this  loveliness  and  grace  and  elegance,  and  that  he
only  by  degrees  attained  this  shape,  this  form,  this
beauty,  and  this  grace.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
human  embryo  did  not  at  once  appear  in  this  form,
neither  did  it  then  become  the  manifestation  of  the
words  '  Praise  be  unto  God,  the  best  of  Creators/
Gradually  it  passed  through  various  conditions  and
different  shapes,  until  it  attained  this  form  and  beauty,
this  perfection,  grace,  and  loveliness.  Thus  it  is  evident
and  confirmed  that  the  development  and  growth  of
man  on  this  earth,  until  he  reached  his  present  perfec-
tion, resembled  the  growth  and  development  of  the
embryo  in  the  womb  of  the  mother :  by  degrees  it  passed
from  condition  to  condition,  from  form  to  form,  from
one  shape  to  another,  for  this  is  according  to  the  require-
ment of  the  universal  system  and  Divine  Law.

That  is  to  say,  the  embryo  passes  through  different
states  and  traverses  numerous  degrees,  until  it  reaches
the  form  in  which  it  manifests  the  words  '  Praise  be  to
God,  the  best  of  Creators/  and  until  the  signs  of  reason
and  maturity  appear.  And  in  the  same  way,  man's
existence  on  this  earth,  from  the  beginning  until  it
reaches  this  state,  form,  and  condition,  necessarily  lasts
a  long  time,  and  goes  through  many  degrees  until  it
reaches  this  condition.  But  from  the  beginning  of
man's  existence  he  is  a  distinct  species.  In  the  same
way,  the  embryo  of  man  in  the  womb  of  the  mother
was  at  first  in  a  strange  form ;  then  this  body  passes


214          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

from  shape  to  shape,  from  state  to  state,  from  form  to
form,  until  it  appears  in  utmost  beauty  and  perfection.
But  even  when  in  the  womb  of  the  mother  and  in  this
strange  form,  entirely  different  from  his  present  form
and  figure,  he  is  the  embryo  of  the  superior  species,
and  not  of  the  animal ;  his  species  and  essence  undergo
no  change.  Now,  admitting  that  the  traces  of  organs
which  have  disappeared  actually  exist,  this  is  not  a
proof  of  the  impermanence  and  the  non-originality  of
the  species.  At  the  most  it  proves  that  the  form,  and
fashion,  and  the  organs  of  man  have  progressed.  Man
was  always  a  distinct  species,  a  man,  not  an  animal.
So,  if  the  embryo  of  man  in  the  womb  of  the  mother
passes  from  one  form  to  another,  so  that  the  second
form  in  no  way  resembles  the  first,  is  this  a  proof  that
the  species  has  changed  ?  that  it  was  at  first  an  animal,
and  that  its  organs  progressed  and  developed  until  it
became  a  man  ?  No  indeed !  How  puerile  and  un-
founded is  this  idea  and  this  thought !  For  the  proof
of  the  originality  of  the  human  species,  and  of  the
permanency  of  the  nature  of  man,  is  clear  and  evident.


XLVIII

THE  DIFFERENCE  WHICH  EXISTS  BETWEEN
MAN  AND  THE  ANIMAL

ALREADY  we  have  talked  once  or  twice  on  the  subject
of  the  spirit,  but  our  words  have  not  been  written
down.

Know  that  people  belong  to  two  categories,  that  is  to
say,  they  constitute  two  parties.  One  party  deny  the
spirit,  and  say  that  man  also  is  a  species  of  animal;
for  they  say,  do  we  not  see  that  animals  and  men  share
the  same  powers  and  senses?  These  simple,  single
elements  which  fill  space  are  endlessly  combined,  and
from  each  of  these  combinations  one  of  the  beings  is
produced.  Among  these  beings  is  the  possessor  of
spirit,1  of  the  powers  and  of  the  senses.  The  more
perfect  the  combination,  the  nobler  is  the  being.  The
combination  of  the  elements  in  the  body  of  man  is
more  perfect  than  the  composition  of  any  other  being ;
it  is  mingled  in  absolute  equilibrium,  therefore  it  is
more  noble  and  more  perfect.  '  It  is  not,'  they  say,
'  that  he  has  a  special  power  and  spirit  which  the  other
animals  lack:  animals  possess  sensitive  bodies,  but
man  in  some  powers  has  more  sensation — although,  in
what  concerns  the  outer  senses,  such  as  hearing,  sight,

1  Man.

S16


216          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

taste,  smell,  touch,  and  even  in  some  interior  powers
like  memory,  the  animal  is  more  richly  endowed  than
man.'  'The  animal,  too/  they  say,  'has  intelligence
and  perception ' :  all  that  they  concede  is  that  man's
intelligence  is  greater.

This  is  what  the  philosophers  of  the  present  state ;
this  is  their  saying,  this  is  their  supposition,  and  thus
their  imagination  decrees.  So  with  powerful  arguments
and  proofs,  they  make  the  descent  of  man  go  back  to
the  animal,  and  say  that  there  was  once  a  time  when
man  was  an  animal;  that  then  the  species  changed,
and  progressed  little  by  little  until  it  reached  the
present  status  of  man.

But  the  theologians  say :  No,  this  is  not  so.  Though
man  has  powers  and  outer  senses  in  common  with  the
animal,  yet  an  extraordinary  power  exists  in  him  of
which  the  animal  is  bereft.  The  sciences,  arts,  in-
ventions, trades,  and  discoveries  of  realities,  are  the
results  of  this  spiritual  power.  This  is  a  power  which
encompasses  all  things,  comprehends  their  realities,
discovers  all  the  hidden  mysteries  of  beings,  and
through  this  knowledge  controls  them:  it  even  per-
ceives things  which  do  not  exist  outwardly ;  that  is  to
say,  intellectual  realities  which  are  not  sensible,  and
which  have  no  outward  existence,  because  they  are
invisible;  so  it  comprehends  the  mind,  the  spirit,  the
qualities,  the  characters,  the  love  and  sorrow  of  man,
which  are  intellectual  realities.  Moreover,  these  exist-
ing sciences,  arts,  laws,  and  endless  inventions  of  man
at  one  time  were  invisible,  mysterious,  and  hidden
secrets ;  it  is  only  the  all-encompassing  human  power
which  has  discovered  and  brought  them  out  from  the


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    217

plane  of  the  invisible  to  the  plane  of  the  visible.  So
telegraphy,  photography,  phonography,  and  all  such
inventions  and  wonderful  arts,  were  at  one  time  hidden
mysteries:  the  human  reality  discovered  and  brought
them  out  from  the  plane  of  the  invisible  to  the  plane  of
the  visible.  There  was  even  a  time  when  the  qualities
of  this  iron  which  you  see — indeed  of  all  the  metals —
were  hidden  mysteries ;  men  discovered  this  metal,  and
wrought  it  in  this  industrial  form.  It  is  the  same  with
all  the  other  discoveries  and  inventions  of  man,  which
are  innumerable.

This  we  cannot  deny.  If  we  say  that  these  are
effects  of  powers  which  animals  also  have,  and  of  the
powers  of  the  bodily  senses,  we  see  clearly  and  evidently
that  the  animals  are,  in  regard  to  these  powers,  superior
to  man.  For  example,  the  sight  of  animals  is  much
more  keen  than  the  sight  of  man;  so  also  is  their
power  of  smell  and  taste.  Briefly,  in  the  powers  which
animals  and  men  have  in  common,  the  animal  is  often
the  more  powerful.  For  example,  let  us  take  the
power  of  memory :  if  you  carry  a  pigeon  from  here
to  a  distant  country,  and  there  set  it  free,  it  will  return,
for  it  remembers  the  way.  Take  a  dog  from  here  to
the  centre  of  Asia,  set  him  free,  and  he  will  come  back
here  and  never  once  lose  the  road.  So  it  is  with  the
other  powers  such  as  hearing,  sight,  smell,  taste,  and
touch.

Thus  it  is  clear  that  if  there  were  not  in  man  a
power  different  from  any  of  those  of  the  animals,  the
latter  would  be  superior  to  man  in  inventions  and  the
comprehension  of  realities.  Therefore  it  is  evident
that  man  has  a  gift  which  the  animal  does  not  possess.


218          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Now,  the  animal  perceives  sensible  things,  but  does
not  perceive  intellectual  realities.  For  example,  that
which  is  within  the  range  of  its  vision  the  animal
sees,  but  that  which  is  beyond  the  range  of  sight  it
is  not  possible  for  it  to  perceive,  and  it  cannot  imagine
it.  So  it  is  not  possible  for  the  animal  to  understand
that  the  earth  has  the  form  of  a  globe.  But  man  from
known  things  proves  unknown  things,  and  discovers
unknown  truths.  For  example,  man  sees  the  curve
of  the  horizon,  and  from  this  he  infers  the  roundness
of  the  earth.  The  Pole  Star  at  Acca,  for  instance,  is
at  33°,  that  is  to  say,  it  is  33°  above  the  horizon.
When  a  man  goes  towards  the  North  Pole,  the  Pole
Star  rises  one  degree  above  the  horizon  for  each
degree  of  distance  that  he  travels,  that  is  to  say,  the
altitude  of  the  Pole  Star  will  be  34°,  then  40°,  then
50°,  then  60°,  then  70°.  If  he  reaches  the  North
Pole  the  altitude  of  the  Pole  Star  will  be  90°  or  have
attained  the  zenith,  that  is  to  say,  will  be  directly  over-
head. This  Pole  Star  and  its  ascension  are  sensible
things.  The  further  one  goes  towards  the  Pole,  the
higher  the  Pole  Star  rises;  from  these  two  known
truths  an  unknown  thing  has  been  discovered,  that
is,  that  the  horizon  is  curved:  meaning  that  the
horizon  of  each  degree  of  the  earth  is  a  different
horizon  from  that  of  another  degree.  Man  perceives
this,  and  proves  from  it  an  invisible  thing  which  is  the
roundness  of  the  earth.  This  it  is  impossible  for  the
animal  to  perceive.  In  the  same  way,  it  cannot  under-
stand that  the  sun  is  the  centre  and  that  the  earth
revolves  around  it.  The  animal  is  the  captive  of  the
senses  and  bound  by  them ;  all  that  is  beyond  the  senses,


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    219

the  things  that  they  do  not  control,  the  animal  can  never
understand ;  although  in  the  outer  senses  it  is  greater
than  man.  Hence  it  is  proved  and  verified  that  in
man  there  is  a  power  of  discovery  by  which  he  is
distinguished  from  the  animals,  and  this  is  the  spirit
of  man.

Praise  be  to  God !  man  is  always  turned  towards  the
heights,  and  his  aspiration  is  lofty ;  he  always  desires
to  reach  a  greater  world  than  the  world  in  which  he
is,  and  to  mount  to  a  higher  sphere  than  that  in
which  he  is.  The  love  of  exaltation  is  one  of  the
characteristics  of  man.  I  am  astonished  that  certain
philosophers  of  America  and  Europe  are  content  to
gradually  approach  the  animal  world,  and  so  to  go
backwards;  for  the  tendency  of  existence  must  be
towards  exaltation.  Nevertheless,  if  you  said  to  one
of  them,  You  are  an  animal — he  would  be  extremely
hurt  and  angry.  •  •

What  a  difference  between  the  human  world  and
the  world  of  the  animal ;  between  the  elevation  of  man
and  the  abasement  of  the  animal;  between  the  per-
fections of  man  and  the  ignorance  of  the  animal;
between  the  light  of  man  and  the  darkness  of  the
animal ;  between  the  glory  of  man  and  the  degradation
of  the  animal !  An  Arab  child  of  ten  years  can  manage
two  or  three  hundred  camels  in  the  desert,  and  with
his  voice  can  lead  them  forward  or  turn  them  back.
A  weak  Hindu  can  so  control  a  huge  elephant,  that
the  elephant  becomes  the  most  obedient  of  servants.  All
things  are  subdued  by  the  hand  of  man ;  he  can  resist
nature,  while  all  other  creatures  are  captives  of  nature,
none  can  depart  from  her  requirements.  Man  alone


220          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

can  resist  nature.  Nature  attracts  bodies  to  the  centre
of  the  earth ;  man  through  mechanical  means  goes  far
from  it,  and  soars  in  the  air.  Nature  prevents  man
from  crossing  the  seas,  man  builds  a  ship,  and  he
travels  and  voyages  across  the  great  ocean,  and  so
on;  the  subject  is  endless.  For  example,  man  drives
engines  over  the  mountains  and  through  the  wilder-
nesses, and  gathers  in  one  spot  the  news  of  the  events
of  the  East  and  West.  All  this  is  contrary  to  nature.
The  sea  with  its  grandeur  cannot  deviate  by  an  atom
from  the  laws  of  nature ;  the  sun  in  all  its  magnificence
cannot  deviate  as  much  as  a  needle's  point  from  the
laws  of  nature,  and  can  never  comprehend  the  con-
ditions, the  state,  the  qualities,  the  movements,  and  the
nature  of  man.

What,  then,  is  the  power  in  this  small  body  of  man
which  encompasses  all  this?  What  is  this  ruling
power  by  which  he  subdues  all  things  ?

One  more  point  remains :  modern  philosophers  say :
'  We  have  never  seen  the  spirit  in  man,  and  in  spite
of  our  researches  into  the  secrets  of  the  human  body,
we  do  not  perceive  a  spiritual  power.  How  can  we
imagine  a  power  which  is  not  sensible?'  The  theo-
logians reply:  'The  spirit  of  the  animal  also  is  not
sensible,  and  through  its  bodily  powers  it  cannot  be
perceived.  By  what  do  you  prove  the  existence  of
the  spirit  of  the  animal?  There  is  no  doubt  that
from  its  effects  you  prove  that  in  the  animal  there  is  a
power  which  is  not  in  the  plant,  and  this  is  the  power
of  the  senses ;  that  is  to  say,  sight,  hearing,  and  also
other  powers;  from  these  you  infer  that  there  is  an
animal  spirit.  In  the  same  way,  from  the  proofs  and


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    221

signs  we  have  mentioned,  we  argue  that  there  is  a
human  spirit.  Since  in  the  animal  there  are  signs
which  are  not  in  the  plant,  you  say  this  power  of
sensation  is  a  property  of  the  animal  spirit ;  you  also
see  in  man  signs,  powers,  and  perfections  which  do  not
exist  in  the  animal ;  therefore  you  infer  that  there  is
a  power  in  him  which  the  animal  is  without.'

If  we  wish  to  deny  everything  that  is  not  sensible,
then  we  must  deny  the  realities  which  unquestionably
exist.  For  example,  ethereal  matter  is  not  sensible,
though  it  has  an  undoubted  existence.  The  power  of
attraction  is  not  sensible,  though  it  certainly  exists.
From  what  do  we  affirm  these  existences  ?  From  their
signs.  Thus  this  light  is  the  vibration  of  that  ethereal
matter,  and  from  this  vibration  we  infer  the  existence
of  ether.


XLIX

THE  GROWTH  AND  DEVELOPMENT  OF
THE  HUMAN  RACE

Question. — What  do  you  say  with  regard  to  the
theories  held  by  some  European  philosophers  on  the
growth  and  development  of  beings  ?

Answer. — This  subject  was  spoken  of  the  other  day,
but  we  will  speak  of  it  again.  Briefly,  this  question
will  be  decided  by  determining  whether  species  are
original  or  not.  That  is  to  say,  has  the  species  of  man
been  established  from  its  origin,  or  was  it  afterwards
derived  from  the  animals  ?

Many  European  philosophers  agree  that  the  species
grows  and  develops,  and  that  even  change  and  altera-
tion are  also  possible.  One  of  the  proofs  that  they  give
for  this  theory  is  that  through  the  attentive  study  and
verification  of  the  science  of  geology  it  has  become
clear  that  the  existence  of  the  vegetable  preceded  that
of  the  animal,  and  that  of  the  animal  preceded  that
of  man.  They  admit  that  both  the  vegetable  and  the
animal  species  have  changed,  for  in  some  of  the  strata
of  the  earth  they  have  discovered  plants  which  existed
in  the  past  and  are  now  extinct ;  they  have  progressed,
grown  in  strength,  their  form  and  appearance  have


222


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    223

changed,  and  so  the  species  have  altered.  In  the  same
way,  in  the  strata  of  the  earth  there  are  some  species
of  animals  which  have  changed  and  are  transformed.
One  of  these  animals  is  the  serpent.  There  are  in-
dications that  the  serpent  once  had  feet ;  but  through
the  lapse  of  time  those  members  have  disappeared.  In
the  same  way,  in  the  vertebral  column  of  man  there  is
an  indication  which  amounts  to  a  proof  that,  like  other
animals,  he  once  had  a  tail.  At  one  time  that  member
was  useful,  but  when  man  developed  it  was  no  longer
of  use,  and  therefore  it  gradually  disappeared.  As  the
serpent  took  refuge  under  the  ground,  and  became  a
creeping  animal,  it  was  no  longer  in  need  of  feet,  so
they  disappeared;  but  their  traces  survive.  The
principal  argument  is  this :  that  the  existence  of  traces
of  members  proves  that  they  once  existed ;  and  as  now
they  are  no  longer  of  service,  they  have  gradually  dis-
appeared. Therefore  while  the  perfect  and  necessary
members  have  remained,  those  which  are  unnecessary
have  gradually  disappeared  by  the  modification  of  the
species,  but  the  traces  of  them  continue.

The  first  answer  to  this  argument  is  the  fact  that
the  animal  having  preceded  man  is  not  a  proof  of  the
evolution,  change,  and  alteration  of  the  species,  nor
that  man  was  raised  from  the  animal  world  to  the
human  world.  For  while  the  individual  appearance  of
these  different  beings  is  certain,  it  is  possible  that  man
came  into  existence  after  the  animal.  So  when  we
examine  the  vegetable  kingdom,  we  see  that  the  fruits
of  the  different  trees  do  not  arrive  at  maturity  at  one
time;  on  the  contrary,  some  come  first  and  others
afterwards.  This  priority  does  not  prove  that  the  later


224          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

fruit  of  one  tree  was  produced  from  the  earlier  fruit  of
another  tree.

Secondly,  these  slight  signs  and  traces  of  members
have  perhaps  a  great  reason  of  which  the  mind  is  not
yet  cognisant.  How  many  things  exist  of  which  we  do
not  yet  know  the  reason !  So  the  science  of  physiology,
that  is  to  say  the  knowledge  of  the  composition  of
the  members,  records  that  the  reason  and  cause  of
the  difference  in  the  colours  of  animals,  and  of  the
hair  of  men,  of  the  redness  of  the  lips,  and  of  the
variety  of  the  colours  of  birds,  is  still  unknown;  it
is  secret  and  hidden.  But  it  is  known  that  the  pupil
of  the  eye  is  black,  so  as  to  attract  the  rays  of  the  sun ;
for  if  it  were  another  colour,  that  is,  uniformly  white,
it  would  not  attract  the  rays  of  the  sun.  Therefore,
as  the  reason  of  the  things  we  have  mentioned  is
unknown,  it  is  possible  that  the  reason  and  the  wisdom
of  these  traces  of  members,  whether  they  be  in  the
animal  or  man,  are  equally  unknown.  Certainly  there
is  a  reason,  even  though  it  is  not  known.

Thirdly,  let  us  suppose  that  there  was  a  time  when
some  animals,  or  even  man,  possessed  some  members
which  have  now  disappeared;  this  is  not  a  sufficient
proof  of  the  change  and  evolution  of  the  species.  For
man,  from  the  beginning  of  the  embryonic  period  till
he  reaches  the  degree  of  maturity,  goes  through
different  forms  and  appearances.  His  aspect,  his  form,
his  appearance,  and  colour  change ;  he  passes  from  one
form  to  another,  and  from  one  appearance  to  another.
Nevertheless,  from  the  beginning  of  the  embryonic
period  he  is  of  the  species  of  man ;  that  is  to  say,  an
embryo  of  a  man,  and  not  of  an  animal;  but  this  is


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    225

not  at  first  apparent,  but  later  it  becomes  visible  and
evident.  For  example,  let  us  suppose  that  man  once
resembled  the  animal,  and  that  now  he  has  progressed
and  changed ;  supposing  this  to  be  true,  it  is  still  not  a
proof  of  the  change  of  species ;  no,  as  before  mentioned,
it  is  merely  like  the  change  and  alteration  of  the
embryo  of  man  until  it  reaches  the  degree  of  reason
and  perfection.  We  will  state  it  more  clearly;  let  us
suppose  that  there  was  a  time  when  man  walked  on
his  hands  and  feet,  or  had  a  tail;  this  change  and
alteration  is  like  that  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb  of  the
mother;  although  it  changes  in  all  ways,  and  grows
and  develops  until  it  reaches  the  perfect  form,  from  the
beginning  it  is  a  special  species.  We  also  see  in  the
vegetable  kingdom  that  the  original  species  of  the
genus  do  not  change  and  alter,  but  the  form,  colour,
and  bulk  will  change  and  alter,  or  even  progress.

To  recapitulate :  as  man  in  the  womb  of  the  mother
passes  from  form  to  form,  from  shape  to  shape,  changes
and  develops,  and  is  still  the  human  species  from  the
beginning  of  the  embryonic  period — in  the  same  way
man,  from  the  beginning  of  his  existence  in  the  matrix
of  the  world,  is  also  a  distinct  species,  that  is,  man,
and  has  gradually  evolved  from  one  form  to  another.
Therefore  this  change  of  appearance,  this  evolution  of
members,  this  development  and  growth,  even  though
we  admit  the  reality  of  growth  and  progress,1  does
not  prevent  the  species  from  being  original.  Man
from  the  beginning  was  in  this  perfect  form  and
composition,  and  possessed  capacity  and  aptitude  for

1  i.e.  if  we  admit,  for  example,  that  man  had  formerly  been  a
quadruped,  or  had  had  a  tail.

P


226          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

acquiring  material  and  spiritual  perfections,  and  was
the  manifestation  of  these  words, '  We  will  make  man
in  Our  image  and  likeness.'  He  has  only  become  more
pleasing,  more  beautiful,  and  more  graceful.  Civilisa-
tion has  brought  him  out  of  his  wild  state,  just  as
the  wild  fruits  which  are  cultivated  by  a  gardener
become  finer,  sweeter,  and  acquire  more  freshness  and
delicacy.

The  gardeners  of  the  world  of  humanity  are  the
Prophets  of  God.


SPIRITUAL  PROOFS  OF  THE  ORIGIN

OF  MAN

THE  proofs  which  we  have  adduced  relative  to  the
origin  of  the  human  species  were  logical  proofs ;  now
we  will  give  the  spiritual  proofs,  which  are  essential.
For,  as  we  have  proved  Divinity  by  logical  arguments,
and  have  also  proved  logically  that  man  exists  from
his  origin  and  foundation  as  man,  and  that  his  species
has  existed  from  all  eternity,  now  we  will  establish
spiritual  proofs  that  human  existence — that  is,  the
species  of  man — is  a  necessary  existence,  and  that
without  man  the  perfections  of  Divinity  would  not
appear.  But  these  are  spiritual  proofs,  not  logical
proofs.

We  have  many  times  demonstrated  and  established
that  man  is  the  noblest  of  beings,  the  sum  of  all
perfections,  and  that  all  beings  and  all  existences  are
the  centres  from  which  the  glory  of  God  is  reflected ;
that  is  to  say,  the  signs  of  the  Divinity  of  God  are
apparent  in  the  realities  of  things  and  of  creatures.
Just  as  the  terrestrial  globe  is  the  place  where  the  rays
of  the  sun  are  reflected — as  its  light  its  heat,  and  its
influence  are  apparent  and  visible  in  all  the  atoms  of
the  earth — so,  in  the  same  way,  the  atoms  of  beings,
in  this  infinite  space,  proclaim  and  prove  one  of  the

227


228  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

divine  perfections.  Nothing  is  deprived  of  this  benefit ;
it  is  either  a  sign  of  the  mercy  of  God  or  it  is  a  sign
of  His  power,  His  greatness,  His  justice,  His  lordship
which  imparts  education;  or  it  is  a  sign  of  the
generosity  of  God,  His  vision,  His  hearing,  His  know-
ledge, His  grace,  and  so  on.

Without  doubt  each  being  is  the  centre  of  the  shining
forth  of  the  glory  of  God  :  that  is  to  say,  the  perfections
of  God  appear  from  it  and  are  resplendent  in  it.  It  is
like  the  sun,  which  is  resplendent  in  the  desert,  upon  the
sea,  in  the  trees,  in  the  fruits  and  blossoms,  and  in  all
earthly  things.  The  world,  indeed  each  existing  being,
proclaims  to  us  one  of  the  names  of  God,  but  the
reality  of  ma'n  is  the  collective  reality,  the  general
reality,  and  is  the  centre  where  the  glory  of  all  the
perfections  of  God  shine  forth.  That  is  to  say,  for  each
name,  each  attribute,  each  perfection  which  we  affirm
of  God,  there  exists  a  sign  in  man ;  if  it  were  otherwise,
man  could  not  imagine  these  perfections,  and  could  not
understand  them.  So  we  say  that  God  is  the  seer,  and
the  eye  is  the  sign  of  His  vision ;  if  this  sight  were  not
in  man,  how  could  we  imagine  the  vision  of  God  ?  for
the  blind,  that  is  one  born  blind,  cannot  imagine  sight ;
and  the  deaf,  that  is  one  deaf  from  birth,  cannot
imagine  hearing;  and  the  dead1  cannot  realise  life.
Consequently  the  Divinity  of  God,  which  is  the  sum  of
all  perfections,  reflects  itself  in  the  reality  of  man ;  that
is  to  say,  the  Essence  of  Oneness  is  the  gathering  of  all
perfections,  and  from  this  unity  He  casts  a  reflection
upon  the  human  reality.  Man  then  is  the  perfect
mirror  facing  the  Sun  of  Truth,  and  is  the  centre  of

1  i.e.  the  spiritually  dead.


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    229

radiation:  the  Sun  of  Truth  shines  in  this  mirror.
The  reflection  of  the  divine  perfections  appears  in  the
reality  of  man,  so  he  is  the  representative  of  God,  the
messenger  of  God.  If  man  did  not  exist,  the  universe
would  be  without  result,  for  the  object  of  existence  is
the  appearance  of  the  perfections  of  God.

Therefore  it  cannot  be  said  there  was  a  time  when
man  was  not.  All  that  we  can  say  is  that  this  ter-
restrial globe  at  one  time  did  not  exist,  and  at  its
beginning  man  did  not  appear  upon  it.  But  from  the
beginning  which  has  no  beginning,  to  the  end  which
has  no  end,  a  perfect  manifestation  always  exists.  This
man  of  whom  we  speak  is  not  every  man ;  we  mean  the
type  man.  For  the  noblest  part  of  the  tree  is  the
fruit,  which  is  the  reason  of  its  existence ;  if  the  tree
had  no  fruit,  it  would  have  no  meaning.  Therefore
it  cannot  be  imagined  that  the  worlds  of  existence,
whether  the  stars  or  this  earth,  were  once  inhabited  by
the  donkey,  cow,  mouse,  and  cat,  and  that  they  were
without  man !  This  supposition  is  false  and  meaning-
less. The  word  of  God  is  clear  as  the  sun.  This  is  a
spiritual  proof,  but  one  which  we  cannot  at  the  begin-
ning put  forth  for  the  benefit  of  the  materialists  ;  first
we  must  speak  of  the  logical  proofs,  afterwards  the
spiritual  proofs.


LI

THE  SPIRIT   AND   MIND   OF   MAN   HAVE
EXISTED  FROM  THE  BEGINNING

Question. — Does  man  in  the  beginning  possess  mind
and  spirit,  or  are  they  an  outcome  of  his  evolution  ?

Answer. — The  beginning  of  the  existence  of  man  on
the  terrestrial  globe  resembles  his  formation  in  the
womb  of  the  mother.  The  embryo  in  the  womb  of  the
mother  gradually  grows  and  develops  until  birth,
after  which  it  continues  to  grow  and  develop  until  it
reaches  the  age  of  discretion  and  maturity.  Though
in  infancy  the  signs  of  the  mind  and  spirit  appear  in
man,  they  do  not  reach  the  degree  of  perfection  ;  they
are  imperfect.  Only  when  man  attains  maturity  do
the  mind  and  the  spirit  appear  and  become  evident  in
utmost  perfection.

So  also  the  formation  of  man  in  the  matrix  of  the
world  was  in  the  beginning  like  the  embryo ;  then
gradually  he  made  progress  in  perfectness,  and  grew
and  developed  until  he  reached  the  state  of  maturity,
when  the  mind  and  spirit  became  visible  in  the  greatest
power.  In  the  beginning  of  his  formation  the  mind
and  spirit  also  existed,  but  they  were  hidden;  later
they  were  manifested.  In  the  womb  of  the  world  mind
and  spirit  also  existed  in  the  embryo,  but  they  were


230


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    231

concealed ;  afterwards  they  appeared.  So  it  is  that
in  the  seed  the  tree  exists,  but  it  is  hidden  and  con-
cealed ;  when  it  develops  and  grows,  the  complete  tree
appears.  In  the  same  way  the  growth  and  develop-
ment of  all  beings  is  gradual;  this  is  the  universal
divine  organisation,  and  the  natural  system.  The  seed
does  not  at  once  become  a  tree,  the  embryo  does  not  at
once  become  a  man,  the  mineral  does  not  suddenly
become  a  stone.  No,  they  grow  and  develop  gradually,
and  attain  the  limit  of  perfection.

All  beings,  whether  large  or  small,  were  created
perfect  and  complete  from  the  first,  but  their  per-
fections appear  in  them  by  degrees.  The  organisation
of  God  is  one :  the  evolution  of  existence  is  one :  the
divine  system  is  one.  Whether  they  be  small  or  great
beings,  all  are  subject  to  one  law  and  system.  Each
seed  has  in  it  from  the  first  all  the  vegetable  per-
fections. For  example,  in  the  seed  all  the  vegetable
perfections  exist  from  the  beginning,  but  not  visibly ;
afterwards  little  by  little  they  appear.  So  it  is  first  the
shoot  which  appears  from  the  seed,  then  the  branches,
leaves,  blossoms,  and  fruits ;  but  from  the  beginning  of
its  existence  all  these  things  are  in  the  seed,  potentially,
though  not  apparently.

In  the  same  way,  the  embryo  possesses  from  the  first
all  perfections,  such  as  the  spirit,  the  mind,  the  sight,
the  smell,  the  taste — in  one  word,  all  the  powers — but
they  are  not  visible,  and  become  so  only  by  degrees.

Similarly,  the  terrestrial  globe  from  the  beginning
was  created  with  all  its  elements,  substances,  minerals,
atoms,  and  organisms;  but  these  only  appeared  by
degrees:  first  the  mineral,  then  the  plant,  afterwards


232  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

the  animal,  and  finally  man.  But  from  the  first  these
kinds  and  species  existed,  but  were  undeveloped  in  the
terrestrial  globe,  and  then  appeared  only  gradually.
For  the  supreme  organisation  of  God,  and  the  universal
natural  system,  surrounds  all  beings,  and  all  are  subject
to  this  rule.  When  you  consider  this  universal  system,
you  see  that  there  is  not  one  of  the  beings,  which  at
its  coming  into  existence  has  reached  the  limit  of  per-
fection. No,  they  gradually  grow  and  develop,  and
then  attain  the  degree  of  perfection.


LII

THE  APPEARING  OF  THE  SPIRIT
IN  THE  BODY

Question. — What  is  the  wisdom  of  the  spirit's  appear-
ing in  the  body  ?

Answer. — The  wisdom  of  the  appearance  of  the
spirit  in  the  body  is  this :  the  human  spirit  is  a  Divine
Trust,  and  it  must  traverse  all  conditions;  for  its
passage  and  movement  through  the  conditions  of
existence  will  be  the  means  of  its  acquiring  perfections.
So,  when  a  man  travels  and  passes  through  different
regions  and  numerous  countries  with  system  and
method,  it  is  certainly  a  means  of  his  acquiring  per-
fection; for  he  will  see  places,  scenes,  and  countries,
from  which  he  will  discover  the  conditions  and  states
of  other  nations.  He  will  thus  become  acquainted
with  the  geography  of  countries,  and  their  wonders  and
arts ;  he  will  familiarise  himself  with  the  habits,  customs,
and  usages  of  peoples ;  he  will  see  the  civilisation  and
progress  of  the  epoch ;  he  will  become  aware  of  the
policy  of  governments,  and  the  power  and  capacity  of
each  country.  It  is  the  same  when  the  human  spirit
passes  through  the  conditions  of  existence:  it  will
become  the  possessor  of  each  degree  and  station.  Even


233


234          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

in  the  condition  of  the  body  it  will  surely  acquire
perfections.

Besides  this,  it  is  necessary  that  the  signs  of  the
perfection  of  the  spirit  should  be  apparent  in  this
world,  so  that  the  world  of  creation  may  bring  forth
endless  results,  and  this  body  may  receive  life  and
manifest  the  divine  bounties.  So,  for  example,  the
rays  of  the  sun  must  shine  upon  the  earth,  and  the
solar  heat  develop  the  earthly  beings ;  if  the  rays  and
heat  of  the  sun  did  not  shine  upon  the  earth,  the  earth
would  be  uninhabited,  without  meaning,  and  its  de-
velopment would  be  retarded.  In  the  same  way,  if  the
perfections  of  the  spirit  did  not  appear  in  this  world,
this  world  would  be  unenlightened  and  absolutely
brutal.  By  the  appearance  of  the  spirit  in  the  physical
form,  this  world  is  enlightened.  As  the  spirit  of  man
is  the  cause  of  the  life  of  the  body,  so  the  world  is  in
the  condition  of  the  body,  and  man  is  in  the  condition
of  the  spirit.  If  there  were  no  man,  the  perfections  of
the  spirit  would  not  appear,  and  the  light  of  the  mind
would  not  be  resplendent  in  this  world.  This  world
would  be  like  a  body  without  a  soul.

This  world  is  also  in  the  condition  of  a  fruit-tree,  and
man  is  like  the  fruit ;  without  fruit  the  tree  would  be
useless.

Moreover,  these  members,  these  elements,  this  com-
position, which  are  found  in  the  organism  of  man,  are
an  attraction  and  magnet  for  the  spirit ;  it  is  certain
that  the  spirit  will  appear  in  it.  So,  a  mirror  which  is
clear  will  certainly  attract  the  rays  of  the  sun.  It  will
become  luminous,  and  wonderful  images  will  appear  in
it.  That  is  to  say,  when  these  existing  elements  are


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN     235

gathered  together  according  to  the  natural  order,  and
with  perfect  strength,  they  become  a  magnet  for  the
spirit,  and  the  spirit  will  become  manifest  in  them  with
all  its  perfections.

Under  these  conditions  it  cannot  be  said  '  what  is
the  necessity  for  the  rays  of  the  sun  to  descend  upon
the  mirror  ? ' — for  the  connection  which  exists  between
the  reality  of  things,  whether  they  be  spiritual  or
material,  requires  that  when  the  mirror  is  clear  and
faces  the  sun,  the  light  of  the  sun  must  become
apparent  in  it.  In  the  same  way,  when  the  elements
are  arranged  and  combined  in  the  most  glorious  system,
organisation  and  manner,  the  human  spirit  will  appear
and  be  manifest  in  them.  This  is  the  decree  of  the
Powerful,  the  Wise.


LIII

THE  RELATION  BETWEEN  GOD  AND
THE  CREATURE

Question. — What  is  the  nature  of  the  connection
between  God  and  the  creature,  that  is  to  say,  between
the  Independent,  the  Most  High,  and  the  other
beings  ?

Answer. — The  connection  between  God  and  the
creatures  is  that  of  the  creator  to  the  creation;  it  is
like  the  connection  between  the  sun  and  the  dark
bodies  of  contingent  beings,  and  is  the  connection
between  the  maker  and  the  things  that  he  has  made.
The  sun  in  its  own  essence  is  independent  of  the
bodies  which  it  lights ;  for  its  light  is  in  itself,  and  is
free  and  independent  of  the  terrestrial  globe;  so  the
earth  is  under  the  influence  of  the  sun  and  receives  its
light,  whereas  the  sun  and  its  rays  are  entirely  in-
dependent of  the  earth.  But  if  there  were  no  sun,
the  earth  and  all  earthly  beings  could  not  exist.

The  dependence  through  the  creatures  upon  God  is
a  dependence  of  emanation:  that  is  to  say,  creatures
emanate  from  God,  they  do  not  manifest  Him.1
The  relation  is  that  of  emanation  and  not  that  of
manifestation.  The  light  of  the  sun  emanates  from  the

1  This  subject,  of  emanation    and    manifestation,   is    more  fully
explained  in  the  following  chapter.
236


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    237

sun,  it  does  not  manifest  it.  The  appearance  through
emanation  is  like  the  appearance  of  the  rays  from
the  luminary  of  the  horizons  of  the  world :  that  is  to
say,  the  holy  essence  of  the  Sun  of  Truth  is  not  divided,
and  does  not  descend  to  the  condition  of  the  creatures.
In  the  same  way,  the  globe  of  the  sun  does  not  become
divided  and  does  not  descend  to  the  earth:  no,  the
rays  of  the  sun,  which  are  its  bounty,  emanate  from  it,
and  illumine  the  dark  bodies.

But  the  appearance  through  manifestation  is  the
manifestation  of  the  branches,  leaves,  blossoms  and  fruit
from  the  seed  ;  for  the  seed  in  its  own  essence  becomes
branches  and  fruits,  and  its  reality  enters  into  the
branches,  the  leaves,  and  fruits.  This  appearance
through  manifestation  would  be  for  God  the  Most  High,
simple  imperfection,  and  this  is  quite  impossible ;  for
the  implication  would  be  that  the  Absolute  Pre-existent
is  qualified  with  phenomenal  attributes ;  but  if  this  were
so,  pure  independence  would  become  mere  poverty,  and
true  existence  would  become  non-existence,  and  this  is
impossible.

Therefore  all  creatures  emanate  from  God;  that  is
to  say,  it  is  by  God  that  all  things  are  realised,  and  by
Him  that  all  beings  have  attained  to  existence.  The
first  thing  which  emanated  from  God  is  that  universal
reality,  which  the  ancient  philosophers  termed  the
'  First  Mind/  and  which  the  people  of  Baha'  call  the
'  First  Will.'  This  emanation,  in  that  which  concerns
its  action  in  the  world  of  God,  is  not  limited  by  time  or
place ;  it  is  without  beginning  or  end ;  beginning  and
end  in  relation  to  God  are  one.  The  pre-existence  of
God  is  the  pre-existence  of  essence,  and  also  pre-exist-


238          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

ence  of  time ;  and  the  phenomenality  of  contingency  is
essential  and  not  temporal,  as  we  have  already  explained
one  day  at  table.1

Though  the  '  First  Mind '  is  without  beginning,  it  does
not  become  a  sharer  in  the  pre-existence  of  God,  for
the  existence  of  the  universal  reality  in  relation  to  the
existence  of  God  is  nothingness,  and  it  has  not  the
power  to  become  an  associate  of  God  and  like  unto
Him  in  pre-existence.  This  subject  has  been  before
explained.

The  existence  of  living  things  signifies  composition,
and  their  death  decomposition.  But  universal  matter
and  the  elements  do  not  become  absolutely  annihilated
and  destroyed :  no,  their  non-existence  is  simply  trans-
formation. For  instance,  when  man  is  annihilated  he
becomes  dust,  but  he  does  not  become  absolutely  non-
existent ;  he  still  exists  in  the  shape  of  dust ;  but  trans-
formation has  taken  place,  and  this  composition  is
accidentally  decomposed.  The  annihilation  of  the
other  beings  is  the  same,  for  existence  does  not  become
absolute  non-existence,  and  absolute  non-existence
does  not  become  existence.

1  Cf.  '  Real  Pre-exiatence,'  page  315.


LIV


Question. — In  the  Bible  it  is  said  that  God  breathed
the  spirit  into  the  body  of  man :  What  is  the  meaning
of  this  verse  ?

Answer. — Know  that  proceeding1  is  of  two  kinds:
the  proceeding  and  appearance  through  emanation,  and
the  proceeding  and  appearance  through  manifestation.
The  proceeding  through  emanation  is  like  the  coming
forth  of  the  action  from  the  actor,  of  the  writing  from
the  writer.  Now  the  writing  emanates  from  the  writer,
and  the  discourse  emanates  from  the  speaker,  and  in
the  same  way  the  human  spirit  emanates  from  God.
It  is  not  that  it  manifests  God — that  is  to  say,  no  part
has  been  detached  from  the  Divine  Reality  to  enter
the  body  of  man.  No,  as  the  discourse  emanates  from
the  speaker,  the  spirit  appears  in  the  body  of  man.

But  the  proceeding  through  manifestation  is  the
manifestation  of  the  reality  of  a  thing  in  other  forms :
like  the  coming  forth l  of  this  tree  from  the  seed  of  the
tree,  or  the  coming  forth  of  the  flower  from  the  seed
of  the  flower :  for  it  is  the  seed  itself  which  appears  in
the  form  of  the  branches,  leaves,  and  flowers.  This  is

1  Lit.  dependence.

289


240          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

called  the  proceeding  through  manifestation.  The
spirits  of  men,  with  reference  to  God,  have  dependence
through  emanation;  just  as  the  discourse  proceeds
from  the  speaker  and  the  writing  from  the  writer ;  that
is  to  say,  the  speaker  himself  does  not  become  the
discourse,  nor  does  the  writer  himself  become  the
writing ;  no,  rather  they  have  the  proceeding  of  emana-
tion. The  speaker  has  perfect  ability  and  power,
and  the  discourse  emanates  from  him,  as  the  action
does  from  the  actor.  The  Real  Speaker,  the  Essence
of  Unity,  has  always  been  in  one  condition;  which
neither  changes  nor  alters,  has  neither  transforma-
tion nor  vicissitude.  He  is  the  Eternal,  the  Immortal.
Therefore  the  proceeding  of  the  human  spirits  from
God  is  through  emanation.  When  it  is  said  in  the
Bible  that  God  breathed  His  spirit  into  man,  this
spirit  is  that  which,  like  the  discourse,  emanates
from  the  Real  Speaker,  taking  effect  in  the  reality
of  man.

But  the  proceeding  through  manifestation  (if  by
this  is  meant  the  divine  appearance,  and  not  division
into  parts),  we  have  said,  is  the  proceeding  and  the
appearance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  Word  which
is  from  God.  As  it  is  said  in  the  Gospel  of  John,
'  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was
with  God ' ;  then  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  Word  are  the
appearance  of  God.  The  Spirit  and  the  Word  mean
the  divine  perfections  that  appeared  in  the  Reality
of  Christ,  and  these  perfections  were  with  God;  so
the  sun  manifests  all  its  glory  in  the  mirror.  For
the  Word  does  not  signify  the  body  of  Christ;  no,
but  the  divine  perfections  manifested  in  him.  For


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    241

Christ  was  like  a  clear  mirror  which  was  facing  the
Sun  of  Reality;  and  the  perfections  of  the  Sun  of
Reality,  that  is  to  say  its  light  and  heat,  were  visible
and  apparent  in  this  mirror.  If  we  look  into  the
mirror  we  see  the  sun,  and  we  say:  it  is  the  sun.
Therefore  the  Word  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  signify
the  perfections  of  God,  are  the  divine  appearance.
This  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse  in  the  Gospel  which
says:  'The  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word  was
God';  for  the  divine  perfections  are  not  different
from  the  Essence  of  Oneness.  The  perfections  of
Christ  are  called  the  Word,  because  all  the  beings
are  in  the  condition  of  letters,  and  one  letter  has
not  a  complete  meaning;  whilst  the  perfections  of
Christ  have  the  power  of  the  word,  because  a  com-
plete meaning  can  be  inferred  from  a  word.  As  the
Reality  of  Christ  was  the  manifestation  of  the  divine
perfections,  therefore  it  was  like  the  word.  Why  ?
because  he  is  the  sum  of  perfect  meanings.  This  is
why  he  is  called  the  Word.

And  know  that  the  proceeding  of  the  Word  and  the
Holy  Spirit  from  God,  which  is  the  proceeding  and
appearance  of  manifestation,  must  not  be  understood
to  mean  that  the  Reality  of  Divinity  had  been  divided
into  parts,  or  multiplied,  or  that  it  had  descended
from  the  exaltation  of  holiness  and  purity.  God
forbid!  If  a  pure,  fine  mirror  faces  the  sun,  the
light  and  heat,  the  form  and  the  image  of  the  sun
will  be  resplendent  in  it  with  such  manifestation,
that  if  a  beholder  says  of  the  sun  which  is  brilliant
and  visible  in  the  mirror :  '  This  is  the  sun,'  it  is  true.
Nevertheless  the  mirror  is  the  mirror,  and  the  sun  is

Q


242  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

the  sun.  The  One  Sun,  even  if  it  appears  in  numerous
mirrors,  is  one.  This  state  is  neither  abiding  nor
entering,  neither  commingling  nor  descending;  for
entering,  abiding,  descending,  issuing  forth  and  com-
mingling are  the  necessities  and  characteristics  of
bodies,  not  of  spirits;  then  how  much  less  do  they
belong  to  the  sanctified  and  pure  Reality  of  God.
God  is  exempt  from  all  that  is  not  in  accordance  with
His  purity,  and  His  exalted  and  sublime  sanctity.

The  Sun  of  Reality,  as  we  have  said,  has  always  been
in  one  condition;  it  has  no  change,  no  alteration,  no
transformation,  and  no  vicissitude.  It  is  eternal  and
everlasting.  But  the  Holy  Reality  of  the  Word  of
God  is  in  the  condition  of  the  pure,  fine,  and  shining
mirror;  the  heat,  the  light,  the  image  and  likeness,
that  is  to  say  the  perfections  of  the  Sun  of  Reality,
appear  in  it.  That  is  why  Christ  says  in  the  Gospel :
'  The  Father  is  in  the  Son ' ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Sun
of  Reality  appears  in  the  mirror.  Praise  be  to  the
One  who  shone  upon  this  Holy  Reality,  who  is  sanctified
among  the  beings !


LV
SOUL,  SPIRIT,  AND  MIND

Question. — What  is  the  difference  between  the  mind,
spirit,  and  soul  ?

Answer. — It  has  been  before  explained  that  spirit  is
universally  divided  into  five  categories :  the  vegetable
spirit,  the  animal  spirit,  the  human  spirit,  the  spirit
of  faith,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.

The  vegetable  spirit  is  the  power  of  growth  which
is  brought  about  in  the  seed  through  the  influence  of
other  existences.

The  animal  spirit  is  the  power  of  all  the  senses,
which  is  realised  from  the  composition  and  mingling
of  elements;  when  this  composition  decomposes,  the
power  also  perishes  and  becomes  annihilated.  It  may
be  likened  to  this  lamp :  when  the  oil,  wick,  and  fire
are  combined  it  is  lighted,  and  when  this  combination
is  dissolved,  that  is  to  say  when  the  combined  parts
are  separated  from  one  another,  the  lamp  also  is
extinguished.

The  human  spirit  which  distinguishes  man  from  the
animal  is  the  rational  soul;  and  these  two  names —
the  human  spirit  and  the  rational  soul — designate  one
thing.  This  spirit,  which  in  the  terminology  of  the
philosophers  is  the  rational  soul,  embraces  all  beings,

Mi


244          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  as  far  as  human  ability  permits  discovers  the
realities  of  things  and  becomes  cognisant  of  their
peculiarities  and  effects,  and  of  the  qualities  and
properties  of  beings.  But  the  human  spirit,  unless
assisted  by  the  spirit  of  faith,  does  not  become
acquainted  with  the  divine  secrets  and  the  heavenly
realities.  It  is  like  a  mirror  which,  although  clear,
polished,  and  brilliant,  is  still  in  need  of  light.  Until
a  ray  of  the  sun  reflects  upon  it,  it  cannot  discover  the
heavenly  secrets.

But  the  mind  is  the  power  of  the  human  spirit.
Spirit  is  the  lamp ;  mind  is  the  light  which  shines  from
the  lamp.  Spirit  is  the  tree,  and  the  mind  is  the
fruit.  Mind  is  the  perfection  of  the  spirit,  and  is  its
essential  quality,  as  the  sun's  rays  are  the  essential
necessity  of  the  sun.

This  explanation,  though  short,  is  complete ;  there-
fore reflect  upon  it,  and  if  God  wills,  you  may  become
acquainted  with  the  details.


LVI

THE  PHYSICAL  POWERS  AND  THE
INTELLECTUAL  POWERS

IN  man  five  outer  powers  exist,  which  are  the  agents
of  perception ;  that  is  to  say,  through  these  five  powers
man  perceives  material  beings.  These  are  sight,
which  perceives  visible  forms;  hearing,  which  per-
ceives audible  sounds;  smell,  which  perceives  odours;
taste,  which  perceives  foods;  and  feeling,  which  is  in
all  parts  of  the  body,  and  perceives  tangible  things.
These  five  powers  perceive  outward  existences.

Man  has  also  spiritual  powers:  imagination,  which
conceives  things ;  thought,  which  reflects  upon  realities;
comprehension,  which  comprehends  realities ;  memory,
which  retains  whatever  man  imagines,  thinks,  and
comprehends.  The  intermediary  between  the  five
outward  powers  and  the  inward  powers,  is  the  sense
which  they  possess  in  common;  that  is  to  say,  the
sense  which  acts  between  the  outer  and  inner  powers,
conveys  to  the  inward  powers  whatever  the  outer
powers  discern.  It  is  termed  the  common  faculty,
because  it  communicates  between  the  outward  and
inward  powers,  and  thus  is  common  to  the  outward
and  inward  powers.

For  instance,  sight  is  one  of  the  outer  powers ;  it


246


246          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

sees  and  perceives  this  flower,  and  conveys  this  per-
ception to  the  inner  power — the  common  faculty —
which  transmits  this  perception  to  the  power  of
imagination,  which  in  its  turn  conceives  and  forms
this  image  and  transmits  it  to  the  power  of  thought ;
the  power  of  thought  reflects,  and  having  grasped  the
reality,  conveys  it  to  the  power  of  comprehension;
the  comprehension,  when  it  has  comprehended  it,
delivers  the  image  of  the  object  perceived  to  the
memory,  and  the  memory  keeps  it  in  its  repository.

The  outward  powers  are  five :  the  power  of  sight,  of
hearing,  of  taste,  of  smell,  and  of  feeling.

The  inner  powers  are  also  five :  the  common  faculty,
and  the  powers  of  imagination,  thought,  comprehension,
and  memory.


LVII

THE  CAUSES  OF  THE  DIFFERENCES  IN  THE
CHARACTERS  OF  MEN

Question. — How  many  kinds  of  character  has  man  ?
and  what  is  the  cause  of  the  differences  and  varieties
in  men  ?

Answer. — He  has  the  innate  character,  the  inherited
character,  and  the  acquired  character  which  is  gained
by  education.

With  regard  to  the  innate  character,  although  the
divine  creation  is  purely  good,  yet  the  varieties  of
natural  qualities  in  man  come  from  the  difference
of  degree ;  all  are  excellent,  but  they  are  more  or  less
so,  according  to  the  degree.  So  all  mankind  possess
intelligence  and  capacities,  but  the  intelligence,  the
capacity,  and  the  worthiness  of  men  differ.  This  is
evident.

For  example,  take  a  number  of  children  of  one
family,  of  one  place,  of  one  school,  instructed  by  one
teacher,  reared  on  the  same  food,  in  the  same  climate,
with  the  same  clothing,  and  studying  the  same  lessons
— it  is  certain  that  among  these  children  some  will  be
clever  in  the  sciences,  some  will  be  of  average  ability,
and  some  dull.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  in  the  original
nature  there  exists  a  difference  of  degree,  and  varieties

247


248          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  worthiness  and  capacity.  This  difference  does  not
imply  good  or  evil,  but  is  simply  a  difference  of  degree.
One  has  the  highest  degree,  another  the  medium  degree,
and  another  the  lowest  degree.  So  man  exists,  the
animal,  the  plant,  and  the  mineral  exist  also  —  but
the  degrees  of  these  four  existences  vary.  What  a
difference  between  the  existence  of  man  and  of  the
animal !  Yet  both  are  existences.  It  is  evident  that
in  existence  there  are  differences  of  degrees.

The  variety  of  inherited  qualities  comes  from  strength
and  weakness  of  constitution ;  that  is  to  say,  when  the
two  parents  are  weak,  the  children  will  be  weak;  if
they  are  strong,  the  children  will  be  robust.  In  the
same  way,  purity  of  blood  has  a  great  effect;  for
the  pure  germ  is  like  the  superior  stock  which  exists
in  plants  and  animals.  For  example,  you  see  that
children  born  from  a  weak  and  feeble  father  and
mother  will  naturally  have  a  feeble  constitution  and
weak  nerves;  they  will  be  afflicted,  and  will  have
neither  patience,  nor  endurance,  nor  resolution,  nor
perseverance,  and  will  be  hasty;  for  the  children  in-
herit the  weakness  and  debility  of  their  parents.

Besides  this,  an  especial  blessing  is  conferred  on  some
families  and  some  generations.  Thus  it  is  an  especial
blessing  that  from  among  the  descendants  of  Abraham
should  have  come  all  the  Prophets  of  the  children  of
Israel.  This  is  a  blessing  that  God  has  granted  to  this
descent:  to  Moses  from  his  father  and  mother,  to
Christ  from  his  mother's  line ;  also  to  Muhammad  and
the  Bab,  and  to  all  the  Prophets  and  the  Holy
Manifestations  of  Israel.

Hence  it  is  evident  that  inherited  character  also


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    249

exists,  and  to  such  a  degree  that  if  the  characters  are
not  in  conformity  with  their  origin,  although  they
belong  physically  to  that  lineage,  spiritually  they  are
not  considered  members  of  the  family;  like  Canaan,1
who  is  not  reckoned  as  being  of  the  race  of  Noah.

But  the  difference  of  the  qualities  with  regard  to
culture  is  very  great ;  for  education  has  great  influence.
Through  education  the  ignorant  become  learned,  the
cowardly  become  valiant;  through  cultivation  the
crooked  branch  becomes  straight,  the  acid,  bitter  fruit
of  the  mountains  and  woods  becomes  sweet  and  de-
licious, and  the  five-petalled  flower  becomes  hundred-
petalled.  Through  education  savage  nations  become
civilised,  and  even  the  animals  become  domesticated.
Education  must  be  considered  as  most  important ;  for
as  diseases  in  the  world  of  bodies  are  extremely  con-
tagious, so,  in  the  same  way,  qualities  of  spirit  and
heart  are  extremely  contagious.  Education  has  a
universal  influence,  and  the  differences  caused  by  it
are  very  great.

Perhaps  some  one  will  say,  that  since  the  capacity
and  worthiness  of  men  differ,  therefore  the  difference  of
capacity  certainly  causes  the  difference  of  characters.2

But  this  is  not  so ;  for  capacity  is  of  two  kinds,  natural
capacity  and  acquired  capacity.  The  first,  which  is
the  creation  of  God,  is  purely  good — in  the  creation
of  God  there  is  no  evil ;  but  the  acquired  capacity  has
become  the  cause  of  the  appearance  of  evil.  For
example,  God  has  created  all  men  in  such  a  manner,
and  has  given  them  such  a  constitution  and  such

1  Of.  Genesis  ix.  25.

2  i.e.  therefore  people  cannot  be  blamed  for  their  character.


250          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

capacities,  that  they  are  benefited  by  sugar  and
honey,  and  harmed  and  destroyed  by  poison.  This
nature  and  constitution  is  innate,  and  God  has  given
it  equally  to  all  mankind.  But  man  begins  little  by
little  to  accustom  himself  to  poison,  by  taking  a  small
quantity  each  day,  and  gradually  increasing  it,  until
he  reaches  such  a  point  that  he  cannot  live  without
a  gramme  of  opium  every  day.  The  natural  capacities
are  thus  completely  perverted.  Observe  how  much
the  natural  capacity  and  constitution  can  be  changed,
until  by  different  habits  and  training  they  become
entirely  perverted.  One  does  not  criticise  vicious
people  because  of  their  innate  capacities  and  nature,
but  rather  for  their  acquired  capacities  and  nature.

In  creation  there  is  no  evil;  all  is  good.  Certain
qualities  and  natures  innate  in  some  men  and  apparently
blameworthy  are  not  so  in  reality.  For  example,  from
the  beginning  of  his  life  you  can  see  in  a  nursing  child
the  signs  of  desire,  of  anger,  and  of  temper.  Then,  it
may  be  said,  good  and  evil  are  innate  in  the  reality
of  man,  and  this  is  contrary  to  the  pure  goodness  of
nature  and  creation.  The  answer  to  this  is  that  desire/
which  is  to  ask  for  something  more,  is  a  praiseworthy
quality  provided  that  it  is  used  suitably.  So,  if  a  man
has  the  desire  to  acquire  science  and  knowledge,  or  to
become  compassionate,  generous,  and  just,  it  is  most
praiseworthy.  If  he  exercises  his  anger  and  wrath
against  the  bloodthirsty  tyrants  who  are  like  ferocious
beasts,  it  is  very  praiseworthy ;  but  if  he  does  not  use
these  qualities  in  a  right  way,  they  are  blameworthy.

Then  it  is  evident  that  in  creation  and  nature  evil
does  not  exist  at  all;  but  when  the  natural  qualities


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    251

of  man  are  used  in  an  unlawful  way,  they  are  blame-
worthy. So,  if  a  rich  and  generous  person  gives  a
sum  of  money  to  a  poor  man  for  his  own  necessities,
and  if  the  poor  man  spends  that  sum  of  money  on
unlawful  things,  that  will  be  blameworthy.  It  is  the
same  with  all  the  natural  qualities  of  man,  which
constitute  the  capital  of  life ;  if  they  be  used  and  dis-
played in  an  unlawful  way,  they  become  blameworthy.
Therefore  it  is  clear  that  creation  is  purely  good.
Consider  that  the  worst  of  qualities  and  most  odious
of  attributes,  which  is  the  foundation  of  all  evil,  is
lying.  No  worse  or  more  blameworthy  quality  than
this  can  be  imagined  to  exist ;  it  is  the  destroyer  of  all
human  perfections,  and  the  cause  of  innumerable  vices.
There  is  no  worse  characteristic  than  this;  it  is  the
foundation  of  all  evils.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  if  a
doctor  consoles  a  sick  man  by  saying :  '  Thank  God
you  are  better,  and  there  is  hope  of  your  recovery,'
though  these  words  are  contrary  to  the  truth,  yet  they
may  become  the  consolation  of  the  patient  and  the
turning-point  of  the  illness.  This  is  not  blameworthy.
This  question  is  now  clearly  elucidated.  Salutations !


LVIII

THE  DEGREE  OF  KNOWLEDGE  POSSESSED  BY
MAN,  AND  THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS

Question. — Of  what  degree  is  the  intelligence  of  the
human  world,  and  what  are  its  limitations  ?

Answer. — Know  that  intelligence  varies ;  the  lowest
degree  of  intelligence  is  that  of  the  animals,  that  is
to  say,  the  natural  feeling  which  appears  through  the
powers  of  the  senses,  and  which  is  called  sensation.
In  this,  men  and  animals  are  sharers  ;  moreover,  some
animals  with  regard  to  the  senses  are  more  powerful
than  man.  But  in  humanity,  intelligence  differs  and
varies  in  accordance  with  the  different  conditions  of
man.

The  first  condition  of  intelligence  in  the  world  of
nature  is  the  intelligence  of  the  rational  soul.  In  this
intelligence  and  in  this  power  all  men  are  sharers,
whether  they  be  neglectful  or  vigilant,  believers  or
deniers.  This  human  rational  soul  is  God's  creation;
it  contains  and  excels  other  creatures;  as  it  is  more
noble  and  distinguished,  it  contains  things.  The
power  of  the  rational  soul  can  discover  the  realities
of  things,  comprehend  the  peculiarities  of  beings,  and
penetrate  the  mysteries  of  existence.  All  sciences,
knowledge,  arts,  wonders,  institutions,  discoveries,  and

262


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    253

enterprises,  come  from  the  exercised  intelligence  of  the
rational  soul.  There  was  a  time  when  they  were
unknown,  preserved  mysteries,  and  hidden  secrets ;  the
rational  soul  gradually  discovered  them  and  brought
them  out  from  the  plane  of  the  invisible  and  the
hidden,  into  the  realm  of  the  visible.  This  is  the
greatest  power  of  intelligence  in  the  world  of  nature,
which  in  its  highest  flight  and  soaring  comprehends
the  realities,  the  properties,  and  the  effects  of  the
contingent  beings.

But  the  universal  divine  mind  which  is  beyond
nature,  is  the  bounty  of  the  Pre-existent  Power.  This
universal  mind  is  divine ;  it  embraces  existing  realities,
and  it  receives  the  light  of  the  mysteries  of  God.  It
is  a  conscious  power,  not  a  power  of  investigation  and
of  research.  The  intellectual  power  of  the  world  of
nature  is  a  power  of  investigation,  and  by  its  researches
it  discovers  the  realities  of  beings,  and  the  properties
of  existences;  but  the  heavenly  intellectual  power
which  is  beyond  nature,  embraces  things  and  is  cog-
nisant of  things,  knows  them,  understands  them,  is
aware  of  mysteries,  realities,  and  divine  significations,
and  is  the  discoverer  of  the  concealed  verities  of  the
Kingdom.  This  divine  intellectual  power  is  the  special
attribute  of  the  Holy  Manifestations  and  the  Dawning-
places  of  prophethood;  a  ray  of  this  light  falls  upon
the  mirrors  of  the  hearts  of  the  righteous,  and  a
portion  and  a  share  of  this  power  comes  to  them
through  the  Holy  Manifestations.

The  Holy  Manifestations  have  three  conditions :  one
the  physical  condition ;  one,  that  of  the  rational  soul ;
and  one,  that  of  the  manifestation  of  perfection  and  of


254          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

the  lordly  splendour.  The  body  comprehends  things
according  to  the  degree  of  its  ability  in  the  physical
world,  therefore  in  certain  cases  it  shows  physical
weakness.  For  example :  '  I  was  sleeping  and  un-
conscious, the  breeze  of  God  passed  over  me  and  awoke
me,  and  commanded  me  to  proclaim  the  Word';  or
when  Christ  in  his  thirtieth  year  was  baptized,  and
the  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  him ;  before  this,  the
Holy  Spirit  did  not  manifest  itself  in  him.  All
these  things  refer  to  the  bodily  condition  of  the
Manifestations ;  but  their  heavenly  condition  embraces
all  things,  knows  all  mysteries,  discovers  all  signs,  and
rules  over  all  things;  before  as  well  as  after  their
mission,  it  is  the  same.  That  is  why  Christ  has  said :
'  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  first  and  the  last ' :  that
is  to  say,  there  has  never  been  and  never  shall  be  any
change  and  alteration  in  me.


LIX
MAN'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  GOD

Question. — To  what  extent  can  the  understanding  of
man  comprehend  God  ?

Answer, — This  subject  requires  ample  time,  and  to
explain  it  thus  at  table  is  not  easy;  nevertheless  we
will  speak  of  it  briefly.

Know  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  knowledge:  the
knowledge  of  the  essence  of  a  thing,  and  the  knowledge
of  its  qualities.  The  essence  of  a  thing  is  known
through  its  qualities,  otherwise  it  is  unknown  and
hidden.

As  our  knowledge  of  things,  even  of  created  and
limited  things,  is  knowledge  of  their  qualities  and  not
of  their  essence,  how  is  it  possible  to  comprehend  in
its  essence  the  Divine  Reality,  which  is  unlimited?
For  the  substance  of  the  essence  of  anything  is  not
comprehended,  but  only  its  qualities.  For  example,
the  substance  of  the  sun  is  unknown,  but  is  under-
stood by  its  qualities,  which  are  heat  and  light.  The
substance  of  the  essence  of  man  is  unknown  and  not
evident,  but  by  its  qualities  it  is  characterised  and
known.  Thus  everything  is  known  by  its  qualities  and
not  by  its  essence.  Although  the  mind  encompasses
all  things,  and  the  outward  beings  are  comprehended

265


256          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

by  it,  nevertheless  these  beings  with  regard  to  their
essence  are  unknown ;  they  are  only  known  with  regard
to  their  qualities.

Then  how  can  the  eternal  everlasting  Lord,  who  is
held  sanctified  from  comprehension  and  conception,  be
known  by  His  essence  ?  That  is  to  say,  as  things  can
only  be  known  by  their  qualities  and  not  by  their
essence,  it  is  certain  that  the  Divine  Reality  is  unknown
with  regard  to  its  essence,  and  is  known  with  regard
to  its  attributes.  Besides,  how  can  the  phenomenal
reality  embrace  the  Pre-existent  Reality?  For  com-
prehension is  the  result  of  encompassing — embracing
must  be,  so  that  comprehension  may  be — and  the
Essence  of  Unity  surrounds  all,  and  is  not  surrounded.

Also  the  difference  of  conditions  in  the  world  of
beings  is  an  obstacle  to  comprehension.  For  example :
this  mineral  belongs  to  the  mineral  kingdom ;  however
far  it  may  rise,  it  can  never  comprehend  the  power
of  growth.  The  plants,  the  trees,  whatever  progress
they  may  make,  cannot  conceive  of  the  power  of  sight
or  the  powers  of  the  other  senses;  and  the  animal
cannot  imagine  the  condition  of  man,  that  is  to  say,
his  spiritual  powers.  Difference  of  condition  is  an
obstacle  to  knowledge;  the  inferior  degree  cannot
comprehend  the  superior  degree.  How  then  can
the  phenomenal  reality  comprehend  the  Pre-existent
Reality  ?  Knowing  God,  therefore,  means  the  compre-
hension and  the  knowledge  of  His  attributes,  and  not
of  His  Reality.  This  knowledge  of  the  attributes  is
also  proportioned  to  the  capacity  and  power  of  man ;
it  is  not  absolute.  Philosophy  consists  in  compre-
hending the  reality  of  things  as  they  exist,  according


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    257

to  the  capacity  and  the  power  of  man.  For  the
phenomenal  reality  can  comprehend  the  Pre-existent
attributes  only  to  the  extent  of  the  human  capacity.
The  mystery  of  Divinity  is  sanctified  and  purified  from
the  comprehension  of  the  beings,  for  all  that  comes
to  the  imagination  is  that  which  man  understands,
and  the  power  of  the  understanding  of  man  does  not
embrace  the  Reality  of  the  Divine  Essence.  All  that
man  is  able  to  understand  are  the  attributes  of  Divinity,
the  radiance  of  which  appears  and  is  visible  in  worlds
and  souls.

When  we  look  at  the  worlds  and  the  souls,  we  see
wonderful  signs  of  the  divine  perfections,  which  are
clear  and  apparent ;  for  the  reality  of  things  proves  the
Universal  Reality.  The  Reality  of  Divinity  may  be
compared  to  the  sun,  which  from  the  height  of  its
magnificence  shines  upon  all  the  horizons,  and  each
horizon,  and  each  soul,  receives  a  share  of  its  radiance.
If  this  light  and  these  rays  did  not  exist,  beings  would
not  exist;  all  beings  express  something,  and  partake
of  some  ray  and  portion  of  this  light.  The  splendours
of  the  perfections,  bounties,  and  attributes  of  God  shine
forth  and  radiate  from  the  reality  of  the  Perfect  Man,
that  is  to  say  the  Unique  One,  the  universal  Manifes-
tation of  God.  Other  beings  receive  only  one  ray,  but
the  universal  Manifestation  is  the  mirror  for  this  Sun,
which  appears  and  becomes  manifest  in  it,  with  all  its
perfections,  attributes,  signs,  and  wonders.

The  knowledge  of  the  Reality  of  the  Divinity  is
impossible  and  unattainable,  but  the  knowledge  of  the
Manifestations  of  God  is  the  knowledge  of  God,  for
the  bounties,  splendours,  and  divine  attributes  are

B


258          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

apparent  in  them.  Therefore  if  man  attains  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Manifestations  of  God,  he  will  attain
to  the  knowledge  of  God;  and  if  he  be  neglectful  of
the  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Manifestation,  he  will  be
bereft  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  It  is  then  ascertained
and  proved  that  the  Holy  Manifestations  are  the  centre
of  the  bounty,  signs,  and  perfections  of  God.  Blessed
are  those  who  receive  the  light  of  the  divine  bounties
from  the  enlightened  Dawning-points !

We  hope  that  the  Friends  of  God,  like  an  attractive
force,  will  draw  these  bounties  from  the  source  itself,
and  that  they  will  arise  with  such  illumination  and
signs  that  they  will  be  evident  proofs  of  the  Sun  of
Reality.


LX
THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT— (I)

HAVING  shown  that  the  spirit  of  man  exists,1  we  must
prove  its  immortality.

The  immortality  of  the  spirit  is  mentioned  in  the
Holy  Books ;  it  is  the  fundamental  basis  of  the  divine
religions.  Now  punishments  and  rewards  are  said  to
be  of  two  kinds.  Firstly,  the  rewards  and  punishments
of  this  life;  secondly,  those  of  the  other  world.  But
the  paradise  and  hell  of  existence  are  found  in  all  the
worlds  of  God,  whether  in  this  world  or  in  the  spiritual
heavenly  worlds.  Gaining  these  rewards  is  the  gaining
of  eternal  life.  That  is  why  Christ  said, '  Act  in  such
a  way  that  you  may  find  eternal  life,  and  that  you
may  be  born  of  water  and  the  spirit,  so  that  you  may
enter  into  the  Kingdom.'

The  rewards  of  this  life  are  the  virtues  and  perfec-
tions which  adorn  the  reality  of  man.  For  example,
he  was  dark  and  becomes  luminous,  he  was  ignorant
and  becomes  wise,  he  was  neglectful  and  becomes
vigilant,  he  was  asleep  and  becomes  awakened,  he  was
dead  and  becomes  living,  he  was  blind  and  becomes  a
seer,  he  was  deaf  and  becomes  a  hearer,  he  was  earthly
and  becomes  heavenly,  he  was  material  and  becomes

1  Of.  '  The  Difference  between  Man  and  the  Animal,'  page  215.

259


260          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

spiritual  Through  these  rewards  he  gains  spiritual
birth,  and  becomes  a  new  creature.  He  becomes  the
manifestation  of  the  verse  in  the  Gospel  where  it  is
said  of  the  disciples  that  they  were  born  not  of  blood,
nor  of  the  will  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but
of  God ; l  that  is  to  say,  they  were  delivered  from  the
animal  characteristics  and  qualities  which  are  the
characteristics  of  human  nature,  and  they  became
qualified  with  the  divine  characteristics,  which  are  the
bounty  of  God;  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  second
birth.  For  such  people  there  is  no  greater  torture
than  being  veiled  from  God,  and  no  more  severe
punishment  than  sensual  vices,  dark  qualities,  lowness
of  nature,  engrossment  in  carnal  desires.  When  they
are  delivered  through  the  light  of  faith  from  the  dark-
ness of  these  vices,  and  become  illuminated  with  the
radiance  of  the  sun  of  reality,  and  ennobled  with  all
the  virtues,  they  esteem  this  the  greatest  reward,  and
they  know  it  to  be  the  true  paradise.  In  the  same
way  they  consider  that  the  spiritual  punishment,  that
is  to  say  the  torture  and  punishment  of  existence,  is  to
be  subjected  to  the  world  of  nature,  to  be  veiled  from
God,  to  be  brutal  and  ignorant,  to  fall  into  carnal  lusts,
to  be  absorbed  in  animal  frailties ;  to  be  characterised
with  dark  qualities,  such  as  falsehood,  tyranny,  cruelty,
attachment  to  the  affairs  of  the  world,  and  being
immersed  in  satanic  ideas;  for  them,  these  are  the
greatest  punishments  and  tortures.

Likewise  the  rewards  of  the  other  world  are  the
eternal  life  which  is  clearly  mentioned  in  all  the  Holy
Books,  the  divine  perfections,  the  eternal  bounties,  and

1  John  i.  13.


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    261

everlasting  felicity.  The  rewards  of  the  other  world
are  the  perfections  and  the  peace  obtained  in  the
spiritual  worlds  after  leaving  this  world;  whilst  the
rewards  of  this  life  are  the  real  luminous  perfections
which  are  realised  in  this  world,  and  which  are  the
cause  of  eternal  life,  for  they  are  the  very  progress  of
existence.  It  is  like  the  man  who  passes  from  the
embryonic  world  to  the  state  of  maturity,  and  becomes
the  manifestation  of  these  words :  '  Blessed  be  God,  the
best  of  Creators.'  The  rewards  of  the  other  world  are
peace,  the  spiritual  graces,  the  various  spiritual  gifts  in
the  Kingdom  of  God,  the  gaining  of  the  desires  of  the
heart  and  the  soul,  and  the  meeting  oi  God  in  the
world  of  eternity.  In  the  same  way  the  punishments
of  the  other  world,  that  is  to  say,  the  torments  of  the
other  world,  consist  in  being  deprived  of  the  special
divine  blessings  and  the  absolute  bounties,  and  fall-
ing into  the  lowest  degrees  of  existence.  He  who  is
deprived  of  these  divine  favours,  although  he  continues
after  death,  is  considered  as  dead  by  the  people  of
truth.

The  logical  proof  of  the  immortality  of  the  spirit  is
this,  that  no  sign  can  come  from  a  non-existing  thing ;
that  is  to  say,  it  is  impossible  that  from  absolute  non-
existence  signs  should  appear,  for  the  signs  are  the
consequence  of  an  existence,  and  the  consequence
depends  upon  the  existence  of  the  principle.  So,  from
a  non- existing  sun  no  light  can  radiate,  from  a  non-
existing  sea  no  waves  appear,  from  a  non-existing
cloud  no  rain  falls ;  a  non-existing  tree  yields  no  fruit ;
a  non-existing  man  neither  manifests  nor  produces
anything.  Therefore  as  long  as  signs  of  existence


262          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

appear,  they  are  a  proof  that  the  possessor  of  the  sign
is  existent.

Consider  that  to-day  the  Kingdom  of  Christ  exists :
from  a  non-existing  king  how  could  such  a  great
kingdom  be  manifested?  How,  from  a  non-existing
sea,  can  the  waves  mount  so  high?  From  a  non-
existing  garden,  how  can  such  fragrant  breezes  be
wafted  ?  Reflect  that  no  effect,  no  trace,  no  influence
remains  of  any  being  after  its  members  are  dispersed
and  its  elements  are  decomposed,  whether  it  be  a
mineral,  a  vegetable,  or  an  animal.  There  is  only  the
human  reality  and  the  spirit  of  man  which,  after  the
disintegration  of  the  members,  dispersing  of  the  par-
ticles, and  the  destruction  of  the  composition,  persists,
and  continues  to  act  and  to  have  power.

This  question  is  extremely  subtle :  consider  it  atten-
tively. This  is  a  rational  proof  which  we  are  giving,  so
that  the  wise  may  weigh  it  in  the  balance  of  reason
and  justice.  But  if  the  human  spirit  will  rejoice  and
be  attracted  to  the  Kingdom  of  God,  if  the  inner  sight
becomes  opened,  and  the  spiritual  hearing  strengthened,
and  the  spiritual  feelings  predominant,  he  will  see  the
immortality  of  the  spirit  as  clearly  as  he  sees  the  sun,
and  the  glad  tidings  and  signs  of  God  will  encompass
hmi.

To-morrow  we  will  give  other  proofs.


LXI
THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT— (II)

YESTERDAY  we  were  occupied  in  discussing  the  immor-
tality of  the  spirit.  Know  that  the  power  and  the
comprehension  of  the  human  spirit  are  of  two  kinds :
that  is  to  say,  they  perceive  and  act  in  two  different
modes.  One  way  is  through  instruments  and  organs :
thus  with  this  eye  it  sees,  with  this  ear  it  hears,  with
this  tongue  it  talks.  Such  is  the  action  of  the  spirit,
and  the  perception  of  the  reality  of  man,  by  means  of
organs.  That  is  to  say,  that  the  spirit  is  the  seer,
through  the  eyes ;  the  spirit  is  the  hearer,  through  the
ear ;  the  spirit  is  the  speaker,  through  the  tongue.

The  other  manifestation  of  the  powers  and  actions  of
the  spirit  is  without  instruments  and  organs.  For
example,  in  the  state  of  sleep  without  eyes  it  sees,
without  an  ear  it  hears,  without  a  tongue  it  speaks,
without  feet  it  runs.  Briefly,  these  actions  are  beyond
the  means  of  instruments  and  organs.  How  often  it
happens  that  it  sees  a  dream  in  the  world  of  sleep,  and
its  signification  becomes  apparent  two  years  afterwards
in  corresponding  events.  In  the  same  way,  how  many
times  it  happens  that  a  question  which  one  cannot
solve  in  the  world  of  wakefulness,  is  solved  in  the
world  of  dreams.  In  wakefulness  the  eye  sees  only  for
a  short  distance,  but  in  dreams  he  who  is  in  the  East

203


264          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

sees  the  West :  awake  he  sees  the  present,  in  sleep  he
sees  the  future.  In  wakefulness,  by  means  of  rapid
transit,  at  the  most  he  can  travel  only  twenty  farsakhs l
an  hour;  in  sleep,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  he
traverses  the  East  and  West.  For  the  spirit  travels  in
two  different  ways:  without  means,  which  is  spiritual
travelling ;  and  with  means,  which  is  material  travelling :
as  birds  which  fly,  and  those  which  are  carried.

In  the  time  of  sleep  this  body  is  as  though  dead ;  it
does  not  see  nor  hear,  it  does  not  feel,  it  has  no
consciousness,  no  perception :  that  is  to  say,  the  powers
of  man  have  become  inactive,  but  the  spirit  lives  and
subsists.  Nay,  its  penetration  is  increased,  its  flight  is
higher,  and  its  intelligence  is  greater.  To  consider
that  after  the  death  of  the  body  the  spirit  perishes,  is
like  imagining  that  a  bird  in  a  cage  will  be  destroyed  if
the  cage  is  broken,  though  the  bird  has  nothing  to  fear
from  the  destruction  of  the  cage.  Our  body  is  like  the
cage,  and  the  spirit  is  like  the  bird.  We  see  that
without  the  cage  this  bird  flies  in  the  world  of  sleep ;
therefore  if  the  cage  becomes  broken,  the  bird  will
continue  and  exist:  its  feelings  will  be  even  more
powerful,  its  perceptions  greater,  and  its  happiness
increased.  In  truth,  from  hell  it  reaches  a  paradise  of
delights,  because  for  the  thankful  birds  there  is  no
paradise  greater  than  freedom  from  the  cage.  That  is
why  with  utmost  joy  and  happiness  the  martyrs  hasten
to  the  plain  of  sacrifice.

In  wakefulness  the  eye  of  man  sees  at  the  utmost
as  far  as  one  hour  of  distance,2  because  through  the

1  One  farsalch  is  equivalent  to  about  four  miles.
1  It  is  a  Persian  custom  to  reckon  distance  by  time.


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    265

instrumentality  of  the  body  the  power  of  the  spirit  is
thus  determined;  but  with  the  inner  sight  and  the
mental  eye  it  sees  America,  and  it  can  perceive  that
which  is  there,  and  discover  the  conditions  of  things
and  organise  affairs.  If,  then,  the  spirit  were  the  same
as  the  body,  it  would  be  necessary  that  the  power  of
the  inner  sight  should  also  be  in  the  same  proportion.
Therefore  it  is  evident  that  this  spirit  is  different  from
the  body,  and  that  the  bird  is  different  from  the  cage,
and  that  the  power  and  penetration  of  the  spirit  is
stronger  without  the  intermediary  of  the  body.  Now,
if  the  instrument  is  abandoned,  the  possessor  of  the
instrument  continues  to  act.  For  example,  if  the  pen
is  abandoned  or  broken,  the  writer  remains  living  and
present;  if  a  house  is  ruined,  the  owner  is  alive  and
existing.  This  is  one  of  the  logical  evidences  for  the
immortality  of  the  soul.

There  is  another :  this  body  becomes  weak,  or  heavy,
or  sick,  or  it  finds  health ;  it  becomes  tired  or  rested  ;
sometimes  the  hand  or  leg  is  amputated,  or  its  physical
power  is  crippled ;  it  becomes  blind  or  deaf  or  dumb ;  its
limbs  may  become  paralysed;  briefly,  the  body  may
have  all  the  imperfections.  Nevertheless,  the  spirit  in
its  original  state,  in  its  own  spiritual  perception,  will  be
eternal  and  perpetual;  it  neither  finds  any  imperfec-
tion nor  will  it  become  crippled.  But  when  the  body
is  wholly  subjected  to  disease  and  misfortune,  it  is
deprived  of  the  bounty  of  the  spirit;  like  a  mirror
which,  when  it  becomes  broken,  or  dirty,  or  dusty,
cannot  reflect  the  rays  of  the  sun,  nor  any  longer  show
its  bounties.

We  have  already  explained  that  the  spirit  of  man  is


266          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

not  in  the  body,  because  it  is  freed  and  sanctified  from
entrance  and  exit,  which  are  bodily  conditions.  The
connection  of  the  spirit  with  the  body  is  like  that  of
the  sun  with  the  mirror.  Briefly,  the  human  spirit  is
in  one  condition;  it  neither  becomes  ill  from  the
diseases  of  the  body,  nor  cured  by  its  health ;  it  does
not  become  sick,  nor  weak,  nor  miserable,  nor  poor,  nor
light,  nor  small.  That  is  to  say,  it  will  not  be  injured
because  of  the  infirmities  of  the  body,  and  no  effect
will  be  visible  even  if  the  body  becomes  weak,  or  if
the  hands  and  feet  and  tongue  be  cut  off,  or  if  it  loses
the  power  of  hearing  or  sight.  Therefore  it  is  evident
and  certain  that  the  spirit  is  different  from  the  body,
and  that  its  duration  is  independent  of  that  of  the
body;  on  the  contrary,  the  spirit  with  the  utmost
greatness  rules  in  the  world  of  the  body,  and  its  power
and  influence,  like  the  bounty  of  the  sun  in  the  mirror,
are  apparent  and  visible.  But  when  the  mirror  becomes
dusty  or  breaks,  it  will  cease  to  reflect  the  rays  of  the
sun.


LXII
PERFECTIONS  ARE  WITHOUT  LIMIT

KNOW  that  the  conditions  of  existence  are  limited  to
the  conditions  of  servitude,  of  prophethood,  and  of
Deity;  but  the  divine  and  the  contingent  perfections
are  unlimited.  When  you  reflect  deeply,  you  discover
that  also  outwardly  the  perfections  of  existence  are  also
unlimited,  for  you  cannot  find  a  being  so  perfect  that
you  cannot  imagine  a  superior  one.  For  example,  you
cannot  see  a  ruby  in  the  mineral  kingdom,  a  rose  in
the  vegetable  kingdom,  or  a  nightingale  in  the  animal
kingdom,  without  imagining  that  there  might  be  better
specimens.  As  the  divine  bounties  are  endless,  so
human  perfections  are  endless.  If  it  were  possible  to
reach  a  limit  of  perfection,  then  one  of  the  realities  of
the  beings  might  reach  the  condition  of  being  in-
dependent of  God,  and  the  contingent  might  attain  to
the  condition  of  the  absolute.  But  for  every  being
there  is  a  point  which  it  cannot  overpass;  that  is  to
say,  he  who  is  in  the  condition  of  servitude,  however
far  he  may  progress  in  gaining  limitless  perfections,
will  never  reach  the  condition  of  Deity.  It  is  the  same
with  the  other  beings :  a  mineral,  however  far  it  may
progress  in  the  mineral  kingdom,  cannot  gam  the
vegetable  power ;  also  in  a  flower,  however  far  it  may
progress  hi  the  vegetable  kingdom,  no  power  of  the  senses

267


268          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

will  appear.  So  this  silver  mineral  cannot  gain  hearing
or  sight;  it  can  only  improve  in  its  own  condition,
and  become  a  perfect  mineral,  but  it  cannot  acquire
the  power  of  growth,  or  the  power  of  sensation,  or
attain  to  life  ;  it  can  only  progress  in  its  own  condition.

For  example,  Peter  cannot  become  Christ.  All  that
he  can  do  is,  in  the  condition  of  servitude,  to  attain
endless  perfections ;  for  every  existing  reality  is  capable
of  making  progress.  As  the  spirit  of  man  after  putting
off  this  material  form  has  an  everlasting  life,  certainly
any  existing  being  is  capable  of  making  progress ;
therefore  it  is  permitted  to  ask  for  advancement,
forgiveness,  mercy,  beneficence,  and  blessings  for  a  man
after  his  death,  because  existence  is  capable  of  pro-
gression. That  is  why  in  the  prayers  of  Baha'u'llah
forgiveness  and  remission  of  sins  are  asked  for  those
who  have  died.  Moreover,  as  people  in  this  world  are
in  need  of  God,  they  will  also  need  Him  in  the  other
world.  The  creatures  are  always  in  need,  and  God  is
absolutely  independent,  whether  in  this  world  or  in  the
world  to  come.

The  wealth  of  the  other  world  is  nearness  to  God.
Consequently  it  is  certain  that  those  who  are  near  the
Divine  Court  are  allowed  to  intercede,  and  this  inter-
cession is  approved  by  God.  But  intercession  in  the
other  world  is  not  like  intercession  in  this  world :  it  is
another  thing,  another  reality,  which  cannot  be  ex-
pressed in  words.

If  a  wealthy  man  at  the  time  of  his  death  bequeaths
a  gift  to  the  poor  and  miserable,  and  gives  a  part  of  his
wealth  to  be  spent  for  them,  perhaps  this  action  may
be  the  cause  of  his  pardon  and  forgiveness,  and  of  his
progress  in  the  Divine  Kingdom.


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    269

Also  a  father  and  mother  endure  the  greatest
troubles  and  hardships  for  their  children;  and  often
when  the  children  have  reached  the  age  of  maturity,  the
parents  pass  on  to  the  other  world.  Rarely  does  it
happen  that  a  father  and  mother  in  this  world  see  the
reward  of  the  care  and  trouble  they  have  undergone
for  their  children.  Therefore  children,  in  return  for
this  care  and  trouble,  must  show  forth  charity  and
beneficence,  and  must  implore  pardon  and  forgiveness
for  their  parents.  So  you  ought,  in  return  for  the  love
and  kindness  shown  you  by  your  father,  to  give  to  the
poor  for  his  sake,  with  greatest  submission  and  humility
implore  pardon  and  remission  of  sins,  and  ask  for  the
supreme  mercy.

It  is  even  possible  that  the  condition  of  those  who
have  died  in  sin  and  unbelief  may  become  changed ;
that  is  to  say,  they  may  become  the  object  of  pardon
through  the  bounty  of  God,  not  through  His  justice ;
for  bounty  is  giving  without  desert,  and  justice  is  giving
what  is  deserved.  As  we  have  power  to  pray  for  these
souls  here,  so  likewise  we  shall  possess  the  same  power
in  the  other  world,  which  is  the  Kingdom  of  God.  Are
not  all  the  people  in  that  world  the  creatures  of  God  ?
Therefore  in  that  world  also  they  can  make  progress.
As  here  they  can  receive  light  by  their  supplications,
there  also  they  can  plead  for  forgiveness,  and  receive
light  through  entreaties  and  supplications.  Thus  as
souls  in  this  world,  through  the  help  of  the  supplica-
tions, the  entreaties,  and  the  prayers  of  the  holy  ones,
can  acquire  development,  so  is  it  the  same  after  death.
Through  their  own  prayers  and  supplications  they  can
also  progress;  more  especially  when  they  are  the
object  of  the  intercession  of  the  Holy  Manifestations.


LXIII

THE  EVOLUTION  OF  MAN  IN  THE
OTHER  WORLD

KNOW  that  nothing  which  exists  remains  in  a  state  of
repose ;  that  is  to  say,  all  things  are  in  motion.  Every-
thing is  either  growing  or  declining;  all  things  are
either  coming  from  non-existence  into  being,  or  going
from  existence  into  non-existence.  So  this  flower,  this
hyacinth,  during  a  certain  period  of  time  was  coming
from  the  world  of  non-existence  into  being,  and  now  it
is  going  from  being  into  non-existence.  This  state  of
motion  is  said  to  be  essential — that  is,  natural ;  it
cannot  be  separated  from  beings  because  it  is  their
essential  requirement,  as  it  is  the  essential  requirement
of  fire  to  burn.

Thus  it  is  established  that  this  movement  is  neces-
sary to  existence,  which  is  either  growing  or  declining.
Now,  as  the  spirit  continues  to  exist  after  death,  it
necessarily  progresses  or  declines;  and  in  the  other
world,  to  cease  to  progress  is  the  same  as  to  decline ;
but  it  never  leaves  its  own  condition,  in  which  it  con-
tinues to  develop.  For  example,  the  reality  of  the
spirit  of  Peter,  however  far  it  may  progress,  will  not
reach  to  the  condition  of  the  Reality  of  Christ ;  it  pro-
gresses only  in  its  own  environment.

270


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    271

Look  at  this  mineral :  however  far  it  may  evolve,  it
only  evolves  in  its  own  condition;  you  cannot  bring
the  crystal  to  a  state  where  it  can  attain  to  sight :  this
is  impossible.  So  the  moon  which  is  in  the  heavens,
however  far  it  might  evolve,  could  never  become  a
luminous  sun ;  but  in  its  own  condition  it  has  apogee
and  perigee.  However  far  the  disciples  might  pro-
gress, they  could  never  become  Christ.  It  is  true  that
coal  could  become  a  diamond,  but  both  are  in  the
mineral  condition  and  their  component  elements  are
the  same.


LXIV

THE  STATE  OF  MAN  AND  HIS  PROGRESS
AFTER  DEATH

WHEN  we  consider  beings  with  the  seeing  eye,  we
observe  that  they  are  limited  to  three  sorts :  that  is  to
say,  as  a  whole,  they  are  either  mineral,  vegetable,  or
animal ;  each  of  these  three  classes  containing  species.
Man  is  the  highest  species  because  he  is  the  possessor
of  the  perfections  of  all  the  classes ;  that  is,  he  has  a
body  which  grows  and  which  feels.  As  well  as  having
the  perfections  of  the  mineral,  of  the  vegetable,  and  of
the  animal,  he  also  possesses  an  especial  excellence
which  the  other  beings  are  without;  that  is,  the
intellectual  perfections.  Therefore  man  is  the  most
noble  of  beings.

Man  is  in  the  highest  degree  of  materiality,  and  at
the  beginning  of  spirituality ;  that  is  to  say,  he  is  the
end  of  imperfection  and  the  beginning  of  perfection.
He  is  at  the  last  degree  of  darkness,  and  at  the  begin-
ning of  light ;  that  is  why  it  has  been  said  that  the
condition  of  man  is  the  end  of  the  night  and  the
beginning  of  day,  meaning  that  he  is  the  sum  of  all
the  degrees  of  imperfection,  and  that  he  possesses  the
degrees  of  perfection.  He  has  the  animal  side  as  well
as  the  angelic  side ;  and  the  aim  of  an  educator  is  to
so  train  human  souls,  that  their  angelic  aspect  may

272


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    273

overcome  their  animal  side.  Then,  if  the  divine  power
in  man  which  is  his  essential  perfection,  overcomes  the
satanic  power,  which  is  absolute  imperfection,  he  be-
comes the  most  excellent  among  the  creatures ;  but  if
the  satanic  power  overcomes  the  divine  power,  he
becomes  the  lowest  of  the  creatures.  That  is  why  he
is  the  end  of  imperfection  and  the  beginning  of  perfec-
tion. Not  in  any  other  of  the  species  hi  the  world  of
existence  is  there  such  a  difference,  contrast,  contradic-
tion, and  opposition,  as  in  the  species  of  man.  Thus
the  reflection  of  the  Divine  Light  was  in  man,  as  in
Christ,  and  see  how  loved  and  honoured  he  is  !  At  the
same  time  we  see  man  worshipping  a  stone,  a  clod  of
earth,  or  a  tree:  how  vile  he  is,  in  that  his  object  of
worship  should  be  the  lowest  existence — that  is  a  stone,
or  clay,  without  spirit ;  a  mountain,  a  forest,  or  a  tree.
What  shame  is  greater  for  man  than  to  worship  the
lowest  existences  ?  In  the  same  way,  knowledge  is  a
quality  of  man,  and  so  is  ignorance ;  truthfulness  is  a
quality  of  man,  so  is  falsehood;  trustworthiness  and
treachery,  justice  and  injustice,  are  qualities  of  man,
and  so  forth.  Briefly,  all  the  perfections  and  virtues,
and  all  the  vices,  are  qualities  of  man.

Consider  equally  the  differences  between  individual
men.  The  Christ  was  in  the  form  of  man,  and  Caiaphas
was  in  the  form  of  man;  Moses  and  Pharaoh,  Abel
and  Cain,  Baha'u'llah  and  Yahya,1  were  men.

Man  is  said  to  be  the  greatest  representative  of
God,  and  he  is  the  Book  of  Creation  because  all
the  mysteries  of  beings  exist  in  him.  If  he  comes

1  Mirza  Yahya  Subhi  Azal,  half  -  brother  of  Baha'u'llah,  and  his
irreconcilable  enemy.

S


274          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

under  the  shadow  of  the  True  Educator  and  is  rightly
trained,  he  becomes  the  essence  of  essences,  the  light
of  lights,  the  spirit  of  spirits ;  he  becomes  the  centre
of  the  divine  appearances,  the  source  of  spiritual
qualities,  the  rising-place  of  heavenly  lights,  and  the
receptacle  of  divine  inspirations.  If  he  is  deprived
of  this  education  he  becomes  the  manifestation  of
satanic  qualities,  the  sum  of  animal  vices,  and  the
source  of  all  dark  conditions.

The  reason  of  the  mission  of  the  Prophets  is
to  educate  men;  so  that  this  piece  of  coal  may
become  a  diamond,  and  this  fruitless  tree  may  be
engrafted,  and  yield  the  sweetest,  most  delicious
fruits.  When  man  reaches  the  noblest  state  in  the
world  of  humanity,  then  he  can  make  further  progress
in  the  conditions  of  perfection,  but  not  in  state;  for
such  states  are  limited,  but  the  divine  perfections  are
endless.

Both  before  and  after  putting  off  this  material  form,
there  is  progress  in  perfection,  but  not  in  state.  So
beings  are  consummated  in  perfect  man.  There  is
no  other  being  higher  than  a  perfect  man.  But  man
when  he  has  reached  this  state  can  still  make  progress
in  perfections  but  not  in  state,  because  there  is  no
state  higher  than  that  of  a  perfect  man  to  which  he
can  transfer  himself.  He  only  progresses  in  the  state
of  humanity,  for  the  human  perfections  are  infinite.
Thus,  however  learned  a  man  may  be,  we  can  imagine
one  more  learned.

Hence,  as  the  perfections  of  humanity  are  endless,
man  can  also  make  progress  in  perfections  after  leaving
this  world.


LXV

EXPLANATION  OF  A  VERSE  IN  THE
KITABU'L-AQDAS

Question. — It  is  said  in  the  Kitabu'l-Aqdas :  '  He
is  of  the  people  of  error,  though  he  shows  forth
all  good  actions.'  What  is  the  meaning  of  this
verse  ?

Answer. — This  blessed  verse  means  that  the  founda-
tion of  success  and  salvation  is  the  knowledge  of  God,
and  that  the  results  of  the  knowledge  of  God  are  the
good  actions  which  are  the  fruits  of  faith.

If  man  has  not  this  knowledge,  he  will  be  separated
from  God;  and  when  this  separation  exists,  good
actions  have  not  complete  effect.  This  verse  does
not  mean  that  the  souls  separated  from  God  are
equal,  whether  they  perform  good  or  bad  actions.
It  signifies  only  that  the  foundation  is  to  know
God,  and  the  good  actions  result  from  this  know-
ledge. Nevertheless,  it  is  certain  that  between  the
good,  the  sinners  and  the  wicked  who  are  veiled
from  God,  there  is  a  difference.  For  the  veiled  one
who  has  good  principles  and  character,  deserves
the  pardon  of  God;  whilst  he  who  is  a  sinner,
and  has  bad  qualities  and  character,  is  deprived  of

275


276  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

the  bounties  and  blessings  of  God:    herein  lies  the
difference.

Therefore  the  blessed  verse  means  that  good
actions  alone,  without  the  knowledge  of  God,  cannot
be  the  cause  of  eternal  salvation,  everlasting  success,
and  prosperity,  and  entrance  into  the  Kingdom  of
God.


LXVI

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  RATIONAL  SOUL
AFTER  THE  DEATH  OF  THE  BODY

Question. — After  the  body  is  put  aside  and  the  spirit
has  obtained  freedom,  in  what  way  will  the  rational
soul  exist?  Let  us  suppose  that  the  souls  who  are
assisted  by  the  bounty  of  God  attain  to  true  existence
and  eternal  life :  but  what  becomes  of  the  rational  souls,
that  is  to  say,  the  veiled  spirits  ? l

Answer. — Some  think  that  the  body  is  the  substance
and  exists  by  itself,  and  that  the  spirit  is  accidental,
and  depends  upon  the  substance  of  the  body ;  although,
on  the  contrary,  the  rational  soul  is  the  substance,  and
the  body  depends  upon  it.  If  the  accident,  that  is  to
say  the  body,  be  destroyed,  the  substance,  the  spirit
remains.

Secondly,  the  rational  soul,  meaning  the  human
spirit,  does  not  descend  into  the  body ;  that  is  to
say,  it  does  not  enter  it,  for  descent  and  entrance
are  characteristics  of  bodies,  and  the  rational  soul  is
exempt  from  this.  The  spirit  never  entered  this  body,
so  in  quitting  it,  it  will  not  be  in  need  of  an  abiding-
place:  no,  the  spirit  is  connected  with  the  body,  as

1  '  Veiled  spirits '  here  signify  rational  souls,  souls  not  possessing  the
spirit  of  faith.  Cf.  '  Soul,  Spirit,  and  Mind,'  page  243.

277


278  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

this  light  is  with  this  mirror.  When  the  mirror  is
clear  and  perfect,  the  light  of  the  lamp  will  be  apparent
in  it,  and  when  the  mirror  becomes  covered  with  dust
or  breaks,  the  light  will  disappear.

The  rational  soul,  that  is  to  say  the  human  spirit,
has  neither  entered  this  body  nor  existed  through  it ;
so  after  the  disintegration  of  the  composition  of  the
body,  how  should  it  be  hi  need  of  a  substance  through
which  it  may  exist  ?  On  the  contrary,  the  rational  soul
is  the  substance  through  which  the  body  exists.  The
personality  of  the  rational  soul  is  from  its  beginning ;
it  is  not  due  to  the  instrumentality  of  the  body ;  but
the  state  and  the  personality  of  the  rational  soul  may
be  strengthened  in  this  world ;  it  will  make  progress,
and  will  attain  to  the  degrees  of  perfection ;  or  it  will
remain  in  the  lowest  abyss  of  ignorance,  veiled  and
deprived  from  beholding  the  signs  of  God.

Question. — Through  what  means  will  the  spirit  of
man,  that  is  to  say  the  rational  soul,  after  departing
from  this  mortal  world,  make  progress  ?

Answer. — The  progress  of  man's  spirit  in  the  divine
world,  after  the  severance  of  its  connection  with  the
body  of  dust,  is  through  the  bounty  and  grace  of  the
Lord  alone,  or  through  the  intercession  and  the  sincere
prayers  of  other  human  souls,  or  through  the  charities
and  important  good  works  which  are  performed  in
its  name.

THE   IMMORTALITY   OF   CHILDREN

Question. — What  is  the  condition  of  children  who  die
before  attaining  the  age  of  discretion,  or  before  the
appointed  time  of  birth  ?


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    279

Answer. — These  infants  are  under  the  shadow  of  the
favour  of  God;  and  as  they  have  not  committed  any
sin,  and  are  not  soiled  with  the  impurities  of  the  world
of  nature,  they  are  the  centres  of  the  manifestation  of
bounty,  and  the  Eye  of  Compassion  will  be  turned
upon  them.


LXVII

ETERNAL  LIFE  AND  ENTRANCE  INTO
THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD

You  question  about  eternal  life,  and  the  entrance
into  the  Kingdom.  The  outer  expression  used  for
the  Kingdom,  is  heaven:  but  this  is  a  comparison
and  similitude,  not  a  reality  or  fact ;  for  the  Kingdom
is  not  a  material  place,  it  is  sanctified  from  time  and
place.  It  is  a  spiritual  world,  a  divine  world,  and  the
centre  of  the  Sovereignty  of  God ;  it  is  freed  from
body  and  that  which  is  corporeal,  and  it  is  purified
and  sanctified  from  the  imaginations  of  the  human
world.  To  be  limited  to  place  is  a  property  of  bodies
and  not  of  spirits.  Place  and  time  surround  the
body,  not  the  mind  and  spirit.  Observe  that  the
body  of  man  is  confined  to  a  small  place]:  it  covers
only  two  spans  of  earth;  but  the  spirit  and  mind  of
man  travel  to  all  countries  and  regions — even  through
the  limitless  space  of  the  heavens — surround  all  that
exists,  and  make  discoveries  in  the  exalted  spheres
and  infinite  distances.  This  is  because  the  spirit  has
no  place,  it  is  placeless;  and  for  the  spirit,  the  earth
and  the  heaven  are  as  one,  since  it  makes  discoveries
in  both.  But  the  body  is  limited  to  a  place,  and  does
not  know  that  which  is  beyond  it.

For  life  is  of  two  kinds :  that  of  the  body,  and  that
of  the  spirit.     The  life  of  the  body  is  material  life,


280


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN     281

but  the  life  of  the  spirit  expresses  the  existence  of
the  Kingdom,  which  consists  in  receiving  the  Spirit
of  God,  and  becoming  vivified  by  the  breath  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  Although  the  material  life  has  existence,
it  is  pure  non-existence  and  absolute  death  for  the
holy  saints.  So  man  exists,  and  this  stone  also  exists,
but  what  a  difference  between  the  existence  of  man  and
that  of  the  stone !  Though  the  stone  exists,  in  relation
to  the  existence  of  man  it  is  non-existent.

The  meaning  of  eternal  life  is  the  gift  of  the  Holy
Spirit,  as  the  flower  receives  the  gift  of  the  season,
the  air,  and  the  breezes  of  spring.  Consider:  this
flower  had  life  hi  the  beginning  like  the  life  of  the
mineral;  but  by  the  coming  of  the  season  of  spring,
of  the  bounty  of  the  clouds  of  the  springtime,  and  of
the  heat  of  the  glowing  sun,  it  attained  to  another  life
of  the  utmost  freshness,  delicacy,  and  fragrance.  The
first  life  of  the  flower,  in  comparison  to  the  second  life,
is  death.

The  meaning  is  that  the  life  of  the  Kingdom  is  the
life  of  the  spirit,  the  eternal  life,  and  that  it  is  purified
from  place,  like  the  spirit  of  man  which  has  no  place.
For  if  you  examine  the  human  body,  you  will  not  find
a  special  spot  or  locality  for  the  spirit,  for  it  has  never
had  a  place ;  it  is  immaterial.  It  has  a  connection
with  the  body,  like  that  of  the  sun  with  this  mirror.
The  sun  is  not  within  the  mirror,  but  it  has  a  connec-
tion with  the  mirror.

In  the  same  way  the  world  of  the  Kingdom  is
sanctified  from  everything  that  can  be  perceived  by
the  eye  or  by  the  other  senses — hearing,  smell,  taste,
or  touch.  The  mind  which  is  in  man,  the  existence


282          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  which  is  recognised — where  is  it  in  him  ?  If  you
examine  the  body  with  the  eye,  the  ear,  or  the  other
senses,  you  will  not  find  it;  nevertheless  it  exists.
Therefore  the  mind  has  no  place,  but  it  is  connected
with  the  brain.  The  Kingdom  is  also  like  this.  In
the  same  way  love  has  no  place,  but  it  is  connected
with  the  heart ;  so  the  Kingdom  has  no  place,  but  is
connected  with  man.

Entrance  into  the  Kingdom  is  through  the  love  of
God,  through  detachment,  through  holiness  and
chastity,  through  truthfulness,  purity,  steadfastness,
faithfulness,  and  the  sacrifice  of  life.

These  explanations  show  that  man  is  immortal  and
lives  eternally.  For  those  who  believe  in  God,  who
have  love  of  God,  and  faith,  life  is  excellent — that  is,
it  is  eternal;  but  to  those  souls  who  are  veiled  from
God,  although  they  have  life,  it  is  dark,  and  in  com-
parison with  the  life  of  believers  it  is  non-existence.

For  example,  the  eye  and  the  nail  are  living;  but
the  life  of  the  nail  in  relation  to  the  life  of  the  eye  is
non-existent.  This  stone  and  this  man  both  exist;
but  the  stone  in  relation  to  the  existence  of  man  is
non-existent,  it  has  no  being;  for  when  man  dies,
and  his  body  is  destroyed  and  annihilated,  it  becomes
like  stone  and  earth.  Therefore  it  is  clear  that
although  the  mineral  exists,  in  relation  to  man  it  is
non-existent.

In  the  same  way,  the  souls  who  are  veiled  from  God,
although  they  exist  in  this  world  and  in  the  world  after
death,  are  in  comparison  with  the  holy  existence  of  the
children  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  non-existing  and
separated  from  God.


LXVIII
FATE

Question. — Is  the  predestination  which  is  mentioned  in
the  Holy  Books  a  decreed  thing?  If  so,  is  not  the
effort  to  avoid  it  useless  ?

Answer. — Fate  is  of  two  kinds :  one  is  decreed,  and
the  other  is  conditional  or  impending.  The  decreed
fate  is  that  which  cannot  change  or  be  altered,  and
conditional  fate  is  that  which  may  occur.  So,  for  this
lamp,  the  decreed  fate  is  that  the  oil  burns,  and  will
be  consumed;  therefore  its  eventual  extinction  is  a
decree  which  it  is  impossible  to  alter  or  to  change,
because  it  is  a  decreed  fate.  In  the  same  way,  in
the  body  of  man  a  power  of  life  has  been  created,
and  as  soon  as  it  is  destroyed  and  ended,  the  body
will  certainly  be  decomposed ;  so  when  the  oil  in  this
lamp  is  burnt  and  finished,  the  lamp  will  undoubtedly
become  extinguished.

But  conditional  fate  may  be  likened  to  this :  while
there  is  still  oil,  a  violent  wind  blows  on  the  lamp,
which  extinguishes  it.  This  is  a  conditional  fate.
It  is  wise  to  avoid  it,  to  protect  oneself  from  it,  to
be  cautious  and  circumspect.  But  the  decreed  fate,
which  is  like  the  finishing  of  the  oil  in  the  lamp,
cannot  be  altered,  changed,  nor  delayed.  It  must
happen;  it  is  inevitable  that  the  lamp  will  become
extinguished.


LXIX
THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  STARS

Question. — Have  the  stars  of  the  heavens  any  influence
upon  the  human  soul,  or  have  they  not  ?

Answer. — Some  of  the  celestial  stars  have  a  clear  and
apparent  material  effect  upon  the  terrestrial  globe  and
the  earthly  beings,  which  needs  no  explanation.  Con-
sider the  sun,  which  through  the  aid  and  the  provi-
dence of  God  develops  the  earth  and  all  earthly  beings.
Without  the  light  and  heat  of  the  sun,  all  the  earthly
creatures  would  be  entirely  non-existent.

With  regard  to  the  spiritual  influence  of  stars,  though
this  influence  of  stars  in  the  human  world  may  appear
strange,  still,  if  you  reflect  deeply  upon  this  subject,
you  will  not  be  so  much  surprised  at  it.  My  meaning
is  not,  however,  that  the  decrees  which  the  astrologers
of  former  times  inferred  from  the  movements  of  the
stars  corresponded  to  occurrences ;  for  the  decrees  of
those  former  astrologers  were  forms  of  imagination
which  were  originated  by  Egyptian,  Assyrian,  and
Chaldean  priests,  nay,  rather,  they  were  due  to  the
fancies  of  Hindus,  to  the  myths  of  the  Greeks,
Romans,  and  other  star-worshippers.  But  I  mean
that  this  limitless  universe  is  like  the  human  body,
all  the  members  of  which  are  connected  and  linked

284


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    285

with  one  another  with  the  greatest  strength.  How
much  the  organs,  the  members,  and  the  parts  of
the  body  of  man  are  intermingled  and  connected  for
mutual  aid  and  help,  and  how  much  they  influence  one
another !  In  the  same  way,  the  parts  of  this  infinite
universe  have  their  members  and  elements  connected
with  one  another,  and  influence  one  another  spiritually
and  materially.

For  example,  the  eye  sees,  and  all  the  body  is
affected;  the  ear  hears,  and  all  the  members  of  the
body  are  moved.  Of  this  there  is  no  doubt ;  and  the
universe  is  like  a  living  person.  Moreover,  the  con-
nection which  exists  between  the  members  of  beings
must  necessarily  have  an  effect  and  impression,  whether
it  be  material  or  spiritual.

For  those  who  deny  spiritual  influence  upon  material
things  we  mention  this  brief  example :  wonderful  sounds
and  tones,  melodies  and  charming  voices  are  accidents
which  affect  the  air — for  sound  is  the  term  for  vibra-
tions of  the  air — and  by  these  vibrations  the  nerves  of
the  tympanum  of  the  ear  are  affected,  and  hearing
results.  Now  reflect  that  the  vibration  of  the  air,
which  is  an  accident  of  no  importance,  attracts  and
perturbs  the  spirit  of  man,  and  has  great  effect  upon
him:  it  makes  him  weep  or  laugh;  perhaps  it  will
influence  him  to  such  a  degree  that  he  will  throw  him-
self into  danger.  Therefore  see  the  connection  which
exists  between  the  spirit  of  man  and  the  atmospheric
vibration,  so  that  the  movement  of  the  air  becomes  the
cause  of  transporting  him  from  one  state  to  another,
and  of  entirely  overpowering  him ;  it  will  deprive  him
of  patience  and  tranquillity.  Consider  how  strange  this


286  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

is,  for  nothing  comes  forth  from  the  singer  which  enters
into  the  listener ;  nevertheless,  a  great  spiritual  effect
is  produced.  Therefore,  surely  so  great  a  connection
between  beings  must  have  spiritual  effect  and  influence.

It  has  been  mentioned  that  the  members  and  parts
of  man  affect  and  influence  one  another.  For  example,
the  eye  sees,  the  heart  is  affected ;  the  ear  hears,  and
the  spirit  is  influenced;  the  heart  is  at  rest,  the
thoughts  become  serene,  and  for  all  the  members  of
man's  body  a  pleasant  condition  is  realised.  What  a
connection,  and  what  an  agreement  is  this !  Since  this
connection,  this  spiritual  effect  and  this  influence  exists
between  the  members  of  the  body  of  man,  who  is  only
one  of  many  finite  beings,  certainly  between  these
universal  and  infinite  beings  there  will  also  be  a
spiritual  and  material  connection.  Although  by  exist-
ing rules  and  actual  science  these  connections  cannot
be  discovered,  nevertheless  their  existence  between  all
beings  is  certain  and  absolute.

To  conclude :  the  beings,  whether  great  or  small,  are
connected  with  one  another  by  the  perfect  wisdom  of
God,  and  affect  and  influence  one  another.  If  it  were
not  so,  in  the  universal  system  and  the  general  arrange-
ment of  existence,  there  would  be  disorder  and  imper-
fection. But  as  beings  are  connected  one  with  another
with  the  greatest  strength,  they  are  in  order  in  their
places  and  perfect.

This  subject  is  worthy  of  examination.


LXX
FREE-WILL

Question. — Is  man  a  free  agent  in  all  his  actions,  or  is
he  compelled  and  constrained  ?

Answer. — This  question  is  one  of  the  most  important
and  abstruse  of  divine  problems.  If  God  wills,
another  day,  at  the  beginning  of  dinner,  we  will  under-
take the  explanation  of  this  subject  in  detail ;  now  we
will  explain  it  briefly,  in  a  few  words,  as  follows.  Some
things  are  subject  to  the  free-will  of  man,  such  as
justice,  equity,  tyranny,  and  injustice,  as  well  as  all  the
good  and  evil  actions ;  it  is  evident  and  clear  that  these
actions  are,  for  the  most  part,  left  to  the  will  of  man.
But  there  are  certain  things  to  which  man  is  forced
and  compelled :  such  as  sleep,  death,  sickness,  decline
of  power,  injuries,  and  misfortunes  ;  these  are  not  sub-
ject to  the  will  of  man,  and  he  is  not  responsible  for
them,  for  he  is  compelled  to  endure  them.  But  in  the
choice  of  good  and  bad  actions  he  is  free,  and  he
commits  them  according  to  his  own  will.

For  example,  if  he  wishes,  he  can  pass  his  time  in
praising  God,  or  he  can  be  occupied  with  other
thoughts.  He  can  be  an  enkindled  light  through  the
fire  of  the  love  of  God,  and  a  philanthropist  loving
the  world,  or  he  can  be  a  hater  of  mankind,  and
engrossed  with  material  things.  He  can  be  just  or


287


288          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

cruel.  These  actions  and  these  deeds  are  subject  to
the  control  of  the  will  of  man  himself,  consequently  he
•is  responsible  for  them.

Now  another  question  arises:  Man  is  absolutely
helpless  and  dependent,  since  might  and  power  belong
especially  to  God.  Both  exaltation  and  humiliation
depend  upon  the  good  pleasure  and  the  will  of  the
Most  High.

It  is  said  in  the  Gospel,  that  God  is  like  a  potter  who
makes  '  one  vessel  unto  honour  and  another  unto  dis-
honour.' Now  the  dishonoured  vessel  has  no  right  to
find  fault  with  the  potter,  saying,  Why  did  you  not
make  me  a  precious  cup,  which  is  passed  from  hand  to
hand  ?  The  meaning  of  this  verse  is  that  the  states  of
beings  are  different.  That  which  is  in  the  lowest  state
of  existence,  like  the  mineral,  has  no  right  to  complain,
saying,  O  God,  why  have  you  not  given  me  the  vegetable
perfections  ?  In  the  same  way,  the  plant  has  no  right
to  complain  that  it  has  been  deprived  of  the  perfec-
tions of  the  animal  world.  Also  it  is  not  befitting  for
the  animal  to  complain  of  the  want  of  the  human
perfections.  No,  all  these  things  are  perfect  in  their
own  degree,  and  they  must  strive  after  the  perfections
of  their  own  degree.  The  inferior  beings,  as  we  have
said,  have  neither  the  right  to,  nor  the  fitness  for,  the
states  of  the  superior  perfections :  no,  their  progress
must  be  in  their  own  state.

Also  the  inaction,  or  the  movement  of  man,  depends
upon  the  assistance  of  God.  If  he  is  not  aided,  he  is
not  able  to  do  either  good  or  evil.  But  when  the  help
of  existence  comes  from  the  Generous  Lord,  he  is  able
to  do  both  good  and  evil ;  but  if  the  help  is  cut  off,  he


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    289

remains  absolutely  helpless.  This  is  why  in  the  Holy
Books '  they  speak  of  the  help  and  assistance  of  God.
So  this  condition  is  like  that  of  a  ship,  which  is  moved
by  the  power  of  the  wind  or  steam ;  if  this  power  ceases,
the  ship  cannot  move  at  all.  Nevertheless,  the  rudder
of  the  ship  turns  it  to  either  side,  and  the  power  of  the
steam  moves  it  in  the  desired  direction.  If  it  is  directed
to  the  east,  it  goes  to  the  east ;  or  if  it  is  directed  to  the
west,  it  goes  to  the  west.  This  motion  does  not  come
from  the  ship ;  no,  it  comes  from  the  wind  or  the  steam.

In  the  same  way,  in  all  the  action  or  inaction  of  man,
he  receives  power  from  the  help  of  God;  but  the
choice  of  good  or  evil  belongs  to  the  man  himself.  So,
if  a  king  should  appoint  some  one  to  be  the  governor
of  a  city,  and  should  grant  him  the  power  of  authority,
and  should  show  him  the  paths  of  justice  and  injustice
according  to  the  laws : — if  then  this  governor  should
commit  injustice,  although  he  should  act  by  the
authority  and  power  of  the  king,  the  latter  would  be
absolved  from  injustice.  But  if  he  should  act  with
justice,  he  would  do  it  also  through  the  authority  of  the
king,  who  would  be  pleased  and  satisfied.

That  is  to  say,  though  the  choice  of  good  and  evil
belongs  to  man,  under  all  circumstances  he  is  depen-
dent upon  the  sustaining  help  of  life,  which  comes
from  the  Omnipotent.  The  Kingdom  of  God  is  very
great,  and  all  are  captives  in  the  grasp  of  His  Power.
The  servant  cannot  do  anything  by  his  own  will;
God  is  powerful,  Omnipotent,  and  the  Helper  of  all
beings.

This  question  has  become  clearly  explained.
Salutations !


LXXI

VISIONS,  AND  COMMUNICATION  WITH
SPIRITS

Question. — Some  people  believe  that  they  achieve
spiritual  discoveries;  that  is  to  say,  that  they  con-
verse with  spirits.  What  kind  of  communion  is
this?

Answer. — Spiritual  discoveries  are  of  two  kinds :  one
kind  is  of  the  imagination,  and  is  only  the  assertion
of  a  few  people ;  the  other  kind  resembles  inspiration,
and  this  is  real — such  are  the  revelations  of  Isaiah,  of
Jeremiah,  and  of  St.  John,  which  are  real.

Reflect  that  man's  power  of  thought  consists  of  two
kinds.  One  kind  is  true,  when  it  agrees  with  a  deter-
mined truth.  Such  conceptions  find  realisation  hi  the
exterior  world;  such  are  accurate  opinions,  correct
theories,  scientific  discoveries,  and  inventions.

The  other  kind  of  conceptions  is  made  up  of  vain
thoughts  and  useless  ideas  which  yield  neither  fruit
nor  result,  and  which  have  no  reality ;  no,  they  surge
like  the  waves  of  the  sea  of  imaginations,  and  they
pass  away  like  idle  dreams.

In  the  same  way,  there  are  two  sorts  of  spiritual
discoveries.  One  is  the  revelations  of  the  Prophets,
and  the  spiritual  discoveries  of  the  elect.  The  visions

290


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    291

of  the  Prophets  are  not  dreams ;  no,  they  are  spiritual
discoveries  and  have  reality.  They  say,  for  example :
'  I  saw  a  person  in  a  certain  form,  and  I  said  such  a
thing,  and  he  gave  such  an  answer.'  This  vision  is  in
the  world  of  wakefulness,  and  not  in  that  of  sleep.
Nay,  it  is  a  spiritual  discovery  which  is  expressed  as  if
it  were  the  appearance  of  a  vision.

The  other  kind  of  spiritual  discoveries  is  made  up  of
pure  imaginations ;  but  these  imaginations  become
embodied  in  such  a  way  that  many  simple-hearted
people  believe  that  they  have  a  reality.  That  which
proves  it  clearly  is  that  from  this  controlling  of  spirits
no  result  or  fruit  has  ever  been  produced :  no,  they  are
but  narratives  and  stories.

Know  that  the  reality  of  man  embraces  the  realities
of  things,  and  discovers  the  verities,  properties,  and
secrets  of  things.  So  all  these  arts,  wonders,  sciences,
and  knowledge,  have  been  discovered  by  the  human
reality.  At  one  time  these  sciences,  knowledge,
wonders,  and  arts  were  hidden  and  concealed  secrets ;
then  gradually  the  human  reality  discovered  them,  and
brought  them  from  the  realm  of  the  invisible  to  the
plane  of  the  visible.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that  the
reality  of  man  embraces  things.  Thus,  it  is  in  Europe
and  discovers  America ;  it  is  on  the  earth  and  it  makes
discoveries  in  the  heavens.  It  is  the  revealer  of  the
secrets  of  things,  and  it  is  the  knower  of  the  realities  of
that  which  exists.  These  discoveries  corresponding  to
the  reality  are  similar  to  revelation  which  is  spiritual
comprehension,  divine  inspiration,  and  the  association
of  human  spirits.  For  instance,  the  Prophet  says,  '  I
saw,  I  said,  I  heard  such  a  thing.'  It  is  therefore


292          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

evident  that  the  spirit  has  great  perception  without
the  intermediary  of  any  of  the  five  senses,  such  as  the
eyes  or  ears.  Among  spiritual  souls  there  are  spiritual
understandings,  discoveries,  a  communion  which  is  puri-
fied from  imagination  and  fancy,  an  association  which
is  sanctified  from  time  and  place.  So  it  is  written
in  the  Gospel  that  on  Mount  Tabor,  Moses  and  Elias
came  to  Christ,  and  it  is  evident  that  this  was  not  a
material  meeting.  It  was  a  spiritual  condition,  which
is  expressed  as  a  physical  meeting.

The  other  sort  of  converse,  presence,  and  communi-
cations of  spirits  is  but  imagination  and  fancy,  which
only  appears  to  have  reality.

The  mind  and  the  thought  of  man  sometimes  dis-
cover truths,  and  from  this  thought  and  discovery  signs
and  results  are  produced.  This  thought  has  a  founda-
tion ;  but  many  things  come  to  the  mind  of  man  which
are  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  of  imaginations,  they  have
no  fruit,  and  no  result  comes  from  them.  In  the  same
way,  man  sees  in  the  world  of  sleep  a  vision  which
becomes  exactly  realised;  at  another  time  he  sees  a
dream  which  has  absolutely  no  result.

What  we  mean  is  that  this  state,  which  we  call  the
converse  and  communications  of  spirits,  is  of  two  kinds :
one  is  simply  imaginary,  and  the  other  is  like  the
visions  which  are  mentioned  in  the  Holy  Book,  such  as
the  revelations  of  St.  John  and  Isaiah  and  the  meeting
of  Christ  with  Moses  and  Elias.  These  are  real,
and  produce  wonderful  effects  in  the  minds  and
thoughts  of  men,  and  cause  their  hearts  to  be
attracted.


LXXII
HEALING  BY"  SPIRITUAL  MEANS

Question. — Some  people  heal  the  sick  by  spiritual
means,  that  is  to  say,  without  medicine.  How  is
this?

Answer. — Know  that  there  are  four  kinds  of  curing
and  healing  without  medicine.  Two  are  due  to  material
causes,  and  two  to  spiritual  causes.

Of  the  two  kinds  of  material  healing,  one  is  due  to
the  fact  that  in  man  both  health  and  sickness  are
contagious.  The  contagion  of  disease  is  violent  and
rapid,  while  that  of  health  is  extremely  weak  and  slow.
If  two  bodies  are  brought  into  contact  with  each  other,
it  is  certain  that  microbic  particles  will  pass  from  one
to  the  other.  In  the  same  way  that  disease  is  trans-
ferred from  one  body  to  another  with  rapid  and  strong
contagion,  it  may  be  that  the  strong  health  of  a  healthy
man  will  alleviate  a  very  slight  malady  in  a  sick  person.
That  is  to  say,  the  contagion  of  disease  is  violent  and
has  a  rapid  effect,  while  that  of  health  is  very  slow  and
has  a  small  effect,  and  it  is  only  in  very  slight  diseases
that  it  has  even  this  small  effect.  The  strong  power
of  a  healthy  body  can  overcome  a  slight  weakness  of
a  sick  body,  and  health  results.  This  is  one  kind  of
healing.


294          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

The  other  kind  of  healing  without  medicine  is
through  the  magnetic  force  which  acts  from  one  body
on  another,  and  becomes  the  cause  of  cure.  This  force
also  has  only  a  slight  effect.  Sometimes  one  can  benefit
a  sick  person  by  placing  one's  hand  upon  his  head  or
upon  his  heart.  Why  ?  Because  of  the  effect  of  the
magnetism,  and  of  the  mental  impression  made  upon
the  sick  person  which  causes  the  disease  to  vanish.
But  this  effect  is  also  very  slight  and  weak.

Of  the  two  other  kinds  of  healing  which  are  spiritual
— that  is  to  say,  where  the  means  of  cure  is  a  spiritual
power — one  results  from  the  entire  concentration  of
the  mind  of  a  strong  person  upon  a  sick  person,  when
the  latter  expects  with  all  his  concentrated  faith  that
a  cure  will  be  effected  from  the  spiritual  power  of  the
strong  person,  to  such  an  extent  that  there  will  be
a  cordial  connection  between  the  strong  person  and
the  invalid.  The  strong  person  makes  every  effort  to
cure  the  sick  patient,  and  the  sick  patient  is  then  sure
of  receiving  a  cure.  From  the  effect  of  these  mental
impressions  an  excitement  of  the  nerves  is  produced,
and  this  impression  and  this  excitement  of  the  nerves
will  become  the  cause  of  the  recovery  of  the  sick
person.  So  when  a  sick  person  has  a  strong  desire
and  intense  hope  for  something,  and  hears  suddenly
the  tidings  of  its  realisation,  a  nervous  excitement  is
produced,  which  will  make  the  malady  entirely  dis-
appear. In  the  same  way,  if  a  cause  of  terror  suddenly
occurs,  perhaps  an  excitement  may  be  produced  in  the
nerves  of  a  strong  person,  which  will  immediately
cause  a  malady.  The  cause  of  the  sickness  will  be
no  material  thing,  for  that  person  has  not  eaten


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN     295

anything,  and  nothing  harmful  has  touched  him ;  the
excitement  of  the  nerves  is  then  the  only  cause  of  the
illness.  In  the  same  way  the  sudden  realisation  of  a
chief  desire  will  give  such  joy  that  the  nerves  will  be
excited  by  it,  and  this  excitement  may  produce  health.

To  conclude,  the  complete  and  perfect  connection
between  the  spiritual  doctor  and  the  sick  person — that
is,  a  connection  of  such  a  kind  that  the  spiritual  doctor
entirely  concentrates  himself,  and  all  the  attention  of
the  sick  person  is  given  to  the  spiritual  doctor  from
whom  he  expects  to  realise  health — causes  an  excite-
ment of  the  nerves,  and  health  is  produced.  But  all
this  has  effect  only  to  a  certain  extent,  and  that  not
always.  For  if  some  one  is  afflicted  with  a  very  violent
disease,  or  is  wounded,  these  means  will  not  remove
the  disease  nor  close  and  heal  the  wound.  That  is  to
say,  these  means  have  no  power  in  severe  maladies,
unless  the  constitution  helps,  because  a  strong  con-
stitution often  overcomes  disease.  This  is  the  third
kind  of  healing.

But  the  fourth  kind  of  healing  is  produced  through  **•»£
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  does  not  depend
on  contact,  nor  on  sight,  nor  upon  presence ;  it  is  not
dependent  upon  any  condition.  Whether  the  disease
be  light  or  severe,  whether  there  be  a  contact  of  bodies
or  not,  whether  a  personal  connection  be  established
between  the  sick  person  and  the  healer  or  not,  this
healing  takes  place  through  the  power  of  the  Holy
Spirit.


LXXIII
HEALING  BY  MATERIAL  MEANS

YESTERDAY  at  table,  we  spoke  of  curative  treatment
and  spiritual  healing,  which  consists  in  treating
maladies  through  the  spiritual  powers.

Now  let  us  speak  of  material  healing.  The  science
of  medicine  is  still  in  a  condition  of  infancy;  it  has
not  reached  maturity;  but  when  it  has  reached  this
point,  cures  will  be  performed  by  things  which  are
not  repulsive  to  the  smell  and  taste  of  man;  that  is
to  say  by  aliments,  fruits,  and  vegetables  which  are
agreeable  to  the  taste  and  have  an  agreeable  smell.
For  the  provoking  cause  of  disease — that  is  to  say,
the  cause  of  the  entrance  of  disease  into  the  human
body — is  either  a  physical  one  or  is  the  effect  of  excite-
ment of  the  nerves.

But  the  principal  causes  of  disease  are  physical ;  for
the  human  body  is  composed  of  numerous  elements,
but  in  the  measure  of  an  especial  equilibrium.  As  long
as  this  equilibrium  is  maintained,  man  is  preserved
from  disease ;  but  if  this  essential  balance,  which  is  the
pivot  of  the  constitution,  is  disturbed,  the  constitution
is  disordered,  and  disease  will  supervene.

For  instance,  there  is  a  decrease  in  one  of  the  con-
stituent ingredients  of  the  body  of  man,  and  in  another

296


POWERS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  MAN    297

there  is  an  increase;  so  the  proportion  of  the  equili-
brium is  disturbed,  and  disease  occurs.  For  example,
one  ingredient  must  be  one  thousand  grammes  in
weight,  and  another  five  grammes,  in  order  that  the
equilibrium  be  maintained.  The  part  which  is  one
thousand  grammes  diminishes  to  seven  hundred
grammes,  and  that  which  is  five  grammes  augments
until  the  measure  of  the  equilibrium  is  disturbed  ;  then
disease  occurs.  When  by  remedies  and  treatments  the
equilibrium  is  re-established,  the  disease  is  banished.
So,  if  the  saccharine  constituent  increases,  the  health
is  impaired;  and  when  the  doctor  forbids  sweet  and
starchy  foods  the  saccharine  constituent  diminishes,
the  equilibrium  is  re-established,  and  the  disease  is
driven  off.  Now  the  readjustment  of  these  constituents
of  the  human  body  is  obtained  by  two  means :  either
by  medicines  or  by  aliments ;  and  when  the  constitu-
tion has  recovered  its  equilibrium,  disease  is  banished.
All  the  elements  that  are  combined  in  man,  exist
also  in  vegetables ;  therefore  if  one  of  the  constituents
which  compose  the  body  of  man  diminishes,  and  he
partakes  of  foods  in  which  there  is  much  of  that
diminished  constituent,  then  the  equilibrium  will  be
established,  and  a  cure  will  be  obtained.  So  long  as
the  aim  is  the  readjustment  of  the  constituents  of  the
body,  it  can  be  effected  either  by  medicine  or  by  food.

The  majority  of  the  diseases  which  overtake  man
also  overtake  the  animal ;  but  the  animal  is  not  cured
by  drugs.  In  the  mountains,  as  in  the  wilderness,
the  animal's  physician  is  the  power  of  taste  and  smell.
The  sick  animal  smells  the  plants  that  grow  in  the
wilderness,  he  eats  those  that  are  sweet  and  fragrant


298          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

to  his  sinell  and  taste,  and  is  cured.  The  cause  of
his  healing  is  this.  When  the  saccharine  ingredient
has  become  diminished  in  his  constitution,  he  begins
to  long  for  sweet  things ;  therefore  he  eats  an  herb  with
a  sweet  taste,  for  nature  urges  and  guides  him;  its
smell  and  taste  please  him,  and  he  eats  it.  The
saccharine  ingredient  in  his  nature  will  be  increased,
and  health  will  be  restored.

It  is  therefore  evident  that  it  is  possible  to  cure  by
foods,  aliments,  and  fruits;  but  as  to-day  the  science
of  medicine  is  imperfect,  this  fact  is  not  yet  fully
grasped.  When  the  science  of  medicine  reaches  perfec-
tion, treatment  will  be  given  by  foods,  aliments,  fragrant
fruits,  and  vegetables,  and  by  various  waters,  hot  and
cold  in  temperature.

This  discourse  is  brief,  but,  if  God  wills,  at  another
time,  when  the  occasion  is  suitable,  this  question  will
be  more  fully  explained.


PART  V
MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS


LXXIV
THE  NON-EXISTENCE  OF  EVIL

THE  true  explanation  of  this  subject  is  very  difficult.
Know  that  beings  are  of  two  kinds :  material  and
spiritual,  those  perceptible  to  the  senses  and  those
intellectual.

Things  which  are  sensible  are  those  which  are  per-
ceived by  the  five  exterior  senses ;  thus  those  outward
existences  which  the  eyes  see,  are  called  sensible.
Intellectual  things  are  those  which  have  no  outward
existence,  but  are  conceptions  of  the  mind.  For  ex-
ample, mind  itself  is  an  intellectual  thing  which  has
no  outward  existence.  All  man's  characteristics  and
qualities  form  an  intellectual  existence,  and  are  not
sensible.

Briefly,  the  intellectual  realities,  such  as  all  the
qualities  and  admirable  perfections  of  man,  are  purely
good,  and  exist.  Evil  is  simply  their  non-existence.
So  ignorance  is  the  want  of  knowledge,  error  is  the
want  of  guidance,  forgetfulness  is  the  want  of  memory,
stupidity  is  the  want  of  good  sense.  All  these  things
have  no  real  existence.

In  the  same  way,  the  sensible  realities  are  absolutely
good,  and  evil  is  due  to  their  non-existence ;  that  is  to
say,  blindness  is  the  want  of  sight,  deafness  is  the  want

801


302  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

of  hearing,  poverty  is  the  want  of  wealth,  illness  is  the
want  of  health,  death  is  the  want  of  life,  and  weakness
is  the  want  of  strength.

Nevertheless  a  doubt  occurs  to  the  mind:  that  is,
scorpions  and  serpents  are  poisonous.  Are  they  good
or  evil,  for  they  are  existing  beings  ?  Yes,  a  scorpion
is  evil  in  relation  to  man;  a  serpent  is  evil,  in  rela-
tion to  man;  but  in  relation  to  themselves  they  are
not  evil,  for  their  poison  is  their  weapon,  and  by  their
sting  they  defend  themselves.  But  as  the  elements  of
their  poison  do  not  agree  with  our  elements,  that  is  to
say,  as  there  is  antagonism  between  these  different
elements,  therefore  this  antagonism  is  evil;  but  in
reality  as  regards  themselves  they  are  good.

The  epitome  of  this  discourse  is,  that  it  is  possible
that  one  thing  in  relation  to  another  may  be  evil,  and
at  the  same  time  within  the  limits  of  its  proper  being  it
may  not  be  evil.  Then  it  is  proved  that  there  is  no
evil  in  existence;  all  that  God  created,  He  created
good.  This  evil  is  nothingness ;  so  death  is  the  absence
of  life.  When  man  no  longer  receives  life,  he  dies.
Darkness  is  the  absence  of  light :  when  there  is  no
light,  there  is  darkness.  Light  is  an  existing  thing,
but  darkness  is  non-existent.  Wealth  is  an  existing
thing,  but  poverty  is  non-existing.

Then  it  is  evident  that  all  evils  return  to  non-
existence.  Good  exists,  evil  is  non-existent.


LXXV
THAT  THERE  ARE  TWO  KINDS  OF  TORMENT

KNOW  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  torment:  subtile
and  gross.  For  example,  ignorance  itself  is  a  torment,
but  it  is  a  subtile  torment ;  indifference  to  God  is  itself
a  torment,  so  also  are  falsehood,  cruelty,  and  treachery.  '
All  the  imperfections  are  torments,  but  they  are  subtile
torments.  Certainly  for  an  intelligent  man,  death  is
better  than  sin,  and  a  cut  tongue  is  better  than  lying
or  calumny.

The  other  kind  of  torment  is  gross :  such  as  penalties,
imprisonment,  beating,  expulsion,  and  banishment.  But
for  the  people  of  God,  separation  from  God  is  the
greatest  torment  of  all.


303


LXXVI
THE  JUSTICE  AND  MERCY  OF  GOD

KNOW  that  to  do  justice  is  to  give  to  every  one
according  to  his  deserts.  For  example,  when  a  work-
man labours  from  morning  until  evening,  justice
requires  that  he  shall  be  paid  his  wages ;  but  when  he
has  done  no  work  and  taken  no  trouble,  he  is  given  a
gift,  this  is  bounty.  If  you  give  alms  and  gifts  to  a
poor  man  although  he  has  taken  no  trouble  for  you,
nor  done  anything  to  deserve  it,  this  is  bounty.  So
Christ  besought  forgiveness  for  his  murderers,  this  is
called  bounty.

Now  the  question  of  the  good  or  evil  of  things  is
determined  by  reason  or  by  law.  Some  believe  that  it
is  determined  by  law ;  such  are  the  Jews,  who  believing
all  the  commandments  of  the  Pentateuch  to  be  ab-
solutely obligatory,  regard  them  as  matters  of  law,
not  of  reason.  Thus  they  say  that  one  of  the  command-
ments of  the  Pentateuch  is  that  it  is  unlawful  to  partake
of  meat  and  butter  together,  because  it  is  '  taref,'  and
'  taref '  in  Hebrew  means  unclean,  as  '  kosher '  means
clean.  This,  they  say,  is  a  question  of  law,  and  not  of
reason.

But  the  theologians  think  that  the  good  and  evil  of
things  depend  upon  both  reason  and  law.  The  chief


304


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  305

foundation  of  the  prohibition  of  theft,  treachery,  false-
hood, hypocrisy,  and  cruelty,  is  reason.  Every  intelli-
gent man  comprehends  that  murder,  theft,  treachery,
falsehood,  hypocrisy,  and  cruelty  are  evil  and  reprehen-
sible ;  for  if  you  prick  a  man  with  a  thorn,  he  will  cry
out,  complain,  and  groan ;  so  it  is  evident  that  he  will
understand  that  murder  according  to  reason  is  evil
and  reprehensible.  If  he  commits  a  murder  he  will  be
responsible,  whether  the  renown  of  the  Prophet  has
reached  him  or  not;  for  it  is  reason  that  formulates
the  reprehensible  character  of  the  action.  When  a
man  commits  this  bad  action,  he  will  surely  be
responsible.

But  in  a  place  where  the  commands  of  a  Prophet  are
not  known,  and  where  the  people  do  not  act  in  con-
formity with  the  divine  instructions,  such  as  the
command  of  Christ  to  return  good  for  evil,  but  act
according  to  the  desires  of  nature — that  is,  if  they
torment  those  who  torment  them — from  the  point  of
view  of  religion  they  are  excused,  because  the  divine
command  has  not  been  delivered  to  them.  Though
they  do  not  deserve  mercy  and  beneficence,  nevertheless
God  treats  them  with  mercy  and  forgives  them.

Now  vengeance,  according  to  reason,  is  also  blame-
worthy, because  through  vengeance  no  good  result  is
gained  by  the  avenger.  So  if  a  man  strikes  another,
and  he  who  is  struck  takes  revenge  by  returning  the
blow,  what  advantage  will  he  gain  ?  Will  this  be  a
balm  for  his  wound  or  a  remedy  for  his  pain?  No,
God  forbid !  In  truth  the  two  actions  are  the  same ;
both  are  injuries;  the  only  difference  is  that  one
occurred  first,  and  the  other  afterwards.  Therefore  if

u


306          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

he  who  is  struck  forgives,  nay,  if  he  acts  in  a  manner
contrary  to  that  which  has  been  used  towards  him,
this  is  laudable.  The  law  of  the  community  will  punish
the  aggressor,  but  will  not  take  revenge.  This  punish-
ment has  for  its  end  to  warn,  to  protect,  and  to  oppose
cruelty  and  transgression,  so  that  other  men  may  not
be  tyrannical.

But  if  he  who  has  been  struck  pardons  and  for-
gives, he  shows  the  greatest  mercy.  This  is  worthy  of
admiration.


LXXVII

THE  RIGHT  METHOD  OF  TREATING
CRIMINALS

Question. — Should  a  criminal  be  punished,  or  forgiven
and  disregarded  ?

Answer. — There  are  two  sorts  of  retributory  punish-
ments. One  is  vengeance,  the  other  chastisement.
Man  has  not  the  right  to  take  vengeance,  but  the
community  has  the  right  to  punish  the  criminal ;  and
this  punishment  is  intended  to  warn  and  to  prevent,
so  that  no  other  person  will  dare  to  commit  a  like
crime.  This  punishment  is  for  the  protection  of  man's
rights,  but  it  is  not  vengeance ;  vengeance  appeases
the  anger  of  the  heart  by  opposing  one  evil  to  another.
This  is  not  allowable;  for  man  has  not  the  right  to
take  vengeance.  But  if  criminals  were  entirely  forgiven,
the  order  of  the  world  would  be  upset.  So  punishment
is  one  of  the  essential  necessities  for  the  safety  of  com-
munities ;  but  he  who  is  oppressed  by  a  transgressor
has  not  the  right  to  take  vengeance :  on  the  contrary,
he  should  forgive  and  pardon,  for  this  is  worthy  of  the
world  of  man.

The  communities  must  punish  the  oppressor,  the
murderer,  the  malefactor,  so  as  to  warn  and  restrain
others  from  committing  like  crimes.  But  the  most
essential  thing  is  that  the  people  must  be  educated  in

807


308          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

such  a  way  that  no  crimes  will  be  committed;  for  it
is  possible  to  educate  the  masses  so  effectively  that
they  will  avoid  and  shrink  from  perpetrating  crimes,
so  that  the  crime  itself  will  appear  to  them  as  the
greatest  chastisement,  the  utmost  condemnation  and
torment.  Therefore  no  crimes  which  require  punish-
ment will  be  committed.

We  must  speak  of  things  that  are  possible  of  per-
formance in  this  world.  There  are  many  theories
and  high  ideas  on  this  subject,  but  they  are  not
practicable;  consequently  we  must  speak  of  things
that  are  feasible.

For  example,  if  some  one  oppresses,  injures,  and
wrongs  another,  and  the  wronged  man  retaliates,  this
is  vengeance,  and  is  censurable.  If  the  son  of  'Amru
kills  the  son  of  Zaid,  Zaid  has  not  the  right  to  kill
the  son  of  'Amru;  if  he  does  so,  this  is  vengeance.
If  'Amru  dishonours  Zaid,  the  latter  has  not  the  right
to  dishonour  'Amru ;  if  he  does  so,  this  is  vengeance,
and  it  is  very  reprehensible.  No,  rather  he  must
return  good  for  evil,  and  not  only  forgive,  but  also,  if
possible,  be  of  service  to  his  oppressor.  This  conduct
is  worthy  of  man :  for  what  advantage  does  he  gain  by
vengeance  ?  The  two  actions  are  equivalent ;  if  one
action  is  reprehensible,  both  are  reprehensible.  The
only  difference  is  that  one  was  committed  first,  the
other  later.

But  the  community  has  the  right  of  defence  and
of  self-protection;  moreover,  the  community  has  no
hatred  nor  animosity  for  the  murderer :  it  imprisons
or  punishes  him  merely  for  the  protection  and  security
of  others.  It  is  not  for  the  purpose  of  taking  vengeance


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  309

upon  the  murderer,  but  for  the  purpose  of  inflicting  a
punishment  by  which  the  community  will  be  protected.
If  the  community  and  the  inheritors  of  the  murdered
one  were  to  forgive  and  return  good  for  evil,  the
cruel  would  be  continually  ill-treating  others,  and
assassinations  would  continually  occur.  Vicious  people,
like  wolves,  would  destroy  the  sheep  of  God.  The
community  has  no  ill-will  and  rancour  in  the  infliction
of  punishment,  and  it  does  not  desire  to  appease  the
anger  of  the  heart ;  its  purpose  is  by  punishment  to
protect  others,  so  that  no  atrocious  actions  may  be
committed.

Thus  when  Christ  said :  '  Whosoever  shall  smite  thee
on  the  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  left  one  also,'  it
was  for  the  purpose  of  teaching  men  not  to  take  personal
revenge.  He  did  not  mean  that  if  a  wolf  should  fall
upon  a  flock  of  sheep  and  wish  to  destroy  it,  that  the
wolf  should  be  encouraged  to  do  so.  No,  if  Christ
had  known  that  a  wolf  had  entered  the  fold  and  was
about  to  destroy  the  sheep,  most  certainly  he  would
have  prevented  it.

As  forgiveness  is  one  of  the  attributes  of  the
Merciful  One,  so  also  justice  is  one  of  the  attributes
of  the  Lord.  The  tent  of  existence  is  upheld  upon
the  pillar  of  justice,  and  not  upon  forgiveness.  The
continuance  of  mankind  depends  upon  justice  and
not  upon  forgiveness.  So  if,  at  present,  the  law  of
pardon  were  practised  in  all  countries,  in  a  short  time
the  world  would  be  disordered,  and  the  foundations
of  human  life  would  crumble.  For  example,  if  the
governments  of  Europe  had  not  withstood  the  notorious
Attila,  he  would  not  have  left  a  single  living  man.


310          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Some  people  are  like  bloodthirsty  wolves :  if  they  see
no  punishment  forthcoming,  they  will  kill  men  merely
for  pleasure  and  diversion.  One  of  the  tyrants  of  Persia
killed  his  tutor  merely  for  the  sake  of  making  merry,
for  mere  fun  and  sport.  The  famous  Mutawakkil,  the
'Abbasid,  having  summoned  his  ministers,  councillors,
and  functionaries  to  his  presence,  let  loose  a  box  full
of  scorpions  in  the  assembly,  and  forbade  any  one  to
move.  When  the  scorpions  stung  those  present,  he
burst  forth  into  boisterous  laughter.

To  recapitulate :  the  constitution  of  the  communities
depends  upon  justice,  not  upon  forgiveness.  Then  what
Christ  meant  by  forgiveness  and  pardon  is  not  that,
when  nations  attack  you,  burn  your  homes,  plunder
your  goods,  assault  your  wives,  children,  and  relatives,
and  violate  your  honour,  you  should  be  submissive  in
the  presence  of  these  tyrannical  foes,  and  allow  them
to  perform  all  their  cruelties  and  oppressions.  No,  the
words  of  Christ  refer  to  the  conduct  of  two  individuals
towards  each  other  :  if  one  person  assaults  another,  the
injured  one  should  forgive  him.  But  the  communities
must  protect  the  rights  of  man.  So,  if  some  one
assaults,  injures,  oppresses,  and  wounds  me,  I  will
offer  no  resistance,  and  I  will  forgive  him.  But  if  a
person  wishes  to  assault  Sayyid  Manshadi,1  certainly
I  will  prevent  him.  Although  for  the  malefactor  non-
interference is  apparently  a  kindness,  it  would  be  an
oppression  to  Manshadi.  If  at  this  moment  a  wild
Arab  were  to  enter  this  place  with  a  drawn  sword,
wishing  to  assault,  wound,  and  kill  you,  most  assuredly
I  would  prevent  him.  If  I  abandoned  you  to  the

1  A  Bahai  sitting  with  us  at  table.


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  311

Arab,  that  would  not  be  justice  but  injustice.    But,  if
he  injure  me  personally,  1  would  forgive  him.

One  thing  remains  to  be  said:  it  is  that  the  com-
munities are  day  and  night  occupied  in  making  penal
laws,  and  in  preparing  and  organising  instruments  and
means  of  punishment.  They  build  prisons,  make  chains
and  fetters,  arrange  places  of  exile  and  banishment,  and
different  kinds  of  hardships  and  tortures,  and  think  by
these  means  to  discipline  criminals  ;  whereas,  in  reality,
they  are  causing  destruction  of  morals  and  perversion
of  characters.  The  community,  on  the  contrary,  ought
day  and  night  to  strive  and  endeavour  with  the  utmost
zeal  and  effort  to  accomplish  the  education  of  men,
to  cause  them  day  by  day  to  progress  and  to  increase
in  science  and  knowledge,  to  acquire  virtues,  to  gain
good  morals  and  to  avoid  vices,  so  that  crimes  may
not  occur.  At  the  present  time  the  contrary  prevails ;
the  community  is  always  thinking  of  enforcing  the
penal  laws,  and  of  preparing  means  of  punishment,
instruments  of  death  and  chastisement,  places  for
imprisonment  and  banishment;  and  they  expect
crimes  to  be  committed.  This  has  a  demoralising
effect.

But  if  the  community  would  endeavour  to  educate
the  masses,  day  by  day  knowledge  and  sciences  would
increase,  the  understanding  would  be  broadened,  the
sensibilities  developed,  customs  would  become  good,
and  morals  normal ;  in  one  word,  in  all  these  classes
of  perfections  there  would  be  progress,  and  there  would
be  fewer  crimes.

It  has  been  ascertained  that  among  civilised  peoples
crime  is  less  frequent  than  among  uncivilised ;  that


312          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

is  to  say,  among  those  who  have  acquired  the  true
civilisation,  which  is  divine  civilisation — the  civilisa-
tion of  those  who  unite  all  the  spiritual  and  material
perfections.  As  ignorance  is  the  cause  of  crimes,  the
more  knowledge  and  science  increases,  the  more  crimes
will  diminish.  Consider  how  often  murder  occurs
among  the  barbarians  of  Africa;  they  even  kill  one
another  in  order  to  eat  each  other's  flesh  and  blood  !
Why  do  not  such  savageries  occur  in  Switzerland  ?
The  reason  is  evident:  it  is  because  education  and
virtues  prevent  them.

Therefore  the  communities  must  think  of  preventing
crimes,  rather  than  of  rigorously  punishing  them.


LXXVIII
THE  REALITY  OF  THE  EXTERIOR  WORLD

CERTAIN  sophists  think  that  existence  is  an  illusion;
that  each  being  is  an  absolute  illusion  which  has  no
existence ;  in  other  words,  that  the  existence  of  beings
is  like  a  mirage,  or  like  the  reflection  of  an  image  in
water  or  in  a  mirror,  which  is  only  an  appearance
having  in  itself  no  principle,  foundation,  or  reality.

This  theory  is  erroneous;  for  though  the  existence
of  beings  in  relation  to  the  existence  of  God  is  an
illusion,  nevertheless  in  the  condition  of  being  it  has  a
real  and  certain  existence.  It  is  futile  to  deny  this.
For  example,  the  existence  of  the  mineral  in  com-
parison with  that  of  man  is  non-existence;  for  when
man  is  apparently  annihilated,  his  body  becomes
mineral ;  but  the  mineral  has  existence  in  the  mineral
world.  Therefore  it  is  evident  that  earth,  in  relation
to  the  existence  of  man,  is  non-existent,  and  its  exist-
ence is  illusory;  but  in  relation  to  the  mineral  it
exists.

In  the  same  manner  the  existence  of  beings  in  com-
parison with  the  existence  of  God  is  but  illusion  and
nothingness;  it  is  an  appearance,  like  the  image
reflected  in  a  mirror.  But  though  an  image  which  is
seen  in  a  mirror  is  an  illusion,  the  source  and  the

315


314          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

reality  of  that  illusory  image  is  the  person  reflected,
whose  face  appears  in  the  mirror.  Briefly,  the  reflec-
tion in  relation  to  the  person  reflected  is  an  illusion.

Then  it  is  evident  that  although  beings  in  relation
to  the  existence  of  God  have  no  existence,  but  are  like
the  mirage  or  the  reflections  in  the  mirror,  yet  in  their
own  degree  they  exist.

That  is  why  those  who  were  heedless  of  God,  and  the
deniers  of  Christ,  were  said  to  be  dead,  although  they
were  apparently  living ;  but  in  relation  to  the  people  of
faith  they  were  dead,  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb.  This  is
what  Christ  meant  when  he  said  '  Let  the  dead  bury
their  dead.'


LXXIX
REAL  PRE-EXISTENCE

Question. — How  many  kinds  of  pre-existence  and  of
phenomena  are  there  ?

Answer. — Some  sages  and  philosophers  believe  that
there  are  two  kinds  of  pre-existence:  essential  pre-
existence  and  pre-existence  of  time.  Phenomena  are
also  of  two  kinds,  essential  phenomena  and  that  of
time.

Essential  pre-existence  is  an  existence  which  is  not
preceded  by  a  cause,  but  essential  phenomena  are  pre-
ceded by  causes.  Pre-existence  of  time  is  without
beginning,  but  the  phenomena  of  time  have  beginnings
and  endings ;  for  the  existence  of  everything  depends
upon  four  causes — the  efficient  cause,  the  matter,  the
form,  and  the  final  cause.  For  example,  this  chair  has
a  maker  who  is  a  carpenter,  a  substance  which  is  wood,
a  form  which  is  that  of  a  chair,  and  a  purpose  which  is
that  it  is  to  be  used  as  a  seat.  Therefore  this  chair  is
essentially  phenomenal,  for  it  is  preceded  by  a  cause,
and  its  existence  depends  upon  causes.  This  is  called
the  essential  and  really  phenomenal.

Now  this  world  of  existence  in  relation  to  its  maker
is  a  real  phenomenon.  As  the  body  is  sustained  by
the  spirit,  it  is  in  relation  to  the  spirit  an  essential

316


316          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

phenomenon.  The  spirit  is  independent  of  the  body,
and  in  relation  to  it  the  spirit  is  an  essential  pre-
existence.  Though  the  rays  are  always  inseparable
from  the  sun,  nevertheless  the  sun  is  pre-existent  and
the  rays  are  phenomenal,  for  the  existence  of  the  rays
depends  upon  that  of  the  sun ;  but  the  existence  of  the
sun  does  not  depend  upon  that  of  the  rays,  for  the  sun
is  the  giver  and  the  rays  are  the  gift.

The  second  proposition  is  that  existence  and  non-
existence  are  both  relative.  If  it  be  said  that  such  a
thing  came  into  existence  from  non-existence,  this  does
not  refer  to  absolute  non-existence,  but  means  that  its
former  condition  in  relation  to  its  actual  condition  was
nothingness.  For  absolute  nothingness  cannot  find
existence,  as  it  has  not  the  capacity  of  existence.  Man,
like  the  mineral,  is  existing ;  but  the  existence  of  the
mineral  in  relation  to  that  of  man  is  nothingness,  for
when  the  body  of  man  is  annihilated  it  becomes  dust
and  mineral.  But  when  dust  progresses  into  the
human  world,  and  this  dead  body  becomes  living,  man
becomes  existing.  Though  the  dust,  that  is  to  say  the
mineral,  has  existence  in  its  own  condition,  in  relation
to  man  it  is  nothingness.  Both  exist,  but  the  existence
of  dust  and  mineral,  in  relation  to  man,  is  non-existence
and  nothingness ;  for  when  man  becomes  non-existent
he  returns  to  dust  and  mineral.

Therefore,  though  the  world  of  contingency  exists,
in  relation  to  the  existence  of  God  it  is  non-existent
and  nothingness.  Man  and  dust  both  exist,  but  how
great  the  difference  between  the  existence  of  the
mineral  and  that  of  man !  The  one  in  relation  to  the
other  is  non-existence.  In  the  same  way,  the  existence


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  317

of  creation  in  relation  to  the  existence  of  God  is  non-
existence.  Thus  it  is  evident  and  clear  that  although
the  beings  exist,  in  relation  to  God  and  to  the  Word  of
God  they  are  non-existent.  This  is  the  beginning  and
the  end  of  the  Word  of  God,  who  says :  '  I  am  Alpha
and  Omega ' ;  for  He  is  the  beginning  and  the  end  of
Bounty.  The  Creator  always  had  a  creation :  the  rays
have  always  shone  and  gleamed  from  the  reality  of  the
sun,  for  without  the  rays  the  sun  would  be  opaque
darkness.  The  names  and  attributes  of  God  require
the  existence  of  beings,  and  the  Eternal  Bounty  does
not  cease.  If  it  were  to,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the
perfections  of  God.


LXXX
REINCARNATION

Question. — What  is  the  truth  of  the  question  of  re-
incarnation, which  is  believed  by  some  people  ?

Answer. — The  object  of  what  we  are  about  to  say
is  to  explain  the  reality — not  to  deride  the  beliefs  of
other  people;  it  is  only  to  explain  the  facts,  that  is
alL  We  do  not  oppose  any  one's  ideas,  nor  do  we
approve  of  criticism.

Know,  then,  that  those  who  believe  in  reincarnation
are  of  two  classes:  one  class  does  not  believe  in  the
spiritual  punishments  and  rewards  of  the  other  world,
and  they  suppose  that  man  by  reincarnation,  and
return  to  this  world,  gains  rewards  and  recompenses ;
they  consider  heaven  and  hell  to  be  restricted  to  this
world,  and  do  not  speak  of  the  existence  of  the  other
world.  Among  these  there  are  two  further  divisions :
one  division  thinks  that  man  sometimes  returns  to  this
world  in  the  form  of  an  animal,  in  order  to  undergo
severe  punishment,  and  that,  after  enduring  this  pain-
ful torment,  he  will  be  released  from  the  animal  world
and  will  come  again  into  the  human  world;  this  is
called  transmigration.  The  other  division  thinks  that
from  the  human  world  one  again  returns  to  the  human
world,  and  that  by  this  return  rewards  and  punishments

318


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  319

for  a  former  life  are  obtained ;  this  is  called  reincarna-
tion. Neither  of  these  classes  speak  of  any  other  world
besides  this  one.

The  second  sort  of  believers  in  reincarnation  affirm
the  existence  of  the  other  world,  and  they  consider
reincarnation  the  means  of  becoming  perfect;  that
is,  they  think  that  man,  by  going  from  and  coming
again  to  this  world,  will  gradually  acquire  perfections,
until  he  reaches  the  inmost  perfection.  In  other
words,  that  men  are  composed  of  matter  and  force;
matter  in  the  beginning,  that  is  to  say  in  the  first
cycle,  is  imperfect,  but  on  coming  repeatedly  to  this
world  it  progresses,  and  acquires  refinement  and
delicacy,  until  it  becomes  like  a  polished  mirror ;  and
force,  which  is  no  other  than  spirit,  is  realised  hi  it
with  all  the  perfections.

This  is  the  presentation  of  the  subject  by  those
who  believe  in  reincarnation  and  transmigration.  We
have  condensed  it;  if  we  entered  into  the  details  it
would  take  much  time;  this  summary  is  sufficient.
No  logical  arguments  and  proofs  of  this  question  are
brought  forward ;  they  are  only  suppositions  and  in-
ferences from  conjectures,  and  not  conclusive  arguments.
Proofs  must  be  asked  for  from  the  believers  in  re-
incarnation, and  not  conjectures,  suppositions,  and
imaginations.

But  you  have  asked  for  arguments  of  the  impossi-
bility of  reincarnation;  this  is  what  we  must  now
explain.  The  first  argument  for  its  impossibility,  is
that  the  outward  is  the  expression  of  the  inward ;  the
earth  is  the  mirror  of  the  Kingdom;  the  material
world  corresponds  to  the  spiritual  world.  Now  observe


320          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

that  in  the  sensible  world,  appearances  are  not  repeated,
for  no  being  in  any  respect  is  identical  with,  nor  the
same  as,  another  being.  The  sign  of  singleness  is
visible  and  apparent  in  all  things.  If  all  the  granaries
of  the  world  were  full  of  grain,  you  would  not  tind
two  grains  absolutely  alike,  the  same  and  identical
without  any  distinction.  It  is  certain  that  there  will
be  differences  and  distinctions  between  them.  As  the
proof  of  uniqueness  exists  in  all  things,  and  the  One-
ness and  Unity  of  God  is  apparent  in  the  reality  of
all  things,  the  repetition  of  the  same  appearance  is
absolutely  impossible.  Therefore  reincarnation,  which
is  the  repeated  appearance  of  the  same  spirit  with  its
former  essence  and  condition  in  this  same  world  of
appearance,  is  impossible  and  unrealisable.  As  the
repetition  of  the  same  appearance  is  impossible  and
interdicted  for  each  of  the  material  beings,  so  for
spiritual  beings  also,  a  return  to  the  same  condition,
whether  in  the  arc  of  descent  or  in  the  arc  of  ascent,
is  interdicted  and  impossible,  for  the  material  corre-
sponds to  the  spiritual.

Nevertheless,  the  return  of  material  beings  with
regard  to  species  is  evident ;  so,  the  trees  which  during
former  years  brought  forth  leaves,  blossoms,  and  fruits,
in  the  coming  years  will  bring  forth  exactly  the  same
leaves,  blossoms,  and  fruits.  This  is  called  the  repe-
tition of  species.  If  any  one  makes  an  objection  saying
that  the  leaf,  the  blossom,  and  the  fruit  have  been
decomposed,  and  have  descended  from  the  vegetable
world  to  the  mineral  world,  and  again  have  come  back
from  the  mineral  world  to  the  vegetable  world,  and
therefore  there  has  been  a  repetition — the  answer  is,


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  321

that  the  blossom,  the  leaf,  and  the  fruit  of  last  year
were  decomposed,  and  these  combined  elements  were
disintegrated  and  were  dispersed  in  space;  and  that
the  particles  of  the  leaf  and  fruit  of  last  year,  after
decomposition,  have  not  again  become  combined,  and
have  not  returned.  On  the  contrary,  by  the  com-
position of  new  elements,  the  species  has  returned.
It  is  the  same  with  the  human  body,  which  after
decomposition  becomes  disintegrated,  and  the  elements
which  composed  it  are  dispersed.  If,  in  like  manner,
this  body  should  again  return  from  the  mineral  or
vegetable  world,  it  would  not  have  exactly  the  same
composition  of  elements  as  the  former  man;  those
elements  have  been  decomposed  and  dispersed;  they
are  dissipated  in  this  vast  space.  Afterwards,  other
particles  of  elements  have  been  combined,  and  a  second
body  has  been  formed;  it  may  be  that  one  of  the
particles  of  the  former  individual  has  entered  into
the  composition  of  the  succeeding  individual;  but
these  particles  have  not  been  conserved  and  kept,
exactly  and  completely,  without  addition  or  diminution,
so  that  they  may  be  combined  again,  and  from  that
composition  and  mingling  another  individual  may
come  into  existence.  So  it  cannot  be  proved  that  this
body  with  all  its  particles  has  returned,  that  the  former
man  has  become  the  latter,  and  that  consequently  there
has  been  repetition ;  that  the  spirit  also,  like  the  body,
has  returned,  and  that  after  death  its  essence  has  come
back  to  this  world.

If  we  say  that  this  reincarnation  is  for  acquiring
perfections,  so  that  matter  may  become  refined  and
delicate,  and  that  the  light  of  the  spirit  may  be

x


322          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

manifest  in  it  with  the  greatest  perfection,  this  also
is  mere  imagination.  For,  even  supposing  we  believe
in  this  argument,  still  change  of  nature  is  impossible
through  renewal  and  return :  the  essence  of  imperfection,
by  returning,  does  not  become  the  reality  of  perfection ;
complete  darkness,  by  returning,  does  not  become  the
source  of  light ;  the  essence  of  weakness  is  not  trans-
formed into  power  and  might  by  returning,  and  an
earthly  nature  does  not  become  a  heavenly  reality.
The  tree  of  Zaqqum,1  no  matter  how  frequently  it
may  come  back,  will  not  bring  forth  sweet  fruit,  and
the  good  tree,  no  matter  how  often  it  may  return,
will  not  bear  a  bitter  fruit.  Therefore  it  is  evident
that  returning  and  coming  back  to  the  material  world
does  not  become  the  cause  of  perfection.  This  theory
has  no  proofs  nor  evidences,  it  is  simply  an  idea.  No,
in  reality  the  cause  of  acquiring  perfections  is  the
bounty  of  God.

The  Theosophists  believe  that  man  on  the  arc  of
ascent2  will  return  many  times,  until  he  reaches  the
supreme  centre;  in  that  condition  matter  becomes  a
clear  mirror,  the  light  of  the  spirit  will  shine  upon
it  with  its  full  power,  and  essential  perfection  will  be
acquired.  Now,  this  is  an  established  and  deep  theo-
logical proposition,  that  the  material  worlds  are  ter-
minated at  the  end  of  the  arc  of  descent,  and  that
the  condition  of  man  is  at  the  end  of  the  arc  of
descent,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  arc  of  ascent,
which  is  opposite  to  the  Supreme  Centre.  Also,  from
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  arc  of  ascent,  there

1  The  infernal  tree  mentioned  in  the  Quran.

2  i.e.  of  the  Circle  of  Existence.


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  323

are  numerous  spiritual  degrees.  The  arc  of  descent  is
called  beginning,1  and  that  of  ascent  is  called  progress.2
The  arc  of  descent  ends  in  materialities,  and  the  arc
of  ascent  ends  in  spiritualities.  The  point  of  the
compass  in  describing  a  circle  makes  no  retrograde
motion,  for  this  would  be  contrary  to  the  natural  move-
ment and  the  divine  order;  otherwise  the  symmetry
of  the  circle  would  be  spoilt.

Moreover,  this  material  world  has  not  such  value
or  such  excellence  that  man,  after  having  escaped  from
this  cage,  will  desire  a  second  time  to  fall  into  this
snare.  No,  through  the  Eternal  Bounty  the  worth  and
true  ability  of  man  becomes  apparent  and  visible  by
traversing  the  degrees  of  existence,  and  not  by  re-
turning. When  the  shell  is  once  opened,  it  will  be
apparent  and  evident  whether  it  contains  a  pearl  or
worthless  matter.  When  once  the  plant  has  grown
it  will  bring  forth  either  thorns  or  flowers;  there  is
no  need  for  it  to  grow  up  again.  Besides,  advancing
and  moving  in  the  worlds  in  a  direct  line  according
to  the  natural  law,  is  the  cause  of  existence;  and  a
movement  contrary  to  the  system  and  law  of  nature
is  the  cause  of  non-existence.  The  return  of  the  soul
after  death  is  contrary  to  the  natural  movement,  and
opposed  to  the  divine  system.

Therefore,  by  returning,  it  is  absolutely  impossible
to  obtain  existence;  it  is  as  if  man,  after  being  freed
from  the  womb,  should  return  to  it  a  second  time.
Consider  what  a  puerile  imagination  this  is  which  is
implied  by  the  belief  in  reincarnation  and  trans -

1  Lit.  bringing  forth.

2  Lit.  producing  something  new.


324          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

migration.  Believers  in  it  consider  the  body  as  a
vessel,  in  which  the  spirit  is  contained,  as  water  is
contained  in  a  cup ;  this  water  has  been  taken  from
one  cup  and  poured  into  another.  This  is  child's  play.
They  do  not  realise  that  the  spirit  is  an  incorporeal
being,  and  does  not  enter  and  come  forth,  but  is  only
connected  with  the  body,  as  the  sun  is  with  the  mirror.
If  it  were  thus,  and  the  spirit  by  returning  to  this
material  world  could  pass  through  the  degrees,  and
attain  to  essential  perfection,  it  would  be  better  if  God
prolonged  the  life  of  the  spirit  in  the  material  world,
until  it  had  acquired  perfections  and  graces;  it  then
would  not  be  necessary  for  it  to  taste  of  the  cup  of
death,  or  to  acquire  a  second  life.

The  idea  that  existence  is  restricted  to  this  perish-
able world,  and  the  denial  of  the  existence  of  divine
worlds,  originally  proceeded  from  the  imaginations  of
certain  believers  in  reincarnation;  but  the  divine
worlds  are  infinite.  If  the  divine  worlds  culminated
in  this  material  world,  creation  would  be  futile :  nay,
existence  would  be  pure  child's  play.  The  result  of
these  endless  beings,  which  is  the  noble  existence
of  man,  would  come  and  go  for  a  few  days  in  this
perishable  dwelling,  and  after  receiving  punishments
and  rewards,  at  last  all  would  become  perfect.  The
divine  creation  and  the  infinite  existing  beings  would
be  perfected  and  completed,  and  then  the  Divinity  of
the  Lord,  and  the  names  and  qualities  of  God,  on
behalf  of  these  spiritual  beings,  would,  as  regards
their  effect,  result  in  laziness  and  inaction !  '  Glory
to  thy  Lord,  the  Lord  who  is  sanctified  from  all  their
descriptions.'


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  325

Such  were  the  limited  minds  of  the  former  philoso-
phers, like  Ptolemy  and  the  others  who  believed  and
imagined  that  the  world,  life,  and  existence,  were
restricted  to  this  terrestrial  globe,  and  that  this
boundless  space  was  confined  within  the  nine  spheres
of  heaven,  and  that  all  were  empty  and  void.  Con-
sider how  greatly  their  thoughts  were  limited  and
how  weak  their  minds.  Those  who  believe  in  rein-
carnation think  that  the  spiritual  worlds  are  restricted
to  the  worlds  of  human  imagination.  Moreover,  some
of  them,  like  the  Druses  and  the  Nusairis,  think  that
existence  is  restricted  to  this  physical  world.  What
an  ignorant  supposition!  For,  in  this  universe  of
God,  which  appears  in  the  most  complete  perfection,
beauty,  and  grandeur,  the  luminous  stars  of  the
material  universe  are  innumerable!  Then  we  must
reflect  how  limitless  and  infinite  are  the  spiritual  worlds,
which  are  the  essential  foundation.  'Be  attentive,  0
people  of  insight.'

But  let  us  return  to  our  subject.  In  the  Divine
Scriptures  and  Holy  Books  'return'  is  spoken  of,
but  the  ignorant  have  not  understood  the  meaning,
and  those  who  believed  in  reincarnation  have  made
conjectures  on  the  subject.  For  what  the  divine
Prophets  meant  by  'return'  is  not  the  return  of  the
essence,  but  that  of  the  qualities ;  it  is  not  the  return  of
the  Manifestation,  but  that  of  the  perfections.  In  the
Gospel  it  says  that  John  the  son  of  Zacharias  is  Elias.
These  words  do  not  mean  the  return  of  the  rational
soul  and  personality  of  Elias  in  the  body  of  John,
but  rather  that  the  perfections  and  qualities  of  Elias
were  manifested  and  appeared  in  John.


326  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

A  lamp  shone  in  this  room  last  night,  and  when
to-night  another  lamp  shines,  we  say  the  light  of  last
night  is  again  shining.  Water  flows  from  a  fountain,
then  it  ceases,  and  when  it  begins  to  flow  a  second
time,  we  say,  this  water  is  the  same  water  flowing
again;  or  we  say,  this  light  is  identical  with  the
former  light.  It  is  the  same  with  the  spring  of  last
year,  when  blossoms,  flowers,  and  sweet-scented  herbs
bloomed,  and  delicious  fruits  were  brought  forth ;  next
year  we  say  that  those  delicious  fruits  have  come  back,
and  those  blossoms,  flowers,  and  blooms  have  returned
and  come  again.  This  does  not  mean  that  exactly  the
same  particles  composing  the  flowers  of  last  year  have,
after  decomposition,  been  again  combined,  and  have
then  come  back  and  returned.  On  the  contrary,  the
meaning  is  that  the  delicacy,  freshness,  delicious  per-
fume, and  wonderful  colour  of  the  flowers  of  last  year
are  visible  and  apparent  in  exactly  the  same  manner
in  the  flowers  of  this  year.  Briefly,  this  expression
refers  only  to  the  resemblance  and  likeness  which
exist  between  the  former  and  latter  flowers.  The
'  return '  which  is  mentioned  in  the  Divine  Scriptures
is  this :  it  is  fully  explained  by  the  Supreme  Pen 1  in
the  Kitabu'l-Iqan ;  refer  to  it,  so  that  you  may  be
informed  of  the  truth  of  the  divine  mysteries.

Upon  you  be  greetings  and  praise.

1  Baha'u'llah.


LXXXI
PANTHEISM

Question. — How  do  the  Theosophists  and  the  Sufis
understand  the  question  of  Pantheism  ? x  What  does
it  mean,  and  how  nearly  does  it  approximate  to  the
truth  ?

Answer. — Know  that  the  subject  of  Pantheism  is
ancient :  it  is  a  belief  not  restricted  to  the  Theosophists
and  the  Sufis;  on  the  contrary,  some  of  the  sages  of
Greece  believed  in  it,  like  Aristotle,  who  said :  '  The
simple  truth  is  all  things,  but  it  is  not  any  one  of
them.'  In  this  case,  'simple'  is  the  opposite  of
'composed';  it  is  the  isolated  Reality  which  is  puri-
fied and  sanctified  from  composition  and  division,  and
which  resolves  Itself  into  innumerable  forms.  There-
fore Real  Existence  is  all  things,  but  It  is  not  one  of
the  things.

Briefly,  the  believers  in  pantheism  think  that  Real
Existence  can  be  compared  to  the  sea,  and  that  beings
are  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  These  waves,  which  signify
the  beings,  are  innumerable  forms  of  that  Real  Exist-
ence; therefore  the  Holy  Reality  is  the  Sea  of  Pre-
existence,2  and  the  innumerable  forms  of  the  creatures
are  the  waves  which  appear.

1  Lit.  the  unity  of  existence.  *  God.

327


328          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

Likewise,  they  compare  this  theory  to  real  unity  and
the  infinitude  of  numbers ;  the  real  unity  reflects  itself
in  the  degrees  of  infinite  numbers,  for  numbers  are  the
repetition  of  the  real  unity.  So  the  number  two  is
the  repetition  of  one,  and  it  is  the  same  with  the  other
numbers.

One  of  their  proofs  is  this:  all  beings  are  things
known  of  God ;  and  knowledge  without  things  known
does  not  exist,  for  knowledge  is  related  to  that  which
exists,  and  not  to  nothingness.  Pure  non-existence
can  have  no  specification  or  individualisation  in  the
degrees  of  knowledge.  Therefore  the  realities  of  beings,
which  are  the  things  known  of  God  the  Most  High,
have  the  existence  which  knowledge  has,1  since  they
have  the  form  of  the  Divine  Knowledge,  and  they  are
pre-existent,  as  the  Divine  Knowledge  is  pre-existent.
As  knowledge  is  pre-existent,  the  things  known  are
equally  so,  and  the  individualisations  and  the  specifica-
tions of  beings,  which  are  the  pre-existent  knowledges
of  the  Essence  of  Unity,  are  the  Divine  Knowledge
itself.  For  the  realities  of  the  Essence  of  Unity,
knowledge,  and  the  things  known,  have  an  absolute
unity  which  is  real  and  established.  Otherwise  the
Essence  of  Unity  would  become  the  place  of  multiple
phenomena,  and  the  multiplicity  of  pre-existences 2
would  become  necessary,  which  is  absurd.

So  it  is  proved  that  the  things  known  constitute
knowledge  itself,  and  knowledge  the  Essence  itself:
that  is  to  say,  that  the  Knower,  the  knowledge,  and
the  things  known,  are  one  single  reality.  And  if
one  imagines  anything  outside  of  this,  it  necessitates

1  i.e.  an  intellectual  existence.  -  gods.


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  329

coming  back  to  the  multiplicity  of  pre-existences  and
to  enchainment ; l  and  pre-existences  end  by  becoming
innumerable.  As  the  individualisation  and  the  specifi-
cation of  beings  in  the  knowledge  of  God  were  the
Essence  of  Unity  itself,  and  as  there  was  not  any
difference  between  them,  there  was  but  one  veritable
Unity,  and  all  the  things  known  were  diffused  and
included  in  the  reality  of  the  one  Essence:  that  is
to  say  that,  according  to  the  mode  of  simplicity  and
of  unity,  they  constitute  the  knowledge  of  God  the
Most  High,  and  the  Essence  of  the  Reality.  When
God  manifested  His  glory,  these  individualisations  and
these  specifications  of  beings  which  had  a  virtual
existence,  that  is  to  say,  which  were  a  form  of  the
Divine  Knowledge,  found  their  existence  substantiated
in  the  external  world ;  and  this  Real  Existence  resolved
Itself  into  infinite  forms.  Such  is  the  foundation  of
their  argument.

The  Theosophists  and  the  Sufis  are  divided  into  two
branches.  One,  comprising  the  mass,  who,  simply  in
the  spirit  of  imitation,  believe  pantheism,  without  com-
prehending the  meaning  of  their  renowned  savants ;  for
the  mass  of  the  Sufis  believe  that  the  signification
of  Being  is  general  existence,  taken  substantively,
which  is  comprehended  by  the  reason  and  the  intelli-
gence: that  is  to  say,  that  man  comprehends  it.
Instead  of  that,  this  general  existence  is  one  of  the
accidents  which  penetrate  the  reality  of  beings,  and
the  qualities  of  beings  are  the  essence.  This  accidental
existence,  which  is  dependent  on  beings,  is  like  other
properties  of  things  which  depend  on  them.  It  is

1  i.e.  infinite  continuation  of  causes  and  effects.


330          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

an  accident  among  accidents,  and  certainly  that  which
is  the  essence  is  superior  to  that  which  is  the
accident.  For  the  essence  is  the  origin,  and  the
accident  is  the  consequence ;  the  essence  is  dependent
on  itself,  and  the  accident  is  dependent  on  something
else:  that  is  to  say,  it  needs  an  essence  upon  which
to  depend.  In  this  case,  God  would  be  the  conse-
quence of  the  creature :  He  would  have  need  of  it,  and
it  would  be  independent  of  Him.

For  example,  each  time  that  the  isolated  elements
combine  conformably  to  the  divine  universal  system,
one  being  among  beings  comes  into  the  world.  That
is  to  say,  that  when  certain  elements  combine,  a  vege-
table existence  is  produced;  when  others  combine,
it  is  an  animal;  again  others  combine,  and  they  pro-
duce different  creatures.  In  this  case,  the  existence  of
things  is  the  consequence  of  their  reality :  how  could
it  be  that  this  existence,  which  is  an  accident  among
accidents,  and  necessitates  another  essence  upon  which
it  depends,  should  be  the  Pre-existent  Essence,  the
Author  of  all  things  ?

But  the  initiated  savants  of  the  Theosophists  and
Sufis,  who  have  studied  this  question,  think  there  are
two  categories  of  existence.  One  is  general  existence,
which  is  understood  by  the  human  intelligence ;  this  is
a  phenomenon,  an  accident  among  accidents,  and  the
reality  of  the  things  is  the  essence.  But  pantheism
does  not  apply  to  this  general  and  imaginary  existence,
but  only  to  the  Veritable  Existence,  freed  and  sanctified
from  all  other  interpretation ;  through  It  all  things  exist,
and  It  is  the  Unity  through  which  all  things  have  come
into  the  world,  such  as  matter,  energy,  and  this  general


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  331

existence  which  is  comprehended  by  the  human  mind.
Such  is  the  truth  of  this  question  according  to  the
Theosophists  and  the  Sufis.

Briefly,  with  regard  to  this  theory  that  all  things
exist  by  the  Unity,  all  are  agreed — that  is  to  say,  the
philosophers  and  the  Prophets.  But  there  is  a  difference
between  them ;  the  Prophets  say :  '  The  Knowledge  of
God  has  no  need  of  the  existence  of  beings,  but  the
knowledge  of  the  creature  needs  the  existence  of  things
known  ;  if  the  Knowledge  of  God  had  need  of  any  other
thing,  then  it  would  be  the  knowledge  of  the  creature,
and  not  that  of  God.  For  the  pre-existent  is  different
from  the  phenomenal,  and  the  phenomenal  is  opposed
to  the  pre-existent ;  that  which  we  attribute  to  the
creature — that  is  the  necessities  of  the  contingent  beings
— we  deny  for  God;  for  purification,  or  sanctification
from  imperfections,  is  one  of  His  necessary  properties
So,  in  the  phenomenal  we  see  ignorance,  in  the  Pre-
existent  we  recognise  knowledge  ;  in  the  phenomenal  we
see  weakness,  in  the  Pre-existent  we  recognise  power ;
in  the  phenomenal  we  see  poverty,  in  the  Pre-existent
we  recognise  wealth.  So  the  phenomenal  is  the  source  of
imperfections,  and  the  Pre-existent  is  the  sum  of  perfec-
tions. The  phenomenal  knowledge  has  need  of  things
known,  the  Pre-existent  Knowledge  is  independent  of
their  existence.  So  the  pre-existence  of  the  specifica-
tion and  of  the  individualisation  of  beings  which  are  the
things  known  of  God  the  Most  High,  does  not  exist;
and  these  divine  and  perfect  attributes  are  not  so
understood  by  the  intelligence,  that  we  can  decide  if
the  Divine  Knowledge  has  need  of  things  known  or  not.

Briefly,  this  is  the  principal  argument  of  the  Sufis ;


332  SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  if  we  wished  to  mention  all  their  proofs  and  explain
their  answers,  it  would  take  a  very  long  time.  This  is
their  decisive  proof  and  their  plain  argument — at  least,
of  the  savants  of  the  Sufis  and  the  Theosophists.

But  the  question  of  the  Real  Existence  by  which  all
things  exist,  that  is  to  say,  the  reality  of  the  Essence  of
Unity  through  which  all  creatures  have  come  into  the
world,  is  admitted  by  every  one.  The  difference  resides  in
that  which  the  Sufis  say  :  '  The  reality  of  the  things  is
the  manifestation  of  the  Real  Unity.'  But  the  Prophets
say '  it  emanates  from  the  Real  Unity  ' ;  and  great  is  the
difference  between  manifestation  and  emanation.  The
appearance  in  manifestation  means  that  a  single  thing
appears  in  infinite  forms.  For  example,  the  seed,  which
is  a  single  thing  possessing  the  vegetative  perfections,
which  it  manifests  in  infinite  forms,  resolving  itself  into
branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruits :  this  is  called
appearance  in  manifestation ;  whereas  in  the  appearance
through  emanation  this  Real  Unity  remains  and  con-
tinues in  the  exaltation  of  Its  sanctity,  but  the  existence
of  creatures  emanates  from  It,  and  is  not  manifested  by
It.  It  can  be  compared  to  the  sun  from  which  emanates
the  light  which  pours  forth  on  all  the  creatures ;  but
the  sun  remains  in  the  exaltation  of  its  sanctity :  it
does  not  descend,  and  it  does  not  resolve  itself  into
luminous  forms  ;  it  does  not  appear  in  the  substance  of
things  through  the  specification  and  the  individualisa-
tion  of  things;  the  pre-existent  does  not  become  the
phenomenal;  independent  wealth  does  not  become
enchained  poverty ;  pure  perfection  does  not  become
absolute  imperfection.

To  recapitulate  :  the  Sufis  admit  God  and  the  creature,


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  333

and  say  that  God  resolves  Himself  into  the  infinite  forms
of  the  creatures,  and  manifests  like  the  sea,  which
appears  in  the  infinite  forms  of  the  waves:  these
phenomenal  and  imperfect  waves  are  the  same  thing  as
the  Pre-existent  Sea,  which  is  the  sum  of  all  the  divine
perfections.  The  Prophets,  on  the  contrary,  believe  that
there  is  the  world  of  God,  the  world  of  the  Kingdom,
and  the  world  of  Creation:  three  things.  The  first
emanation  from  God  is  the  bounty  of  the  Kingdom,
which  emanates  and  is  reflected  in  the  reality  of  the
creatures,  like  the  light  which  emanates  from  the  sun
and  is  resplendent  in  creatures ;  and  this  bounty,  which
is  the  light,  is  reflected  in  infinite  forms  in  the  reality  of
all  things,  and  specifies  and  individualises  itself  accord-
ing to  the  capacity,  the  worthiness,  and  the  intrinsic
value  of  things.  But  the  affirmation  of  the  Sufis  requires
that  the  Independent  Wealth  should  descend  to  the
degree  of  poverty,  that  the  Pre-existent  should  con-
fine itself  to  phenomenal  forms,  and  that  Pure  Power
should  be  restricted  to  the  state  of  weakness,  according
to  the  limitations  of  contingent  beings.  And  this  is  an
evident  error.  Observe  that  the  reality  of  man,  who  is
the  most  noble  of  creatures,  does  not  descend  to  the
reality  of  the  animal,  that  the  essence  of  the  animal,
which  is  endowed  with  the  powers  of  sensation,  does  not
abase  itself  to  the  degree  of  the  vegetable,  and  that  the
reality  of  the  vegetable,  which  is  the  power  of  growth,
does  not  descend  to  the  reality  of  the  mineral.

Briefly,  the  superior  reality  does  not  descend  nor
abase  itself  to  inferior  states ;  then  how  could  it  be  that
the  Universal  Reality  of  God,  which  is  freed  from  all
descriptions  and  qualifications,  notwithstanding  Its


334          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

absolute  sanctity  and  purity,  should  resolve  Itself  into
the  forms  of  the  realities  of  the  creatures,  which  are  the
source  of  imperfections  ?  This  is  a  pure  imagination
which  one  cannot  conceive.

On  the  contrary,  this  Holy  Essence  is  the  sum  of
the  divine  perfections :  and  all  creatures  are  favoured
by  the  bounty  of  resplendency  through  emanation,  and
receive  the  lights,  the  perfection,  and  the  beauty  of  Its
Kingdom ;  in  the  same  way  that  all  earthly  creatures
obtain  the  bounty  of  the  light  of  the  rays  of  the  sun,
but  the  sun  does  not  descend  and  does  not  abase
itself  to  the  favoured  realities  of  earthly  beings.

After  dinner,  and  considering  the  lateness  of  the  hour,
there  is  no  time  to  explain  further.

Salutations  be  upon  you.


LXXXII

THE  FOUR  METHODS  OF  ACQUIRING
KNOWLEDGE

THERE  are  only  four  accepted  methods  of  comprehen-
sion :  that  is  to  say,  the  realities  of  things  are  under-
stood by  these  four  methods.

The  first  method  is  by  the  senses,  that  is  to  say,  all
that  the  eye,  the  ear,  the  taste,  the  smell,  the  touch
perceives,  is  understood  by  this  method.  To-day  this
method  is  considered  the  most  perfect  by  all  the
European  philosophers ;  they  say  that  the  principal
method  of  gaming  knowledge  is  through  the  senses;
they  consider  it  supreme,  although  it  is  imperfect,  for
it  commits  errors.  For  example,  the  greatest  of  the
senses  is  the  power  of  sight.  The  sight  sees  the  mirage
as  water,  and  it  sees  images  reflected  in  mirrors  as  real
and  existent ;  large  bodies  which  are  distant  appear  to
be  small,  and  a  whirling  point  appears  as  a  circle.  The
sight  believes  the  earth  to  be  motionless,  and  sees  the
sun  in  motion,  and  in  many  similar  cases  it  makes
mistakes.  Therefore  we  cannot  trust  it.

The  second  is  the  method  of  reason,  which  was  that
of  the  ancient  philosophers,  the  pillars  of  wisdom ;  this
is  the  method  of  the  understanding.  They  proved
things  by  reason,  and  held  firmly  to  logical  proofs  ;  all


335


336          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

their  arguments  are  arguments  of  reason.  Notwith-
standing this,  they  differed  greatly,  and  their  opinions
were  contradictory.  They  even  changed  their  views;
that  is  to  say,  during  twenty  years  they  would  prove  the
existence  of  a  thing  by  logical  arguments,  and  afterwards
they  would  deny  it  by  logical  arguments.  So  much  so,
that  Plato  at  first  logically  proved  the  immobility  of  the
earth  and  the  movement  of  the  sun ;  later  by  logical
arguments  he  proved  that  the  sun  was  the  stationary
centre,  and  that  the  earth  was  moving.  Afterwards  the
Ptolemaic  theory  was  spread  abroad,  and  the  idea  of
Plato  was  entirely  forgotten,  until  at  last  a  new  observer
again  called  it  to  life.  Thus  all  the  mathematicians
disagreed,  although  they  relied  upon  arguments  of
reason.  In  the  same  way,  by  logical  arguments,  they
would  prove  a  problem  at  a  certain  time,  then  after-
wards by  arguments  of  the  same  nature  they  would
deny  it.  So,  one  of  the  philosophers  would  firmly  up-
hold a  theory  for  a  time  with  strong  arguments  and
proofs  to  support  it,  which  afterwards  he  would  retract
and  contradict  by  arguments  of  reason.  Therefore  it  is
evident  that  the  method  of  reason  is  not  perfect ;  for
the  differences  of  the  ancient  philosophers,  the  want  of
stability  and  the  variations  of  their  opinions,  prove  this.
For  if  it  were  perfect,  all  ought  to  be  united  in  their
ideas  and  agreed  in  their  opinions.

The  third  method  of  understanding  is  by  tradition,
that  is,  through  the  text  of  the  Holy  Scriptures ;  for
people  say :  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  God  spoke
thus.  This  method  equally  is  not  perfect,  because  the
traditions  are  understood  by  the  reason.  As  the  reason
itself  is  liable  to  err,  how  can  it  be  said  that  in  inter-


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  337

preting  the  meaning  of  the  traditions  it  will  not  err,
for  it  is  possible  for  it  to  make  mistakes,  and  certainty
cannot  be  attained.  This  is  the  method  of  the  religious
leaders;  whatever  they  understand  and  comprehend
from  the  text  of  the  books,  is  that  which  their  reason
understands  from  the  text,  and  not  necessarily  the  real
truth ;  for  the  reason  is  like  a  balance,  and  the  mean-
ings contained  in  the  text  of  the  Holy  Books  are  like
the  thing  which  is  weighed.  If  the  balance  is  untrue,
how  can  the  weight  be  ascertained  ?

Know  then :  that  which  is  in  the  hands  of  people,
that  which  they  believe,  is  liable  to  error.  For,  in
proving  or  disproving  a  thing,  if  a  proof  is  brought
forward  which  is  taken  from  the  evidence  of  our
senses,  this  method,  as  has  become  evident,  is  not
perfect ;  if  the  proofs  are  intellectual  the  same  is  true,
or  if  they  are  traditional  such  proofs  also  are  not
perfect.  Therefore  there  is  no  standard  in  the  hands
of  people  upon  which  we  can  rely.

But  the  bounty  of  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  the  true
method  of  comprehension  which  is  infallible  and  in-
dubitable. This  is  through  the  help  of  the  Holy
Spirit  which  comes  to  man,  and  this  is  the  condition
in  which  certainty  can  alone  be  attained.


LXXXIII

THE  NECESSITY  OF  FOLLOWING  THE  TEACH-
INGS OF  THE  DIVINE  MANIFESTATIONS

Question. — Those  who  are  blessed   with  good  actions
and   universal    benevolence,  who    have    praiseworthy
characteristics,  who  act  with  love  and  kindness  towards
all  creatures,  who  care  for  the  poor,  and  who  strive  to
establish  universal  peace — what  need  have  they  of  the
divine  teachings,  of  which  they  think  indeed  that  they  are
independent  ?    What  is  the  condition  of  these  people  ?
Answer. — Know  that  such  actions,  such  efforts,  and
such  words  are  praiseworthy  and  approved,   and  are
the  glory  of  humanity.     But  these  actions  alone  are  not
sufficient ;  they  are  a  body  of  the  greatest  loveliness,
but  without  spirit.     No,  that  which  is   the  cause  of
everlasting  life,  eternal  honour,  universal  enlightenment,
real  salvation  and  prosperity,  is,  first  of  all,  the  know-
ledge of  God.     It  is  known  that  the  knowledge  of  God
is  beyond  all  knowledge,  and  it  is  the  greatest  glory  of
the  human  world.    For,  in  the  existing  knowledge  of
the  reality  of  things  there  is  material  advantage,  and
through  it  outward  civilisation  progresses;   but  the
knowledge  of  God  is  the  cause  of  spiritual  progress  and
attraction,  and  through  it  the  perception  of  truth,  the
exaltation  of  humanity,  divine  civilisation,  Tightness  of
morals  and  illumination,  are  obtained.


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  339

Secondly  comes  the  love  of  God,  the  light  of  which
shines  in  the  lamp  of  the  hearts  of  those  who  know
God;  its  brilliant  rays  illuminate  the  horizon  and
give  to  man  the  life  of  the  Kingdom.  In  truth,  the
fruit  of  human  existence  is  the  love  of  God,  for  this
love  is  the  spirit  of  life,  and  the  eternal  bounty.  If  the
love  of  God  did  not  exist,  the  contingent  world  would
be  in  darkness ;  if  the  love  of  God  did  not  exist,  the
hearts  of  men  would  be  dead,  and  deprived  of  the
sensations  of  existence;  if  the  love  of  God  did  not
exist,  spiritual  union  would  be  lost ;  if  the  love  of  God
did  not  exist,  the  light  of  unity  would  not  illuminate
humanity ;  if  the  love  of  God  did  not  exist,  the  East
and  West,  like  two  lovers,  would  not  embrace  each
other;  if  the  love  of  God  did  not  exist,  division  and
disunion  would  not  be  changed  into  fraternity ;  if  the
love  of  God  did  not  exist,  indifference  would  not  end
in  affection;  if  the  love  of  God  did  not  exist,  the
stranger  would  not  become  the  friend.  The  love  of  the
human  world  has  shone  forth  from  the  love  of  God,
and  has  appeared  by  the  bounty  and  grace  of  God.

It  is  clear  that  the  reality  of  mankind  is  diverse,
that  opinions  are  various  and  sentiments  different ;  and
this  difference  of  opinions,  of  thoughts,  of  intelligence,
of  sentiments  among  the  human  species,  arises  from
essential  necessity ;  for  the  differences  in  the  degrees  of
existence  of  creatures  is  one  of  the  necessities  of
existence,  which  unfolds  itself  in  infinite  forms.  There-
fore we  have  need  of  a  general  power  which  may
dominate  the  sentiments,  the  opinions,  and  the  thoughts
of  all,  thanks  to  which  these  divisions  may  no  longer
have  effect,  and  all  individuals  may  be  brought  under


340          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

the  influence  of  the  unity  of  the  world  of  humanity.
It  is  clear  and  evident  that  this  greatest  power  in  the
human  world  is  the  love  of  God.  It  brings  the
different  peoples  under  the  shadow  of  the  tent  of
affection;  it  gives  to  the  antagonistic  and  hostile
nations  and  families  the  greatest  love  and  union.

See,  after  the  time  of  Christ,  through  the  power  of
the  love  of  God,  how  many  nations,  races,  families,  and
tribes  came  under  the  shadow  of  the  Word  of  God:
the  divisions  and  differences  of  a  thousand  years  were
entirely  destroyed  and  annihilated.  The  thoughts  of
race  and  of  fatherland  completely  disappeared;  the  union
of  souls  and  of  existences  took  place ;  all  became  true
spiritual  Christians.

The  third  virtue  of  humanity,  is  the  goodwill  which
is  the  basis  of  good  actions.  Certain  philosophers  have
considered  intention  superior  to  action,  for  the  good
will  is  absolute  light ;  it  is  purified  and  sanctified  from
the  impurities  of  selfishness,  of  enmity,  of  deception.
Now  it  may  be  that  a  man  performs  an  action  which
in  appearance  is  righteous,  but  which  is  dictated  by
covetousness.  For  example,  a  butcher  rears  a  sheep,
and  protects  it ;  but  this  righteous  action  of  the  butcher
is  dictated  by  desire  to  derive  profit,  and  the  result  of
this  care  is  the  slaughter  of  the  poor  sheep.  How
many  righteous  actions  are  dictated  by  covetousness !
But  the  good  will  is  sanctified  from  such  impurities.

Briefly,  if  to  the  knowledge  of  God  is  joined  the
love  of  God,  and  attraction,  ecstasy,  and  goodwill,  a
righteous  action  is  then  perfect  and  complete.  Other-
wise, though  a  good  action  is  praiseworthy,  yet  if  it  is
not  sustained  by  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  love  of  God,


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  341

and  a  sincere  intention,  it  is  imperfect.  For  example,
the  being  of  man  must  unite  all  perfections  to  be
perfect.  Sight  is  extremely  precious  and  appreciated,
but  it  must  be  aided  by  hearing ;  the  hearing  is  much
appreciated,  but  it  must  be  aided  by  the  power  of  speech ;
the  faculty  of  speech  is  very  acceptable,  but  it  must  be
aided  by  the  power  of  reason  ;  and  so  forth.  The  same
is  true  of  the  other  powers,  organs  and  members  of
man ;  when  all  these  powers,  these  senses,  these  organs,
these  members  exist,  he  is  perfect.

Now,  to-day,  we  meet  w^th  people  in  the  world  who,  in
truth,  desire  the  universal  good,  and  who  according  to
their  power  occupy  themselves  in  protecting  the  oppressed
and  in  aiding  the  poor :  they  are  enthusiastic  for  peace
and  the  universal  wellbeing.  Although  from  this  point
of  view  they  may  be  perfect,  if  they  are  deprived  of
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  they  are  imperfect.

Galen,  the  physician,  in  his  book  in  which  he
comments  on  the  treatise  of  Plato  on  the  art  of  govern-
ment,1 says  that  the  fundamental  principles  of  religion
have  a  great  influence  upon  a  perfect  civilisation,  because
'  the  multitude  cannot  understand  the  connection  of
explanatory  words ;  so  it  has  need  of  symbolical  words
announcing  the  rewards  and  punishments  of  the  other
world ;  and  that  which  proves  the  truth  of  this  affirma-
tion,' he  says,  '  is  that  to-day  we  see  a  people  called
Christians  who  believe  in  rewards  and  punishments;
and  this  sect  show  forth  beautiful  actions  like  those
which  a  true  philosopher  performs.  So  we  all  see
clearly  that  they  do  not  fear  death,  that  they  expect

1  Of.  Ibn  Ab!  Usaibia,  'Uyiln  al-anbd  fl  tabaqdt  al-atibbd'.     Cairo,
1882,  torn.  i.  pp.  76-77.


342          SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

and  desire  nothing  from  the  multitude  but  justice  and
equity,  and  they  are  considered  as  true  philosophers.'

Now  observe  what  was  the  degree  of  the  sincerity,
the  zeal,  the  spiritual  feeling,  the  obligation  of  friend-
ship, and  the  good  actions  of  a  believer  hi  Christ,  so
that  Galen,  the  philosophical  physician,  although  he
was  not  of  the  Christian  religion,  should  yet  bear
witness  to  the  good  morals  and  the  perfections  of  these
people,  to  the  point  of  saying  that  they  were  true
philosophers.  These  virtues,  these  morals,  were
obtained  not  only  through  good  actions,  for  if  virtue
were  only  a  matter  of  obtaining  and  giving  forth  good,
as  this  lamp  is  lighted  and  illuminates  the  house —
without  doubt  this  illumination  is  a  benefit — then  why
do  we  not  praise  the  lamp  ?  The  sun  causes  all  the
beings  of  the  earth  to  increase,  and  by  its  heat  and
light  gives  growth  and  development :  is  there  a  greater
benefit  than  that?  Nevertheless,  as  this  good  does
not  come  from  goodwill  and  from  the  love  and  know-
ledge of  God,  it  is  imperfect.

When,  on  the  contrary,  a  man  gives  to  another  a  cup
of  water,  the  latter  is  grateful  and  thanks  him.  A
man,  without  reflecting,  will  say  :  this  sun  which  gives
light  to  the  world,  this  supreme  bounty  which  is
apparent  in  it,  must  be  adored  and  praised :  why
should  we  not  be  grateful  and  thankful  to  the  sun
for  its  bounty,  when  we  praise  a  man  who  performs
a  simple  act  of  kindness?  But  if  we  look  for  the
truth,  we  see  that  this  insignificant  kindness  of  the
man  is  due  to  conscious  feelings  which  exist,  therefore
it  is  worthy  of  praise ;  whereas  the  light  and  heat  of
the  sun  are  not  due  to  the  feelings  and  consciousness,


MISCELLANEOUS  SUBJECTS  343

therefore  they  are  not  worthy  of  eulogy  or  of  praise,
and  do  not  deserve  gratitude  or  thanks.

In  the  same  way,  when  a  person  performs  a  good
action,  although  it  is  praiseworthy,  if  it  is  not  caused
by  the  love  and  knowledge  of  God,  it  is  imperfect.
Moreover,  if  you  reflect  justly,  you  will  see  that  these
good  actions  of  other  men  who  do  not  know  God  are
also  fundamentally  caused  by  the  teachings  of  God ;
that  is  to  say,  that  the  former  Prophets  led  men  to
perform  these  actions,  explained  their  beauty  to  them,
and  declared  their  splendid  effects ;  then  these  teach-
ings were  diffused  among  men,  and  reached  them
successively,  one  after  the  other,  and  turned  their
hearts  towards  these  perfections.  When  men  saw  that
these  actions  were  considered  beautiful,  and  became
the  cause  of  joy  and  happiness  for  mankind,  they
conformed  to  them.

Wherefore  these  actions  also  come  from  the  teach-
ings of  God.  But  justice  is  needed  to  see  this,  and  not
controversy  and  discussion.  Praise  be  to  God,  you
have  been  to  Persia,  and  you  have  seen  how  the
Persians,  through  the  holy  breezes  of  Baha'u'llah,  have
become  benevolent  towards  humanity.  Formerly,  if
they  met  any  one  of  another  race,  they  tormented  him,
and  were  filled  with  the  utmost  enmity,  hatred,  and
malevolence ;  they  went  so  far  as  to  throw  dirt  at  him.
They  burned  the  Gospel  and  the  Old  Testament,  and  if
their  hands  were  polluted  by  touching  these  books,  they
washed  them.  To-day  the  greater  number  of  them
recite  and  chant,  as  is  suitable,  the  contents  of  these
two  Books  in  their  reunions  and  assemblies,  and  they
expound  their  teaching.  They  show  hospitality  to


344      |    SOME  ANSWERED  QUESTIONS

their  enemies.  These  sanguinary  wolves  have  become
as  gentle  as  gazelles  in  the  plains  of  the  love  of  God.
You  have  seen  their  customs  and  habits,  and  you  have
heard  them  speak  of  the  manners  of  former  Persians.
This  transformation  of  morals,  this  improvement  of
conduct  and  of  words,  are  they  possible  otherwise  than
through  the  love  of  God?  No,  in  the  name  of  God.
If,  by  the  help  of  science  and  knowledge,  we  wished  to
introduce  these  morals  and  customs,  truly  it  would
take  a  thousand  years,  and  then  they  would  not  be
spread  throughout  the  masses.

To-day,  thanks  to  the  love  of  God,  they  are  arrived
at  with  the  greatest  facility.

Be  admonished,  O  possessors  of  intelligence !


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  CONSTABLE,  Printers  to  Ms  Majesty
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


A     000707755     5
