=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
After1For preferably, the tithes should be separated in order, as stated in Hilchot Terumah 3:23. separating the first tithe every year, we separate the second tithe,2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 128) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 473) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. In Sefer HaMitzvot, the Rambam states that separating the second tithe and partaking of it in Jerusalem are considered two facets of one mitzvah. The Ramban (in his Hosafot to Sefer HaMitzvot) differs and considers partaking of the produce in Jerusalem as another positive mitzvah.as [Deuteronomy 14:22] states: "You shall certainly tithe the produce of your crops."3From the context of the passage, it is obvious that it is referring to another tithe and not to the first tithe which is given to the Levites. In the third and sixth years [of the seven year agricultural cycle], we separate the tithe for the poor instead of the second tithe, as we explained.4Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 6:3; Hilchot Ma'aser 9:3-4.
The first of Tishrei is the beginning of the year with regard to the reckoning of the tithes5I.e., with regard to the reckoning of the years of the agricultural cycle. These concepts also apply to with regard to the Sabbatical year. for grain, legumes,6This is the popular translation of the Hebrew term kitniyot. More particularly, the Hebrew term includes many species that are not legumes. and vegetables. Whenever the term Rosh HaShanah is used [with regard to crops], the intent is the first of Tishrei. The fifteenth of Shvat is the beginning of the year with regard to reckoning the tithes for fruit-trees.What is implied? If grain or legumes7Vegetables are not mentioned here, because different laws apply to them, as stated in Halachah 4. With regard to kitniyot, note, however, Halachah 8. reach "the phase of tithing"8I.e., one third of their full growth, as stated in Hilchot Ma'aser 2:5. before Rosh HaShanah of the third year,9I.e., they reached this level of growth during the second year of the agricultural cycle. As mentioned above, the second tithe is separated in the second year of the agricultural cycle and the tithe for the poor in the third year. the second tithe should be separated from them even though they became fully developed and were gathered in the third year. If, however, they did not reach "the phase of tithing" until after Rosh HaShanah of the third year,10Even though their initial growth was in the second year. the tithe for the poor should be separated from them. Similarly, if fruit from trees reaches "the phase of tithing" before the fifteenth of Shvat in the third year, it should be tithed according to the previous year and the second tithe should be separated from it even though it became fully developed and was gathered at the end of the third year. Similarly, if it reaches "the phase of tithing" before the fifteenth of Shvat in the fourth year, the tithe for the poor should be separated from it even though it became fully developed and was gathered at the end of the fourth year. If it reaches "the phase of tithing" after the fifteenth of Shvat, it should be tithed like the produce of the coming year.
Even though the fruit of carob trees begin to ripen11Black spots begin to appear upon them. This is "the phase of tithing" for them, as stated in Hilchot Ma'aser 2:5. before the fifteenth of Shvat, they should be tithed according to the coming year,12I.e., the year when they are harvested. since [the obligation to] tithe them is of Rabbinic origin.13See Hilchot Terumah 3:3; Hilchot Ma'aser 1:9.Because the obligation is Rabbinic in origin, they are tithed like vegetables for the obligation to tithe them is also of Rabbinic origin.It appears to me that this applies only with regard to the carobs that grow in Tzalmona or other similar species that are not fit to be eaten by most people. [Hence,] the obligation to partake of them is Rabbinic in origin.14According to Scriptural Law, there is no obligation to tithe them, because most people do not partake of them. Nevertheless since there are some who do partake of them, our Sages imposed this obligation. It appears to me that other carobs are similar to the rest of the fruit of the trees.15And the mitzvah of tithing them is of Scriptural origin.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam, maintaining that the carobs of Tzalmona need not be tithed at all and that the obligation to tithe all trees is Rabbinic in origin. The Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh discuss these points at length.
Vegetables should be tithed according to the year when they are harvested.16Our Sages (Kiddushin 3a) explain the difference between vegetables and other crops. Unlike other crops for which the water from the rains suffice, vegetables require irrigation. What is implied? If they are harvested on the day of Rosh HaShanah of the third year,17It is forbidden for a Jew to harvest produce on Rosh HaShanah. We are speaking about produce belonging to a Jew harvested by a gentile. the tithe for the poor should be separated from them even though they reached "the phase of tithing"18In contrast to the fruit mentioned in Halachah 4. and [indeed,] fully matured19In contrast to the species mentioned in Halachah 8. in the second year. If they were harvested in the fourth year, the second tithe should be separated from them.
Similarly, among fruit from trees, only an esrog is like a vegetable,20For it also requires water from irrigation. [i.e., the laws governing it] whether for tithes or the Sabbatical year are dependent on when it is harvested.What is implied?21Here the Rambam is outlining the laws governing the tithes. The laws governing the Sabbatical year are described in Hilchot Shemitah 4:12. If it was harvested in the third year after the fifteenth of Shvat, the tithe for the poor should be separated from it even though its growth was completed in the second year. Similarly, if it was gathered in the fourth year before the fifteenth of Shvat, the tithe for the poor should be separated from it.22Because with regard to trees, the fourth year does not start until the fifteenth of Shvat. If it was harvested in the fourth year after the fifteenth of Shvat, the second tithe should be separated from it.
Although the laws governing an esrog depend on when it was reaped, when an esrog that grew23I.e., reached "the phase of tithing." in the sixth year entered the seventh year, tithes must be separated from it.24The Ra'avad has a different understanding of Rosh HaShanah 15a-b, the source for the Rambam's ruling and differs on that basis. The Radbaz justifies the Rambam's understanding of that passage and hence his ruling here. [This applies] even though it was only an olive size [at the beginning of the Sabbatical year] and became the size of a loaf of bread [during that year].
We apply both the stringencies that apply to trees and those that apply to vegetables to caper berries.25The Ra'avad notes that the Rambam's ruling appears to contradict Berachot 36a which cites the position quoted by the Rambam in the name of the School of Shammai, while the School of Hillel considers it only as the fruits of a tree. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that capers are considered as the fruits of a tree only with regard to the prohibitions of kilayim and orlah. With regard to the second tithe, by contrast, since there is no loss in observing both stringencies, we follow the stricter ruling. Thus if they grew26Reaching one third of their growth. from the second year and then they entered into the third year and were harvested before the fifteenth of Shvat, the first tithe should be separated. Afterwards, another tithe27Which as reflected in the continuation of the halachah will serve as both the second tithe and the tithe for the poor. should be separated. Afterwards, it should be redeemed28As is done with the second tithe. and then given to the poor.29As is done with the tithe for the poor. The proceeds of the redemption [should be used to purchase food that] is eaten according to the laws of the second tithe. Thus it is as if he separated both the second tithe and the tithe for the poor.
With regard to rice, millet,30According to some opinions, the translation of these two terms should be reversed. poppy seed, and sesame seeds, even if the plants took root before Rosh HaShanah, we are concerned only with the completion of [the maturity of] the fruit and thus the tithes are separated as is the produce of the coming year. Similarly, with regard to Egyptian beans, even though a portion of the crop took root before Rosh HaShanah and a portion afterwards, he should gather the entire crop together31The Ra'avad questions that Rambam's ruling, for seemingly, if everything depends on when the produce reaches maturity, it is not necessary to gather all the produce together. Instead, it can be tithed as it is gathered. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam is saying that even if the produce is gathered all together, there is no difficulty. We do not say that the produce is from different years, because everything depends on when the produce reaches maturity. He is not, however, required to gather the produce together. and separate terumah and tithes from the entire crop as one. For everything depends on the produce reaching maturity.32See Halachah 10 where the Rambam mentions other particulars with regard to Egyptian beans.
When one withheld water from onions that do not produce sprouts33The literal translation of the Rambam's words (taken from Shivi'it 2:9) is "eunuch onions." In his Commentary to the Mishnah, he explains that term: "[Generally,] when onions are left in a moist place after being uprooted from the ground, they sprout forth green leaves. There is one type that does not do this. They are called 'eunuch onions,' for they represent a eunuch who does not produce seed." for 30 days or when one withheld water from onions that are irrigated from three periods34I.e., three periods in which they would ordinarily be watered. For example, if it was customary to water them every week, the laws that follow would apply if one withheld water from tem for three weeks. before Rosh HaShanah, they should be tithed as produce of the previous year.35Even though they are not harvested immediately, their growth has already ceased. If water was withheld from them for less than this - and thus they began to dry up before Rosh HaShanah36And thus one might think that their growth has been completed. - they should be tithed like produce of the coming year.
[The following rules apply when] Egyptian beans reached a third of their growth before Rosh HaShanah. If they were sown to produce seed,37I.e., to take the beans. See Rav Kappach's version of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shivi'it 8:2). they should be tithed as produce of the previous year.38I.e., even the vegetables. For the vegetables are considered as secondary to the seed (beans). Thus these plants are judged as other legumes in which case, the ruling depends on when the beans reach one third of their growth as stated in Halachah 2. If they were sown to produce vegetables,39I.e., the leaves of the plant. they should be tithed as produce of the coming year.40I.e., even the seed. For the seed are considered as secondary to the vegetables and vegetables should be tithed according to when they are gathered as stated in Halachah 4. If they were sown to produce seed and vegetables or they were sown to produce seed and then [the owner changed his mind and] thought to use them for vegetables [as well], he should tithe from the seeds for the vegetables and from the vegetables as seeds.41I.e., he separates one tithe for both the vegetables and the seeds, even though there is reason to say that the tithes for each of the two should be separated separately. If he harvested the plants primarily for the seeds, even the vegetables should be tithed as if they were seeds. Conversely, if he harvested the plants primarily as vegetables, even the seeds should be tithed as such.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam, questioning why he bases his ruling on the Jerusalem Talmud (Shivi'it 2:8) when - the Ra'avad states - that ruling is problematic. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's view.[Different rules apply if the beans] did not reach one third of their growth before Rosh HaShanah. If they were sown to produce seed, they should be tithed as produce of the previous year, but the vegetables that grow should be tithed as they are harvested, provided they are harvested before Rosh HaShanah.42Only in such a situation should the produce be tithed as produce of the second year. The Ra'avad notes that this ruling is problematic: Since the produce has not reached a third of its growth, why is there a need to tithe it? The Radbaz explains that since the person gathers, it is significant for him, and - as far as he is concerned, it has reached its full growth. If they were harvested after Rosh HaShanah, both the vegetables and the seeds should be tithed as produce of the coming year.43For the vegetables, this ruling is obvious and even for the seeds, it applies because the plants did not reach one third of their growth in the previous year.If they were sown to produce seed and then [the owner changed his mind and] thought to use them for vegetables [only], the ruling follows his thought.44And they should be tithed according to when they are harvested. If they were sown to produce vegetables and then [the owner changed his mind and] thought to use them for seed, the thought to use it as seed has no effect on the ruling unless he withholds water from it for three periods45When produce is grown to be used as a vegetable, it is watered before it is harvested. When it is grown for seeds, it is not (Radbaz). The Ra'avad questions the Hebrew term used by the Rambam. The Radbaz states that it means "harvests," because, as explained above, vegetables are usually watered before they are harvested. when [the plants] would be ordinarily be watered,46For his intent to be significant, it has to be reinforced by a deed. and [then,] only when [the plants] reached a third of their growth before Rosh HaShanah.47Otherwise, it would not be appropriate for them to be tithed as produce of the second year.[They are, however, governed by different rules] if they did not reach a third of their growth before Rosh HaShanah even though he withheld water from it for three periods when [the plants] would be ordinarily be watered.48The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling in this instance as well and again the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's approach. If he sowed it for the purpose of seed and the entire crop grew into fully grown plants before Rosh HaShanah, the seed is tithed as produce of the previous year49For they reached a level of growth obligated them to be tithed at that time. and the vegetables are tithed according to when they are harvested.50Since he intended to use the plants for vegetables, we do not say that the vegetables are entirely insignificant. If some of the plants reached their full growth and some did not, to this situation, we apply our Sages' statement:51Rosh HaShanah 13b. "He should gather the entire crop together." [Thus he should separate tithes from the entire crop as one,] separating tithes from the seed for the vegetables and from the vegetables as seed.52As explained in Halachah 8.
When produce from the second year becomes mixed with produce from the third year or produce from the third year becomes mixed with that of the fourth year, we follow the majority.53I.e., the entire quantity of produce is tithed according to the laws governing the majority. For we assume that any individual fruit was separated from the majority. If it is half and half, we separate the second tithe from the entire quantity, but not the tithe for the poor.54The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the tithe for the poor should also be separated, for if it is not separated, the produce is tevel. Rav Yosef Korcus differs, explaining that the same logic could be used with regard to the first clause of the halachah, and that ruling is based on an explicit mishnah (Makshirin 2:11). This explanation provides us with a new definition of tevel - produce from which the separations have been made to the best of man's ability. [The rationale is that] the second tithe is a more severe obligation, because it is sacred,55I.e., it is considered as sacred property, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 17. while the tithe for the poor is ordinary produce. Similarly, when there is a doubt whether produce is from the second year or from the third year, the second tithe should be separated from it.
Whenever [produce] is exempt from the first tithe, it is also exempt from the second tithe and the tithe for the poor.56See Hilchot Ma'aser 1:7. Whenever produce is obligated in the first tithe, it is also obligated in these two. All of the individuals who may separate terumah may also separate [these] tithes and those who are not entitled to separate terumah may not separate these tithes. When any of the individuals with regard to whom it is said that [they should not separate terumah,] but if they separate terumah, the separation is effective57See Hilchot Terumot 4:4. separate these tithes, their separation is effective. When any of the individuals with regard to whom it is said that their separation of terumah is ineffective58See ibid.:2. separate these tithes, their separation is ineffective.
When a person separated the first tithe from produce before the obligation to tithe was established,59I.e., through one of the six situations mentioned in Hilchot Ma'aser 3:2-3. he may snack from it before separating the second tithe. For [separating] the first [tithe] does not create an obligation to separate the second. If, however, an obligation to tithe was established, it is forbidden to snack from it until he separates the second tithe or the tithe for the poor even though he has already separated the first tithe.60For the prohibition against partaking of tevel applies until all the tithes have been separated. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:20.
Since the second tithe must be brought [to Jerusalem],61As explained in the following chapter. it should not be brought from the Diaspora,62The Scriptural obligation to separate the second tithe applies only in Eretz Yisrael. Furthermore, not only is there no Rabbinic obligation, one should not do so. like the firstborn of animals.63The firstborn offspring of kosher animals must be offered as a sacrifice. Nevertheless, a firstborn animal in the Diaspora should not be brought to Jerusalem. Indeed, even if it is brought to the Temple, it is not offered as a sacrifice. See Hilchot Bechorot 1:5. For this reason, our Sages did not obligate the separation of the second tithe in Syria.64I.e., since the second tithe should not be brought from Syria to Jerusalem, our Sages did not require its separation there. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, but it is justified by the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh.It appears to me that the second tithe that is separated in Babylonia and in Egypt65See Hilchot Terumot 1:1 which states that our Prophets and Sages ordained that terumah should be separated in these lands. should be redeemed and the proceeds taken to Jerusalem. Similarly, it appears to me that the obligation to separate the second tithe in these places was established only so that there would be an obligation to separate the tithe for the poor, so that the poor of the Jewish people could rely on it.66I.e., there was always a substantial Jewish community in these lands and our Sages wanted to provide the poor with an opportunity to receive their livelihood. This provision was not enacted with regard to Syria, because it was relatively close to Eretz Yisrael and the poor could receive their livelihood from the tithe for the poor separated there (Radbaz). The Ra'avad maintains that the second tithe should also be separated in Syria, but the commentaries follow the Rambam's view.

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
The second tithe should be eaten1Similarly, it can be used as a beverage or for anointing oneself, for these are also considered as "eating." by its owners within the walls of Jerusalem,2As mentioned in the notes to the previous chapter, there are authorities who consider partaking of the second tithe as an independent mitzvah. The Rambam, however, considers it as part of the mitzvah of separating the second tithe. as [Deuteronomy 14:23] states: "And you shall eat before God, your Lord, in the place He chooses to cause His name to dwell."It must be observed whether the Temple is standing or it is not standing.3See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:15 which states that the holiness of Jerusalem is not nullified even though the Temple is destroyed, for the city's holiness derives from the manifestation of God's presence and that holiness can never be nullified. Nevertheless, we partake of it only while the Temple is standing,4When the Temple is not standing, the second tithe must be separated, but we do not partake of it. Instead, we redeem it, as stated in the following halachah. for [the verse states]: "the tithe of your grain, your wine, your oil, and the firstborn of your cattle or your sheep." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught:5Sifri to Deuteronomy 14:23. Just as a firstborn is not eaten except while the Temple is standing, so too, the second tithe is not eaten except when the Temple is standing.
It is pious behavior6A commitment to observance that goes beyond the basic requirements of the law. to redeem the second tithe for its full value7The Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 4:1) relates that the Sages of the Talmud would conduct themselves in this manner. in the same manner as it should be redeemed while the Temple is standing.8See Chapter 4, Halachah 1, 18. Our Sages, [however,] ruled that, in the present age, if one desires, he may redeem a maneh's9100 silver coins. worth of produce for a p'rutah10A copper coin of minimal value. Since when the Temple is standing, after the fact, such an exchange is acceptable, in the present era, it can be accepted as an initial and preferable measure (Radbaz). as an initial and preferable measure,11For, after all, it is being destroyed (Siftei Cohen 331:149). [for this produce] need not be considered more stringently than consecrated property.12Which can be redeemed in this manner as an initial and preferable measure (Hilchot Arachin 8:10). That p'rutah should be discarded in the Mediterranean Sea.13I.e., in a place where it will permanently be lost. If it is being thrown to a river, it must first be ground to dust so that it will never be able to be used [Kessef Mishneh; Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:133)].Here the Rambam uses the term yam hagadol, "the Great Sea," which in relation to Eretz Yisrael means the Mediterranean Sea. Sometimes, the term yam hamelech, "the Salt Sea, is used. Although in contemporary usage, the term is used in reference to the Dead Sea, the Rambam understands it as referring to the Mediterranean.
Similarly, if one transferred the holiness of a maneh's worth of produce that is the second tithe for a p'rutah's worth of other produce, the holiness is transferred. He should then burn the produce to which he transferred the holiness so that it will not present an obstacle to others, [following the same procedure] as the redemption of neta rivai'i in the present age, as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.14See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:17. Both here and in that source, the Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that a silver coin must be used for these redemptions. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh support the Rambam's position. See also Chapter 2, Halachah 4 and notes.
Just as we do not partake of the second tithe in the present era in Jerusalem,15For the Temple is not standing, as stated in Halachah 1. Moreover, we are all ritually impure, and the second tithe may not be eaten in a state of ritual impurity, as stated in Chapter 3, Halachah 1.It must be emphasized that with the term Jerusalem, we mean the city limits in the era of the Second Temple. The fact that an area is included in the contemporary metropolis of Jerusalem is not at all significant. so too, we do not redeem it there,16For money.The Kessef Mishneh states that if produce from the second tithe becomes ritually impure, it can be redeemed as indicated by Halachah 8. The Tur (Yoreh De'ah 331) [based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 3:6)] writes that we can water produce that has been detached so that it will become susceptible to ritual impurity. When it becomes ritually impure, it can be redeemed. These concepts are quoted by the Shulchan Aruch and Rama (Yoreh De'ah 331:135). nor transfer its holiness,17For other produce. The rationale is that produce from the second tithe should not be redeemed or exchanged in Jerusalem as stated in Halachah 8. or sell it.18See also Chapter 3, Halachah 17. If [produce which is the second tithe] is brought into Jerusalem in the present era, it should not be removed from there.19See Halachah 9. Instead, we leave it there until it rots. Similarly, if one transgressed and removed it from there, he should leave it until it rots.For this reason,20I.e., because it will be condemned to rot. we do not separate the second tithe in the present era in Jerusalem. Instead, we remove the produce from the city while it is tevel and redeem it. If it was separated there in the present era, it should be left to rot.
Anyone who eats an olive-sized portion of [produce from] the second tithe or who drinks a revi'it of wine21See Hilchot Terumot 10:2. [from such produce] outside the walls of Jerusalem22I.e., he partook of the produce after it was taken to Jerusalem and then taken out, as stated in the following halachah. is liable for lashes, as [Deuteronomy 12:17] states: "In your gates,23I.e., in cities outside Jerusalem. you may not partake of the tithe of your grain, your wine, and your oil."24Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandments 141-142) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvot 442-444) include these as three of the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.He is liable for lashes for each one individually.25The Rambam explains the rationale for this in General Principle 9 of his Sefer HaMitzvot, quoting Keritot 4b, and giving the explanation that he offers in this halachah. Therefore if he partakes of the three outside the walls [of Jerusalem], he is liable for three sets of lashes, for it is stated: And you shall eat before God in the place He chooses to cause His name to dwell."It must be observed whether the Temple is standing or it is not standing.26See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:15 which states that the holiness of Jerusalem is not nullified even though the Temple is destroyed, for the city's holiness derives from the manifestation of God's presence and that holiness can never be nullified. Nevertheless, we partake of it only while the Temple is standing,27When the Temple is not standing, the second tithe must be separated, but we do not partake of it. Instead, we redeem it, as stated in the following halachah. for [the Torah states]: "And you shall eat before God... the tithe of your grain, your wine, your oil," and "You may not partake of the tithe of your grain, your wine, and your oil."28I.e., since the Torah mentions all three types of produce in both the positive and negative commandments, we can assume that the repetition was meant to teach us that one is liable for each type of produce individually. In his Hasagot, the Ramban disagrees and maintains that one who administers three sets of lashes for partaking of these types of produce is liable for striking a fellow Jew unnecessarily. Why does [the Torah] mention them individually instead of saying: "Do not partake of them in your gates?" To make one liable for each one individually.
According to Scriptural Law, one is not liable for lashes unless he partakes of produce [from the second tithe] after it had entered the walls of Jerusalem [and was removed], as it is written: "You may not partake... in your gates" and "And you shall eat before God." [Implied is that] since the produce enters the place where it should be eaten and then it was eaten outside [that place], one is liable for lashes. If, however, one ate such produce before it entered Jerusalem,29Tosafot (Makkot 19b) explain that the violation of a positive commandment is involved, for we are commanded to redeem the produce from the second tithe that is not brought to Jerusalem. he should be given stripes for rebellious conduct.30A punishment ordained by the Rabbis for breaking Rabbinic commandments or negative commandments that result from a positive commandment.
[The following rules apply if] a portion of [produce from the second] tithe is inside [Jerusalem] and a portion is outside. One who eats from the portion that has not entered [the city] should be given stripes for rebellious conduct.31I.e., one might think that he would be liable, because a portion of the produce was brought into the city. Hence, it is necessary to state that he is not. See Hilchot Bikkurim 3:2, for it is the source of this law. If one eats the portion that entered outside [the city], he is liable for lashes. 32I.e., one might think that he would not be liable, because the entire quantity of produce was not brought into the city. Hence, it is necessary to state that he is.
We do not redeem the second tithe in Jerusalem unless it became impure,33Even though produce from the second tithe that is pure should not be redeemed in Jerusalem, as stated in Halachah 4, if it becomes impure, it should be redeemed, for otherwise, it will be worthless, for it may not be eaten in that state.Pesachim 36b derives this concept as follows: The mitzvah of redeeming produce from the second tithe is derived from Deuteronomy 14:24: "If you cannot carry it...." Se'as, the term for "carry" used in that verse is also used in connection with food as stated in Deuteronomy 14:24] states: "If the place34Jerusalem. The verse speaks about the redemption of the second tithe. will be distant from you...." [Implied is that such produce] may be redeemed when the place is distant, but not when it is close.If a person is inside [Jerusalem] and his burden is outside, even if he is carrying it on a pole,35And thus he does not even have to walk outside to bring it inside (Kessef Mishneh; Or Sameach). Rashi interprets the passage differently. since the produce from the second tithe itself was not brought into Jerusalem, it can be redeemed there next to the wall.36The converse is also true. If he was outside and his burden had been brought inside, it cannot be redeemed (Makkot 19b).
Once produce from the second tithe - even if it is demai37Produce which is demai may be taken in and out of Jerusalem (Halachah 11). Once the second tithe has been separated from it, however, it may not be taken out of Jerusalem after it has been brought in. This represents a reversal of the Rambam's opinion from that stated in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 3:6). - is brought into Jerusalem, it is forbidden to remove it from there, for it has already been taken in by [the city's] barriers. Similar concepts apply with regard to produce purchased with money [from the redemption of] the second tithe, as [implied by] the verse: "And you shall eat before God your Lord."38The law is not derived from this verse, for as the Rambam stated previously, the prohibition is Rabbinic in origin. Instead, the verse is an asmachta, a support from the Torah for a Rabbinic law. Significantly, to this writer's knowledge, our Rabbis have not identified a previous Rabbinic source where this verse is cited as a prooftext.[This alludes to a question frequently raised: Did the Rambam have sources from the Sages of the Talmud that were lost or were interpretations such as this his original work?] If a person transgressed and took [such produce] out of Jerusalem or it was taken out inadvertently, it should be returned and eaten in Jerusalem.[The concept that produce from the second tithe that was brought into Jerusalem is] taken in by its partitions is a Rabbinic decree. Even produce from [the redemption of] the second tithe whose fifth is not worth a p'rutah which is [observed] by virtue of Rabbinic decree [alone]39When a person redeems produce from the second tithe that belongs to him, it is necessary to add a fifth, as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 1. Here, however, we are speaking about a situation where that fifth is not worth a p'rutah. Thus the redemption of such produce is not feasible. And since its redemption is not feasible, according to Scriptural Law, such produce need not be treated as produce from the second tithe (Meiri to Bava Metzia 53b). Nevertheless, our Rabbis were stringent and required that the fifth be separated even in such a situation. is taken in by [the city's] partitions and it is forbidden to remove it.40I.e., although two Rabbinic decrees are involved, we still rule stringently. Money from [the redemption of] the second tithe, by contrast, may be brought into Jerusalem and then removed.41For our Sages imposed their decree with regard to produce alone.
When produce for which the tasks involved in its preparation have been completed42And from which the second tithe has not been separated. is taken through Jerusalem and then removed, [its owner] cannot separate tithes from it from other produce which has not been brought into Jerusalem yet.43I.e., in this regard, we consider it as if the second tithe had already been separated. Hence, since it passed through Jerusalem, it must be eaten there [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. Instead, the second tithe from this produce should be [separated,] and returned and eaten in Jerusalem. It cannot be redeemed outside the city. Even if one designates the entire quantity of produce which was removed as the second tithe for produce that was not yet brought [to Jerusalem], it must be returned and eaten in [that city].44I.e., it cannot be redeemed for money. This is a stringency associated with the walls of Jerusalem. Once [produce] is taken in by them, it has been taken in.45I.e., there is no alternative but to partake of the produce in the holy city.
When produce for which the tasks involved in its preparation have not been completed, e.g., baskets of grapes that are being taking to the vat46To be squeezed for wine [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. or baskets of figs that are being taken to dry, is taken through Jerusalem and then removed, it is permitted to redeem the second tithe from them outside Jerusalem.47Since there was no obligation to tithe them at the time they passed through Jerusalem, they are not considered to have been taken in by the city's barriers. Similarly, the second tithe from produce that is demai may be redeemed outside [of Jerusalem] even though the tasks involved in its preparation have been completed and it passed through the city.48Since the obligation to separate the second tithe from demai was instituted only because of a doubt, our Rabbis did not apply this stringency. See Halachah 9.
[The following laws apply when] produce from the second tithe which became impure49And hence cannot be eaten. in Jerusalem was redeemed.50See Halachah 4. If it became impure through contact with a secondary source of impurity, it is forbidden to remove it.51I.e., the decree imposed by our Sages must be upheld because this impurity is merely Rabbinic in origin and thus the holiness of the produce was not defiled [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.):9].[Instead,] it should be eaten within [the city]. If it became impure as a result of contact with a primary source of impurity or it became impure outside [the city] even through contact with a secondary source of impurity, it may be redeemed and eaten in any place, even though it was brought into Jerusalem.52For when it was brought into Jerusalem, it was not fit to be eaten and thus did not possess a measure of holiness (ibid.).
When does the above53That produce that became impure due to contact with a secondary source of impurity outside of Jerusalem can be redeemed or removed from the city after it was brought in. If, however, produce became impure through contact with a primary source of impurity, one's intent is not significant. A person may remove it from Jerusalem even if he did not have the intent originally. apply? When it was brought in with the intent that the barriers of [the city] would not take it in. If, however, he did not make such a stipulation, since it entered the city and it is ritually pure according to Scriptural Law, it is taken in by [the city's] barriers and should not be removed.54Instead, it should be redeemed and eaten in Jerusalem. For a secondary source of ritual impurity does not impart impurity to another entity according to Scriptural Law.
It is permitted to partake of chilba from the second tithe while it is in its fresh state, for then it is fit to be eaten.55After it has dried out, by contrast, it is not fit to be eaten. For that reason, it is forbidden to let it dry out [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.) 2:3; see also Hilchot Terumah 2:8]. This explanation nullifies the Ra'avad's objections to the Rambam's ruling. Similarly, vetch from the second tithe may be eaten while it is fresh.56Vetch refers to a species of beans generally used as cattle fodder. While they are fresh, however, they are fit for human consumption with difficulty (see ibid.:4; see also Hilchot Terumah 2:2; Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 1:9). If one made a dough from them, it is permitted to take it into Jerusalem and remove it, because vetch is not considered as [ordinary] produce.57Since they are not fit for ordinary human consumption, the restrictions that usually apply to produce from the second tithe were not placed upon a dough made from them. Indeed, the laws governing vetch are more lenient than those governing chilba, for chilba is frequently eaten by humans while fresh. Vetch, by contrast, is eaten only when ordinary food is not available.The Ra'avad understands the Rambam as ruling that the restrictions are relaxed only with regard to dough made from vetch, but not with regard to vetch itself. If the actual beans were taken outside the city, they must be returned. The commentaries accept this understanding. If it became impure in Jerusalem, it may be redeemed and eaten outside [the city].
When a tree is standing within the walls of Jerusalem and its branches extend outside the wall, produce from the second tithe should not be eaten under [those] branches.58I.e., in this context, one is considered to be outside the city. If, however, produce from the second tithe was brought under its branches, it can no longer be redeemed, because it is considered as if it was brought into Jerusalem.59Note the parallel in Hilchot Rotzeach 8:11; see also Hilchot Ma'aser 4:16.
[The following rules apply when] houses positioned at the side of the wall with their entrances within the wall, but the length of the house extends outside the wall. [The portions of the house that] are within the wall are considered as being within the city with regard to all matters. In those which are outside the wall, we may not eat [the produce of the second tithe] and as a stringency, produce from the second tithe should not be redeemed there.60I.e., in this context, it is considered as part of the city, because of the entrance. If the length of the house extends within [the wall] and the entrance is outside, [the portion that are] outside the wall are considered as outside the city.61For neither the entrance to the home, nor this position of it is in the city. We may re redeem [produce from the tithes] there and may not partake of it there. [In the portion that is within the wall], we may not eat [such produce] there62Because the entrance is the primary determinant. and as a stringency, we may not redeem it.63For in actual fact, one is within the city's walls. The windows and the breadth of the walls are considered within the city.64The commentaries note the concurrence between this ruling and that of Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:9, but the apparent contradiction between it and that of Hilchot Shemitah VeYoval 12:12. They conclude that there is no one general principle governing the situation and each set of laws has its own rules.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
A person who partakes of produce from the second tithe in a state of ritual impurity is liable for lashes,1Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 150) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 609) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [implied by Deuteronomy 26:14]: "I did not consume it in a state of impurity." [This applies] whether the produce is impure and the person partaking of it is pure or the produce is pure and the person partaking of it is impure, provided he partakes of it in Jerusalem before it is redeemed.2For after the produce has been redeemed, it is ordinary produce. For one is liable for lashes for partaking of such produce in a state of ritual impurity in a place where it is fit to partake of it. If, however, one partakes of it in a state of ritual impurity outside of Jerusalem,3With regard to partaking of such produce outside of Jerusalem in a state of ritual purity, see the previous chapter. he is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct.4For the prohibition is only Rabbinic in origin. This applies even if the produce had already been brought into Jerusalem and was then removed.
Once it has become impure,5I.e., even though it has become impure. Before it becomes impure, it is forbidden to use it for purposes other than human consumption, as stated in Halachah 10. it even forbidden to use such produce [as fuel] to kindle a lamp until it is redeemed, as [implied by]: "I did not consume it in a state of impurity."
We already explained,6Chapter 2, Halachah 8. that when produce from the second tithe becomes impure, it should be redeemed and eaten- even in Jerusalem.7Where it is otherwise forbidden to redeem produce from the second tithe. The proceeds [from its redemption] should [be used to purchase food that is] eaten in a state of ritual purity according to the laws governing produce from the second tithe, as will be explained.8See Halachot 10-11. Even if all the produce became impure while it was tevel, one should separate the second tithe in a state of ritual impurity9I.e., we do not say that since it became impure before the second tithe was separated and thus the mitzvah associated with that produce could never be fulfilled, the mitzvah does not take effect. and redeem it.
An uncircumcised person is considered as if he is ritually impure. If he partakes of produce from the second tithe, he is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law as he is liable for lashes for partaking of terumah.10See Hilchot Terumah 7:10; see also Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:9; Hilchot Chagigah 2:1. [This equivalence is established, because] terumah is referred to as "holy,"11Leviticus 22:10. and produce from the second tithe is referred as "holy," for [Leviticus 27:30] describes it as being "holy unto God."When a person who was impure immerses himself [in a mikveh],12And thus performs the act necessary to emerge from ritual impurity. he may partake of produce from the second tithe even though the sun has not set that day.13A person who purified himself must wait until nightfall before partaking of terumah. This stringency does not apply with regard to partaking of produce from the second tithe.
When a person partakes of produce from the second tithe in a Scripturally defined state of aninut,14See the following halachah. he is liable for lashes15Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 151) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 608) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.The Rambam explains why he considers this a negative commandment in General Principle 8 of Sefer HaMitzvot, saying that whenever the Torah requires us to declare that we did not perform a specific activity, the performance of that activity is forbidden by Scriptural Law. The Ramban does not accept this principle as he states in his Hasagot. as [implied by Deuteronomy 26:14]: "I did not consume it in a state of aninut." [This applies,] provided he partakes of it in the place we are commanded to partake of it, [i.e.,] in Jerusalem.16The Kessef Mishneh explains that this concept is derived from the prohibition against partaking of the second tithe in a state of ritual impurity which is mentioned in Halachah 1. Since the two prohibitions are mentioned in sequence by the Torah, we can assume that they share the same laws. If, however, he partook of such produce outside Jerusalem17Even if the produce had passed through Jerusalem previously. in a state of aninut or partook of it in Jerusalem in a Rabbinically defined state of aninut, he is given stripes for rebellious conduct.18For his actions involve either the violation of a positive Scriptural command or a Rabbinic ordinance.
Who is an onain? One is mourning for one of the relatives for whom he is obligated to mourn19A person's mother, father, son, daughter, paternal brother and paternal sister (Hilchot Evel 2:1). on the day of their death is an onain according to Scriptural law. At night, he is an onain according to Rabbinic decree. [This is derived from Leviticus 10:19]: "If I would partake of a sin offering today, would it find favor in the eyes of God?"20Aaron asked this rhetorical question after Moses rebuked him for not partaking of the sin offering on the day of the dedication of the Sanctuary. Aaron was explaining that since his sons had died that day, it would not be appropriate for him to partake of a sin offering that day. [Implied is that the day is forbidden,21For the verse states today. but the night is permitted.22I.e., according to Scriptural Law; it is, however, forbidden by Rabbinic decree as above.If the deceased remains [unburied] for several days and is not buried until afterwards, [his relatives are] onanim according to Rabbinic decree throughout the days from the day of death until the day of the burial. [The status of] the day of burial is not extended until [the following] night.23I.e., even according to Rabbinic Law, the laws of aninut do not apply.
[This restriction does not apply] to the second tithe alone, [but also] to all sacrificial foods. If one partakes of them in a Scriptural state of aninut, he is liable for lashes. In a Rabbinic state of aninut, he is liable for stripes for rebellious conduct.24See Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 2:9-10. See Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 151) which explains that the prohibition is included in this Scriptural commandment.
Produce from the second tithe, nor produce purchased with money from the second tithe, nor money from the redemption of the second tithe should not be given to a common person, because we operate under the assumption that he is impure.25And it is forbidden to cause produce from the second tithe to contract ritual impurity.It is permitted to partake of produce from the second tithe that was separated from demai in a state of aninut26Even in a state of Scriptural aninut. and it may be given to a common person,27Although it may contract ritual impurity. The produce may not, however, be eaten in a state of ritual impurity until it is redeemed. The amount that may be given to a common person is, however, quite small, as stated in the following halachah. provided he eats [an equivalent amount of produce] in place of them.28I.e., he must separate an equivalent amount of produce from his possessions and partake of it according to the strictures of the second tithe. He is thus transferring the holiness of the first batch of produce to the second [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:2)]. Since the obligation to separate the second tithe from demai is Rabbinic in origin, certain leniencies are allowed.Produce from the second tithe should not be entrusted [to a colleague for safekeeping], not even to a chavair,29The Ra'avad protests the Rambam's ruling. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that their disagreement stems from two different versions of the Tosefta (Ma'aser Sheni 4:3). lest he die and the produce will continue in the possession of his son, who is a common person. One may, however, entrust produce from the second tithe separated from demai to a common person.
It is forbidden to cause the loss of even a small amount of produce from the second tithe30This is referring to an instance where we are certain that the second tithe was not separated from the produce beforehand in contrast to the second tithe that was separated from demai. on the journey [to Jerusalem].31In order to prevent this from happening, the Torah gave the option of redeeming the produce, as will be explained. Instead, one must transport it in its entirety or the proceeds [from its redemption] to Jerusalem. It is, however, permitted, to cause the loss of a small amount of produce from the second tithe separate from demai on the journey.What is meant by a small portion? Less than the size of a dried fig,32See Hilchot Shabbat, chs. 8, 9, 18, which mention this measure as significant with regard to food (Kessef Mishneh). whether it is eaten whole or sliced. We may not, however, cause the loss of a portion the size of a dried fig.33The Ra'avad is more lenient and maintains that a larger amount, a portion the size of an egg, can be given to a common person. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that the difference in the two opinions depends in a textual difference in their versions of Jerusalem Talmud (Demai 2:1), the source for the Rambam's ruling.When a person separates a portion less than the size of a dried fig from produce from the second tithe separated from demai, he may give it to a common person34Here also, the Ra'avad is more lenient and maintains that a larger amount, a portion the size of an egg, can be given to a common person. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh explain that in this instance as well, the difference in the two opinions depends in a textual difference in their versions of the above source. provided he eats [a comparable portion in Jerusalem] in exchange for it. At the outset, he should not set it aside to be lost, for produce should not be set aside to be lost.
The produce of the second tithe may be used to eat and to drink, as [implied by Deuteronomy 14:23]: "And you shall eat before God, your Lord."35And drinking is included in eating (Yoma 76b). In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1), the Rambam also cites Deuteronomy 14:26 which speaks about using the money from the redemption of the produce from the second tithe to purchase meat, oil, and wine. Smearing oneself is considered as drinking.36In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.), the Rambam cites the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1) derives the permission to use oil from the second tithe for smearing as follows: It is forbidden to use oil for a corpse. Now why would oil be used for a corpse? To smear on it. Thus we can infer that it is permitted to use oil to smear on a living person. Others note that smearing oneself is frequently equated with drinking. See Hilchot Sh'vitat Esor 1:4-5; Hilchot Terumot 11:1.It is forbidden to use [this produce] for any of one's other needs,37Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 152; see also General Principle 8) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 610) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to purchase utensils, clothes, or servants, as [ibid. 26:14] states: "I did not give from it to a corpse," i.e., I did not use it [to purchase] an object that does not maintain the body.38In his Commentary to the Torah, the Ramban objects to the Rambam's interpretation of this verse, but the Kessef Mishneh justifies it. If a person uses this produce for other purposes, even for a mitzvah, e.g., he uses it to purchase a coffin and shrouds for an abandoned corpse,39The literal translation of the Rambam's words is "a corpse [that it is] a mitzvah [to bury]. As explained in Hilchot Evel 3:5, this refers to a corpse that is abandoned on the road without anyone to bury it. he must eat other food in place of it,40I.e., he is not liable for lashes, because he can correct the transgression by purchasing food worth the value of the produce and eating it in place of that produce (Radbaz). This applies if the seller is no longer present or he cannot return the money. If, however, he can return the money, he must, as stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 16. according to the laws governing the second tithe.
[With regard to produce from the second] tithe: One should eat produce that is normally eaten,41In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1), the Rambam explains that this phrase implies an exclusion: Something that is normally eaten must be eaten. We cannot benefit from it in another manner. The examples the Rambam proceeds to give reflect how foods are used for functions other than their primary purpose. See also Hilchot Shemitah 5:2-3. drink what is normally drunk, and smear on oneself what is normally smeared. He should not smear wine or vinegar, but he may smear oil.42Even though oil is primarily used as food, it is also common to smear it on one's flesh (Radbaz). Wine or vinegar, by contrast, are generally not applied as ointments. He should not squeeze fruit to extract its juice with the exception of olives and grapes.43For producing juice from other fruits is not considered the ordinary way of benefitting from this produce. See also Chapter 9, Halachah 3; Hilchot Terumot 11:3; Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 1:5. We do not mix spices with oil, 44For this spoils the oil's taste and thus reduces the amount of people who would partake of it [The Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. but do so with wine.45For this enhances the wine's taste.We do not require a person to eat bread that has become moldy or oil that has become rancid. Instead, as soon as it has become spoiled to the point that it is not fit for human consumption, its holiness has departed from it.46In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit., the Rambam explains that this concept is also derived from the phrasing of that Mishnah: "To eat what is normally eaten." Since this food has spoiled, it is not "normally eaten."
Whatever parts of produce from terumah that non-priests are permitted to eat47I.e., parts of the plant that are not usually eaten. See Hilchot Terumah 11:10-13 for examples. may also be eaten from produce of the second tithe like ordinary produce.48I.e., it need not be eaten in Jerusalem, nor in a state of ritual purity. When [grape] dregs from the second tithe were placed in water,49To impart their flavor to the water. the first [quantity of drink produce] is forbidden like the produce from the second tithe.50For it is considered as if a significant amount of the fruit was imparted to the water. The second is permitted, like ordinary produce.51Because it does not contain a significant amount of the fruit. [If the produce of the second tithe was] from demai, even the first quantity is permitted.52Since there is a doubt whether the produce is really from the second tithe, we do not impose this stringency.
When honey and spices53That were ordinary produce. fell into wine from the second tithe and improved its flavor, the improvement is judged proportionately.54As explained in Halachah 15. Similarly, if fish were cooked with leek from the second tithe and their flavor was improved, the improvement is judged proportionately.
When a dough made with flour from the second tithe was baked55With ordinary wood [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1)]. and improved, the improvement is accredited to the second tithe.56I.e., if one seeks to redeem the bread, one must pay its full value, even though as dough it was worth far less. The rationale is that its flavor is enhanced, but not its measure. This is the general principle: Whenever the improvement57In the taste of the produce.The Ra'avad has protested this ruling based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1). Indeed, the ruling is difficult to understand because it runs contrary to the Rambam's commentary on the Mishnah that serves as the source for the Jerusalem Talmud.To explain: The Mishnah states: "This is the general principle: Whenever the improvement is obvious, the improvement is judged proportionately. Whenever the improvement is not obvious, the improvement is accredited to the second [tithe]."The Rambam comments: "I.e., the entity that was improved had its weight... and volume increased, it is not [merely] that the effect of the ordinary produce increased the quality of the produce from the second tithe."The Jerusalem Talmud cites the following difference of opinion between Rabbi Yochanan and Reish Lakish in connection with our Mishnah:Rabbi Yochanan says: "Whenever the volume of the produce has increased, the increase is proportionate. Whenever the volume has not increased, the increase is accredited to the second tithe."Reish Lakish says: "Whenever the improvement in flavor is obvious, the increase is proportionate. Whenever the improvement in flavor is not obvious, the increase is accredited to the second tithe."Now the general rule is that whenever there is a difference of opinion between Rabbi Yochanan and Reish Lakish, the halachah follows Rabbi Yochanan. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh understand Rabbi Yochanan to be explaining and amplifying the Mishnah, stating that the improvement must be both in flavor and in size, while Reish Lakish maintains that an improvement in flavor is also sufficient. is obvious, if the volume of the produce is increased, the improvement is judged proportionately. If the volume of the produce is not increased, the improvement is accredited to the second tithe alone. Whenever the improvement is not obvious, the improvement is attributed to the second tithe alone even when the volume is not increased.
What is meant by the phrase "the improvement is judged proportionately"? Honey and spices worth a zuz fall into wine from the second tithe that is worth three [zuz], increasing its volume and improving its flavor.58Thus meeting the two requirements mentioned above. The combined worth is now five zuz, we consider the worth [for the tithes] as four and a fourth.59The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling and states that four zuz minus a fourth should be considered as the second tithe. Some commentaries suggest that there is a printing error and the Rambam also agrees with this ruling. "According to that version, the reckoning is straightforward. The zuz of increase is divided proportionately according to the ratio of the original value of the substances.The Kessef Mishneh maintains the present text of the Mishneh Torah and explains as follows: When everything belongs to one person, three and three quarters zuz are considered as the second tithe as the Ra'avad maintains. When, however, the honey and spices belong to two people, the value of the entire mixture is considered as four and a fourth zuz. One and a fourth is given to the owner of the honey. Thus the owner of the wine has three and three fourths zuz worth which he must eat in accordance with the laws of the second tithe. Note the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1) which follows these same principles, but describes the situation differently. Similar rules apply with regard to other substances.
Although produce from the second tithe may be used for smearing,60As stated in Halachah 10. it should not be placed on a foot infection or on boils, nor may it be used as an amulet or the like, because it was not intended to be used as medication.61But rather as food, or for smearing that is pleasurable like eating (Radbaz). Note the parallel in Hilchot Shemitah 5:11.
The second tithe is considered the property of the Most High, as [Leviticus 27:30] states: "It is God's." Therefore it cannot be acquired [when given] as a present,62The Rambam is not saying that it may not be given as a present, because a person may give produce from the second tithe tithe to a colleague. Nevertheless, the recipient does not acquire that produce as his own. Instead, it is as if he is a guest of the giver, partaking of his property. More particularly, it is as if the recipient is partaking of God's property. unless one gives a colleague tevel and he separates the second tithe from it.It may not be used to consecrate a woman,63Indeed, if one attempts to consecrate a woman with such produce, the consecration is not effective, for the money used to consecrate a woman must belong to the husband (Hilchot Ishut 5:4,6). nor may it be sold, nor may it be taken as security.64See the following halachah for examples of all these prohibitions. It may not be exchanged,65For an exchange is equivalent to a sale [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:1)]. nor may it be given as surety.
What is meant by the prohibition against taking it as security? One should not enter [the debtor's] home66See Hilchot Malveh veLoveh 3:7 which describes when a creditor can enter the debtor's home to collect security. and take produce from the second tithe of his as security. If one transgressed and took such produce as security, it is expropriated from him.What is meant by the prohibition against giving it as surety? One should not tell a colleague: "Take this produce from the second tithe. Keep it in your possession and lend me money because of it."67In contrast to the previous instance, this is referring to security willingly given by the debtor to the creditor.What is meant by the prohibition against exchanging it? A person should not tell a colleague: "Here is wine from the second tithe for you and give me oil from the second tithe."68I.e., the exchange is forbidden even if he receives produce from the second tithe in return. The Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:1)] states that such an exchange is forbidden even in Jerusalem where the produce would be eaten. He may, however, tell a colleague: "Here is wine from [the second tithe] for you, but I don't have oil." If his colleague desires to give him oil, it is permitted, because he did not exchange it with him.69For the recipient of the wine is under no obligation to provide the giver with oil or anything else. He merely notified him that he lacked it. Thus, if that person desired to give him, he may.
We do not use produce from the second tithe as a weight for anything, even for golden dinarim.70For this is deprecating to the holiness of the second tithe [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:1)]. [This is forbidden] even to [weigh coins] onto which the holiness from other produce will be transferred.71I.e., one knows the weight of the produce and one uses it in order to weigh the golden coins onto which the holiness from other produce from the second tithe will be transferred. [This is] a decree,72I.e., one might think that this is permitted for after all, he is using the produce from the second tithe for a mitzvah, to enable him to transfer the holiness of other produce. [enacted] lest he balance his scales on this basis and the produce be lacking in weight.73I.e., the produce may dry out, be eaten by mice, or spoil, and thus weigh less than the owner thought (Rav Yosef Corcus). Thus if he uses them to weigh coins upon which to transfer the holiness of other produce from the second tithe, he will be redeeming such produce for less than its worth.
When brothers divide produce from the second tithe [left them in an estate], they should not weigh them against each other.74The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that this is permitted. The Kessef Mishneh states that the passage which the Ra'avad uses as a source can be explained differently. Nevertheless, he questions the rationale for the Rambam's ruling. Similarly, coins [upon which the holiness of] the second tithe [has been transferred] should not be weighed against each other. [Such coins] should not be sold, nor exchanged, nor given as surety. One may not give them to a moneychanger to use to create an impression.75I.e., to stack them on his table so that he will appear to have an active business. One may not lend them to boost his image.76One gives the loan only for appearance sake - to create an impression that he is wealthy - and the borrower returns it immediately. It is, however, permitted to lend them so that they will not rust.
We may not use [this money] to repay loans. They may not be used as wedding gifts,77It was customary for a person's friends to give him money as a wedding gift and for him to repay the favor when the friends married. See Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah, ch. 7, for a detailed explanation. This is forbidden, because the present is considered as a loan. nor may they be used to repay favors.78I.e., a person invited a colleague for a meal with the expectation that the colleague return the favor (P'nei Moshe, the Jerusalem Talmud, Demai 3:1). Produce from the second tithe cannot be used for such meals, for it is like an exchange. They may not be used to pay for charity levied upon him in the synagogue.79For he will be paying an obligation levied upon him with funds belonging to God (ibid.). One may, however, send them [as gifts] for charitable purposes.80As long is the donor is not obligated to make these payments. One must, however, [notify the recipient].81So that he will use it as required for money from the second tithes.
A person should not tell a colleague: "Bring this produce to Jerusalem and take your wages from it," for such an arrangement is equivalent to taking his wages for transporting the produce to Jerusalem.82That would be forbidden because it would be equivalent to using the produce from the second tithe to pay his debt. He may, however, tell him: "Bring it to Jerusalem so that we can eat it and drink it there."83Hinting at such an arrangement without specifically mentioning it.
In Jerusalem, a person may ask a colleague to smear oil from the second tithe upon him even though the oil also becomes smeared on the colleague's hand. This is not considered as a wage for smearing it upon him.84This is permitted, because the oil smeared on his hand is not financially significant [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:2)]. Nevertheless, a non-priest is not to put oil which is terumah on his hand to smear it on a priest. The difference between the two situations is that there is no prohibition against having a colleague use oil from the second tithe, while a non-priest is not allowed to benefit from terumah.
We have already explained85Halachah 17. that the produce from the second tithe belongs to the Most High. Therefore we say that one who steals produce from the second tithe is not obligated to make a double payment, nor is one who robs it obligated to add a fifth.86These are the penalties one would be required to pay for taking a person's individual property. The thief is, however, required to return the principal. See Hilchot Geneivah 2:1.
When a person consecrates produce from the second tithe to the Temple treasury,87The consecration is effective. Since the person has the right to partake of the produce, that right has monetary value and hence may be consecrated. See Chapter 7, Halachah 19, with regard to dedicating the second tithes for the purchase of sacrifices. the one88I.e., not necessarily the owner, for anyone can redeem consecrated property. The owner, however, must add a fifth (see Hilchot Arachin 7:2-4). Similarly, when a person redeems produce from the second tithe that belongs to him, he must add a fifth, as stated in Chapter 5, Halachah 1. See Radbaz. who redeems it should redeem it with the intent of giving what is due to the Temple treasury to it and what is due to the second tithe to it.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
A person who desires to redeem produce from the second tithe should1Although there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:7), the variance in views applies only after the fact. According to all views, the initial and preferable option is for him to make an explicit statement. redeem it according to its worth2See Halachah 18 and Chapter 2, Halachah 2. and say: "These coins3The coins need not be in front of him when he makes the declaration. As long as they are within his possession, it is acceptable. See Halachot 11-13. take the place of this produce" or "The holiness of this produce is transferred to these coins."If he did not make such an explicit statement, but merely set aside the coins equivalent to [the value of] the produce, it is sufficient. He need not make an explicit statement.4For the circumstances clarify the nature of his intent [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:7)].In some printings of the Mishneh Torah, there is a note (which some ascribe to the Ra'avad) that states that for the redemption to be acceptable when he does not make an explicit statement, he must have been involved with the matter beforehand. Rav Yosef Corcus discusses this issue at length, noting that this is indeed the law with regard to the consecration and divorce of a woman (Hilchot Ishut 3:8, Hilchot Gerushin 1:11). He makes two distinctions regarding the situations:a) in contrast to consecration and divorce, setting aside money for produce from the second tithe is a self-explanatory act; the intent is directly obvious;b) consecration and divorce must be observed by witnesses. Hence, one must make his intent clear to them. There is no such obligation with regard to the redemption of produce. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 31:136) quotes the Rambam's ruling.The produce then is considered ordinary produce and the coins must be taken to Jerusalem and spent there,5To purchase food. See Chapter 7, Halachah 3. as [Deuteronomy 14:24] states: "When the journey will be too great for you, because you cannot transport it...."
Similarly, if a person desires to transfer the holiness of produce from the second tithe to other produce, he should bring the other produce6The original produce, by contrast, is now considered as ordinary produce and can be eaten anywhere. The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the transfer is not effective, for he maintains that the holiness of the produce from the second tithe can only be transferred to money. Nevertheless, as a stringency, he maintains that the second batch of produce must also be taken to Jerusalem. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's ruling. to Jerusalem and eat it there. He should not transfer the holiness of produce from one species to produce from another species,7The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam on this issue as well and again the commentaries justify the Rambam's position. nor from high quality produce from one species to lower quality produce even if it is of the same species. If, however, he transferred the holiness of produce in these instances, the transfer is effective.
A person who redeems produce from the second tithe should recite a blessing:8Before separating the produce. "[Blessed are You...] who sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us concerning the redemption of the second tithe." If he transferred the holiness to other produce or he transferred the holiness of money to produce,9See Halachah 6. he should recite the blessing: "...concerning the transfer of the holiness of the second tithe."10In continuation of his comments on the previous halachah, the Ra'avad states that a blessing should not be recited. Since the person is not allowed to transfer the holiness of the produce in this manner, he should not recite a blessing. A person who redeems or transfers the holiness of demai need not11Indeed, he should not, lest he be taking God's name in vein. recite a blessing.12Because there is no definite Scriptural obligation incumbent on this produce.
When one redeems produce from the second tithe, he should not redeem it as the second tithe, but rather as ordinary produce. He should say: "How much is this ordinary produce worth." [This applies] even if everyone knows that the produce is from the second tithe, so that it will not be disgraced.13Produce from the second tithe is sold for a lower price than ordinary produce, because restrictions apply with regard to its consumption. Hence, if produce from the second tithe is offered for evaluation and its identity is known, people will look at it less favorably. The Kessef Mishneh questions this rationale, noting that once this produce is redeemed, there is no difference between it and ordinary produce and hence, its price should not be reduced. He explains that, nevertheless, since it originally was from the second tithe, it is still viewed less favorably.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling and maintains that such a ploy is not necessary. The commentaries follow the Rambam's view.
The holiness of coins [used to redeem produce from] the second tithe should not be transferred to other coins.14The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh state that the Rambam derives this from the fact that Demai 1:2 states that such a redemption may be made with coins upon which the holiness of the second tithe of demai had been transferred. Implied is that if we are certain that the produce is from the second tithe, no such redemption can be made. See the Rambam's Commentary to that mishnah where he states that the concept is derived from Deuteronomy 14:25 which states: "And you shall exchange it for silver and you shall bundle the silver," i.e., the silver originally used for the redemption must be the silver taken to Jerusalem.See the conclusion of Chapter 5 and the beginning of Chapter 6 which mentions some exceptions to this general principle. [This applies] whether both sets of coins were silver or both were brass, the first set was silver and the second brass, or the first set was brass and the second silver. If one transgressed and transferred the holiness, the transfer is effective.15See also Halachah 7 which states that redemption may be made in a pressing situation.
[Outside of Jerusalem,] the holiness of money of the second tithe should not be transferred to produce. If such a transfer was made, the produce should be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.16I.e., if the produce was purchased intentionally with money of the second tithe. See Chapter 7, Halachot 1, 15. [Similarly, the holiness of money from the second tithe] should not be transferred to living domesticated animals, beasts, or fowl. If one [attempted to] make such a transfer, the holiness of the second tithe is not transferred. [This is a decree,]17I.e., our Sages rescinded the transfer of the holiness to the animal for the reason stated (Sukkah 40b). lest one raise them in herds. If one transferred the [holiness of such funds] to animals that were slaughtered, they are considered as produce. They must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there and the money is considered as ordinary funds.18See Chapter 7, Halachah 16.
In a pressing situation,19E.g., the situation described in Chapter 6, Halachah 2. This example is also discussed by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:6). it is permitted to transfer the holiness of silver coins to brass ones. One should not maintain this situation, however.20I.e., one should not leave the brass coins in a state of holiness (ibid.). Among the reasons silver coins are preferred is that they are more prestigious and they do not corrode. Instead, [when he has] a respite he should transfer the holiness of the brass back to silver coins.
As an initial preference,21Since the separation of the second tithe from demai is merely a Rabbinic stringency, our Sages granted leniency in its application. one may transfer the holiness of coins of the second tithe from demai, transferring the holiness from silver to silver, from silver to brass, from brass to brass, and from brass to produce. That produce should be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.22I.e., its holiness should not be transferred back to coins.
The produce from the second tithe may only be redeemed23The Radbaz distinguishes between pediah, "redemption," which requires coined silver, and chillul, "the transfer of holiness." The latter does not require coinage at all. for silver, as [implied by Deuteronomy 14:25]: "And you shall bundle the silver." Similarly, if a person redeems the silver for himself and adds a fifth,24As required by Chapter 5, Halachah 1. that fifth must be silver like the principal.25See parallels in Hilchot Terumah 10:15; Hilchot Arachin 7:2.One should not use uncoined silver for the redemption [of the second tithe]. Instead, one must use silver imprinted with an image or with writing.26This is also derived from the above prooftext. Vitzarta, translated as "you shall bundle," relates to the word tzurah meaning "form" or "image." Thus the prooftext is implying that one may redeem produce from the second tithe with silver with an imprint [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:2); based on Bava Metzia 47b]. If one [attempted to] redeem [produce from the second tithe] with silver bullion or the like - this is referred as an asimon - his actions are of no consequence. We may not redeem [produce from the second tithe] with [a coin less valuable] than a p'rutah,27A p'rutah is a copper coin of minimal value. One may not use a silver coin less valuable than this copper coin. The rationale is that its minimal value causes it to be considered as uncoined silver (Radbaz; Kessef Mishneh). because this is considered as redeeming with an asimon.
We may not redeem [produce from the second tithe] with a coin that is not legal tender in that place and at that time,28I.e., it has an imprint and was once issued by a government as currency, but is no longer accepted by the present ruling authorities. as [implied by ibid.:26]: "And you shall exchange the silver for anything your heart desires." [Implied is that the silver] must be fit for exchange.29The Rambam mentions this interpretation of the verse in his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). The commentaries have not cited a common prior Rabbinic source. See, however, Midrash HaGadol and Midrash Tana'im. A coin minted by kings of an earlier era30But which is no longer being minted at present. may be used for redemption if it is still circulated as currency.
We may not redeem [produce from the second tithe] with coins that are not in one's possession,31E.g., his pouch fell into the sea, in which instance, his coins are no longer accessible to him (Bava Kama 98a). as [implied by] the verse: "And you shall bundle the silver in your hand."32The word "yadecha," translated as "your hand," can also be interpreted as "your domain." That is the intent here, because the money need not actually be in one's hand. As long as they are in one's domain, and they are accessible, it is acceptable, as evident from this and the subsequent halachot. If a person's pouch fell into a cistern, but it is possible for him to remove it from there, he may use [the coins in] it for redemption,33The cost of recovering the coins must, however, be deducted before one uses the money to redeem produce [the Jerualem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 1:2)]. for it is [still] in his domain.
[The following rules apply when] one was traveling on the road, carrying money, and a man of force was approaching him.34And he is certain that he will rob him. If he could save [his money, even] with difficulty, he can use it to redeem produce of the second tithe in his home.35I.e., the person knows that he will lose his money. Hence, rather than forfeit it without receiving anything for it, he decides that it is preferable for him to use it for something - to redeem his produce. The Kessef Mishneh maintains that the Rambam is not stating that, a priori, he may use the money to redeem his produce. Instead, the intent is that after the fact if he redeems the produce with this money, after the fact, the redemption is effective. If he cannot, and he says: "The holiness of the produce that is in my house is transferred to this money," his statements are of no consequence.
When a person sets aside money upon which to transfer the holiness of produce from the second tithe, he may [continue to] redeem his produce under the assumption that the money exists in his possession. If he discovers that the money has been lost, he must be concerned about all the produce that he redeemed with that money.36I.e., he must operate under the premise that the money was lost immediately after he saw it last and all the produce that he sought to redeem from that time onward was thus not redeemed. See Hilchot Ma'aser 7:4, however, which mentions a similar situation with regard to tithing produce and rules that although the produce must be tithed again, the status of that tithing is only doubtful.
When a person located in Tiberias has money in Babylonian coinage in Babylon, he may not transfer the holiness [of the produce of the second tithe] to them.37I.e., the Rambam's perspective is that in these instances, there are two negative factors: a) the coinage is not legal tender in the place where he is located; b) he does not have the money at hand. Hence, he cannot redeem the produce of the second tithe with it. If, by contrast, [although he is in Tiberias,] he possesses money of Tiberian coinage in Babylon, he may transfer the holiness [of the produce of the second tithe] to them.38Because there is only one difficulty, that the person is not located in the same place as the money, the money is not disqualified.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that there is only one significant factor, whether the money is legal tender in the place it is located. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh discuss the two views at length. Similarly laws apply in all analogous situations.
When a person says: "The holiness of produce from the second tithe is transferred to the first sela that I will take out of this wallet," "...on the sela I will receive when I exchange this golden dinar," "...on the pundiyon39All of the italicized terms are coins used in the Talmudic era. I will receive when I exchange this sela, the transfer is effective.40In all these instances, the transfer of holiness is effective even though the coin was not singled out at the time when the declaration was made. Nevertheless, the transfer of holiness is not effective retroactively, i.e., we do not say that once the coin is taken, the transfer of holiness takes effect from the time the declaration was made.The above follows the explanation given by Rav Yosef Corcus who notes that the Rambam (Hilchot Terumot 1:21) does not accept the principle of bereirah with regard to questions of Scriptural Law. The Radbaz explains that this explanation is not necessary, because the Rambam rules that the obligation to separate the second tithe in the present age is Rabbinic in origin. The sela that he will take out or receive in exchange is money of the second tithe.
When a person says: "The holiness of the produce of the second tithe is transferred to the sela in my son's possession, the holiness is not transferred. Perhaps the sela was not in his possession at that time.41Even if the coin was later discovered in the son's possession, the transfer of holiness is not effective, because we do not know whether it was in his possession at the time the declaration was made (Rashas). One might conclude that if one knows that the coin was in the son's possession at the time of the declaration, the separation is effective.
When a person redeems the produce from the second tithe before he separates it, e.g., he says: "The second tithe of this produce42Which he has not yet separated. is redeemed with this money," his statements are of no consequence and the tithes have not been defined. If, however, he says: "The second tithe from this produce is in its northern portion" or "...in its southern portion43Making such a statement is equivalent to separating the second tithe. Note the parallels in Hilchot Terumah 3:8. and its holiness is transferred to this money," the redemption is effective.
When the produce of the second tithe is redeemed, it should be redeemed for its fair value.44I.e., at the time the Temple was standing; alternatively, in the present age, as an expression of piety (Chapter 2, Halachah 2). One may, however, value it at the buying price, i.e., what the storekeeper would pay if he purchased it and not the price he would charge if he sold it.45I.e., the storekeeper obviously sells the produce for a higher price than the price at which he purchases it. Similarly, he may pay money according to the rate that a moneychanger would pay and not according to the rate he would charge.46In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:2), the Rambam explains that a moneychanger will take 25 me'ah for a sela, but will only give 24. If the produce is worth a sela, the person redeeming it need not pay more than 24. If a person transgresses and redeemed [produce] worth a maneh47100 large silver pieces. with [a coin] worth a p'rutah, the holiness [of the produce] is transferred.48Bava Metzia 57a makes such a statement with regard to consecrated property (see Hilchot Arachin 7:8). The Rambam draws the parallel since the laws governing consecrated property are more stringent than those governing the second tithe.
[The following laws apply if] a sela was lacking a sixth or less [than its weight].49In previous eras, the minting of coins was less precise and it was possible that a coin would weigh slightly less than the standard weight for it. Alternatively, wear and tear could have reduced its weight. If it would be accepted [in business dealings even] with difficulty, one may transfer the holiness a sela's worth [of produce of the second tithe] to it without concern.50This is also a leniency, for in ordinary business dealings one would have to reimburse the other party for the difference in value (Hilchot Mechirah 10:12). If one redeemed [produce] with a sela and it was discovered to be unacceptable,51I.e., its worth is more than a sixth less than the value of a sela. he should exchange it.52Transferring the holiness from it to a coin of fair value. There is no difficulty with the original transfer of holiness from the produce to the coin, for - after the fact - as long as a coin is worth a p'rutah, the transfer of holiness to it is effective as stated in the previous halachah.
One should not redeem produce from the second tithe by estimation.53For as stated above, the initial preference is to redeem the produce of the second tithe at its fair market price. That can only be established after its measure is known. Instead, one should be precise concerning its volume or its weight and give their value. If the value [of the produce] was known,54I.e., we are speaking about ordinary produce that has a fixed market value. he may redeem it in the presence of only one person.55Because in such an instance, it is not necessary to evaluate its worth. If its value was not known, e.g., wine that had begun turning into vinegar,56Which is still valuable, but is not as valuable as ordinary wine and hence, must be assessed, for once the produce has started to spoil, its value is not a cut-and-dry matter [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 4:2)]. produce that spoiled, or coins that corroded, he should redeem them according to the appraisal of three merchants.57For they will be able to assess the true value of the produce. [It is acceptable] even if one of them is a gentile or the owner of the produce58Two gentiles or two owners, however, are not acceptable [Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 4:2)]. of the second tithe. It is even acceptable to redeem [produce] based on the appraisal of a man and his two wives.59Sanhedrin 14b relates that Rav Papa's wife helped evaluate his produce. We compel the owner to make the first bid [to redeem the produce].60Because the owner must add a fifth. This is a stringency applied with regard to produce from the second tithe over consecrated property.61The Rambam's ruling is based on his version of the Tosefta, Ma'aser Sheni 3:3. The Ra'avad maintains that the proper version of that source is: "We compel him to make the first bid. If he desires to retract he may. This is the stringency of consecrated property over the second tithes." The Kessef Mishneh notes that this is indeed the version of the Tosefta commonly followed. There is an added difficulty with the Rambam's ruling, because in all instances of consecrated property, he requires the owner to make the first bid. See Hilchot Arachin, ch. 5, in contrast to the statements of Radbaz here.
We should not transport produce62By contrast, money to which the holiness of the second tithe has been transferred may of course be transported. from the second tithe from one place to another to redeem it there. When a person transports produce from a place where it is expensive to a place where it is inexpensive, he should redeem it according to its value in the place he is redeeming it. If it is demai,63In which instance, leniency is allowed, because the obligation is of Rabbinic origin. we may redeem it at the inexpensive price, since it was possible to sell it at that price.
If a person possessed produce from the second tithe in his granary and spent money to transport them from his house to the town,64The price of produce in a town is always higher than their price in the field, because someone had to undertake the transportation costs. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:1)]. thus causing the value of the produce to increase, he should redeem it according to the price in the city. He forfeits the expenses he undertook.65I.e., they are included in the price of the produce of the second tithe. The rationale is that until the produce is redeemed, any increase in its value is considered part of the produce. Just like he is obligated to bring the produce to Jerusalem, he is obligated to do anything to facilitate its being brought to Jerusalem, including bringing it to a place where it is redeemed.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
When a man redeems his produce for the second tithe for himself - whether it is from his own crops, he acquired it as an inheritance, or it was given to him while tevel as we explained,1See Chapter 3, Halachah 17. Otherwise, it is forbidden to give the second tithe as a present. he must add a fifth [of the new total].2Although the produce of the second tithe belongs to God, as it were, since the person partakes of it, the Torah considers as his, with regard to the obligation to add a fifth (Bava Kama 69b). [Thus] if it was worth four, he should give five,3This is true in all instances that the Torah requires that a fifth be added. as [Leviticus 27:31] states: "If a man will redeem from his tithes, he shall add a fifth to it."
When a woman redeems produce for the second tithe that she separated, she is not required to add a fifth. According to the Oral Tradition,4Kiddushin 24a. we have learned: "If a man [will redeem from] his tithes," excluding a woman. Similarly, if a man redeems [money used to] redeem produce from the second tithe for himself,5Using it to purchase peace sacrifices or the like. he must add a fifth.
When a person redeems the produce of his second tithe and adds a fifth, and then redeems the money itself a second time, he must add a second fifth of the principal alone. He need not add a fifth for the original fifth.6For example, if the produce was worth 4, the person redeeming it must originally pay 5 and then, if he must pay an additional 1. He need not pay an additional 1.2.
When the fifth of the produce of the second tithe is not worth a p'rutah, [the person redeeming it] need not add a fifth.7Because anything less than a fifth is not considered as financially significant. According to the Rambam, he must, however, redeem the produce. Rashi (Bava Metzia 54b), by contrast, maintains that it need not be redeemed at all. Similarly, when the worth of the produce of the second tithe is unknown,8The Radbaz distinguishes between this instance and Chapter 4, Halachah 20, which states that when the value of produce is unknown, it should be assessed by three experts, explaining that that halachah is speaking about an instance where the produce has genuine worth, but it can only be determined by experts, not a common person. This halachah, by contrast, is speaking about an instance where its worth is not known at all. it is sufficient for him to say: "The holiness of the produce and its fifth are transferred to this sela."9This is acceptable, for as mentioned above, after the fact, the transfer of holiness from produce to money is acceptable even if the money is not of equal worth as the produce. Whenever a person does not redeem produce from the second tithe with his own money, he need not add a fifth.10The Jerusalem Talmud (ma'aser Sheni 4:3) derives this concept from the exegesis of Leviticus 27:31. [When one redeems] produce from the second tithe that is demai, he need not add a fifth.11Since the obligation to redeem the second tithe of demai is merely Rabbinic in origin, this added stringency was not imposed.
When a person is redeeming produce of the second tithe and he has other produce from the second tithe that was not redeemed whose fifth is not worth a p'rutah, it is sufficient for him to say: "The holiness of it and its fifth are transferred to the money [set aside] originally."12The reason why it is acceptable to use the money used to redeem other produce is explained in the following halachah and notes. This leniency is granted because the obligation to set aside the second tithe from such produce is Rabbinic in origin as stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 9. We grant him this leniency rather than require him to bring that produce to Jerusalem or to wait until he has enough other produce so that the fifth will be worth a p'rutah [Rashi (Bava Metzia 53b)]. [This leniency is granted,] because it is impossible to require a person to be precise with his money.13And we assume that, as a safeguard, a person will be somewhat generous in the money he sets aside in redemption of the second tithe, setting aside a little more than the worth of the produce. The holiness of the produce whose fifth is worth less than a p'rutah is transferred to that extra amount (ibid.; Radbaz).
When a person redeems produce from the second tithe for more than its worth, that additional value is not considered as money from the second tithe.14In contrast, when a person redeems consecrated money for more than its worth, the extra amount is considered as consecrated [the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 4:3)].
When the owner of the produce bids a sela to redeem it and another person also bids a sela, the owner is given precedence, because he is required to add a fifth. If, however, the owner bids a sela and another person bids a sela and a p'rutah, that other person is given precedence, because he increases the principal.15In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:3; based on the Jerusalem Talmud), the Rambam explains that an increase in the principal is favored over a lesser amount of principal but a greater total, because there are "guileful" means to avoid paying the additional fifth as will be explained.
It is permitted to act "guilefully" with regard to the redemption of produce of the second tithe.16I.e., the intent of the person's "guile" is to avoid paying the additional fifth. What is implied? A person may tell his son or daughter who are beyond majority or his Hebrew servant:17All three of these individuals have an independent financial capacity. Hence, they are not considered as acting on behalf of the owner. "Here is this money. Use it to redeem this produce from the second tithe," so that they will not have to add a fifth. He should not say, however: "Use them to redeem it for me."18For then it appears that they are acting on his behalf. Similarly, he is not required to add a fifth if he tells them: "Redeem it for me using your money."19For then the other people are considered as acting on their own initiative, even though he gave them instructions. This applies even if the owner of the produce gives the other person an equivalent amount of money, but that person does not use it to redeem the produce.
He should not, however, give money to redeem [the produce] to one of his sons or daughters who are below majority20As indicated by Hilchot Terumah 4:5, this is speaking about an instance where the child has reached the age when his vows are significant. In such an instance, his actions are effective even with regard to matters of Scriptural Law. or to his Canaanite servants or maid-servants, because they do not have an independent financial capacity.21See Hilchot Avadim 5:3, et al. If he gave the money to his Hebrew maidservant,22In this instance, she will ultimately have an independent financial capacity when she comes of age. Nevertheless, at present, because she is a minor, she can act on behalf of others only with regard to matters of Rabbinic Law. his words are effective if [the obligation to separate] the second tithe from this produce is Rabbinic in origin, e.g., produce grew in a flowerpot without a hole.23See Hilchot Terumah 5:14-16. [The rationale is that] a Hebrew maidservant is a minor and a minor can acquire property for others only with regard to matters of Rabbinic Law.24See Hilchot Lulav 8:10 and Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 4:7 which explain that a minor can acquire for his or her self, but cannot do so on behalf of another person.
Similarly, a person may act with guile and give produce from the second tithe as a present while it is still tevel25Once, however, the second tithe has been separated, it cannot be given as a present - except to be eaten immediately thereafter - for it is considered as "the property of the Most High." Hence, the person who "owns" it on the earthly plane does not have the authority to give it to someone else (Chapter 3, Halachah 17, and Halachah 1 of the present chapter). and while giving it say: "The holiness from [the second tithe of] this produce is transferred to the money I have at home."26In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:5), the Rambam explains that here also the owner desires to redeem the produce without paying the additional fifth. Nevertheless, we are speaking about an instance where he is in his field and does not have money at hand. Hence, none of the techniques mentioned in Halachah 8 are effective. What can he do? He can give the produce to another person and redeem it for him. Thus the produce is being redeemed by a person other than its owner at that time. Hence a fifth need not be added.
Two brothers,27I.e., even if they are partners in other matters. As Chasdei David emphasizes, this leniency does not, however, apply to the redemption of produce which is owned in partnership. two partners, a father and his son, may redeem produce from the second tithe for each other so that they will not have to add a fifth. When a woman brings produce from the second tithe to her husband's home,28When a woman marries, all of the property she owns is given to her husband to use. On the other hand, as the Rambam continues to explain, she is not the owner of the produce of the second tithe and hence, her husband also does not become its owner. the husband does not acquire it as his own, since it belongs to the Most High, as we explained.29Chapter 3, Halachah 17. Therefore, if he redeems it,30With his own money. As mentioned in Halachah 2, a woman is never required to add a fifth when redeeming produce for herself. If, however, she redeems produce for her husband with her own money, she is required to add a fifth (Radbaz). he need not add a fifth.
A person who redeems produce from the second tithe for himself, who paid the principal, but did not pay the additional fifth, should not partake of [the produce] until he pays the fifth. [This applies] even on the Sabbath.31In which instance, it is a mitzvah to delight in food and drink. [And it applies] even though the payment of the fifth does not hold back the transfer of holiness [from the produce to the coins]. Indeed, that transfer takes place. [This restriction is] a decree, lest the person be negligent and fail to pay.
If a person desires to exchange money from the redemption of the second tithe for golden dinarim,32As mentioned above, the second tithe must be redeemed with silver. Now gold is much more valuable than silver so that by exchanging the silver for gold, the person will be lightening his load considerably.See Ma'aser Sheni 2:7 which states that Rabbi Akiva made such a transfer on behalf of Rabban Gamliel and Rabbi Yehoshua. so that his burden will be lighter,33As stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 5, generally, a person cannot transfer the holiness of money of the second tithe to other money, in this and the following halachah, exceptions are made for they are to the benefit of the second tithe: making the money easier to transport and to use. he may. Even34The addition of this word is based on the gloss of the Radbaz. if he exchanged [the two] with his own money, he need not add a fifth, for this is not considered as redemption.
When a person exchanges a sela of money35I.e., a sela is a coin of relatively large value. It is easier to shop for food with smaller coins. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:9). from the second tithe - whether in Jerusalem or outside the city - he should not exchange it entirely for brass coins. Instead, it should be divided into a shekel's worth of silver coins and a shekel's worth of brass coins.
It is permissible to transfer the holiness of money of the second tithe together with produce from the second tithe to money,36As mentioned above, although generally, a person cannot transfer the holiness of money of the second tithe to other money, an exception is made here, because of the produce that is included in the transfer. provided the produce is worth less than a dinar.37The rationale is that when the produce is worth less than a dinar, it is not fit to be redeemed. (For a coin less than a dinar is small and of comparatively little value.) Hence it is to the benefit of the produce from the second tithe that the money be redeemed with it (Kessef Mishneh; based on the Jerusalem Talmud, Ma'aser Sheni 2:8). If, however, [the produce] is worth a dinar, its holiness should not be transferred together with that of money. Instead, [it should be transferred] by itself. What is implied? A person possessed produce that was worth a dinar and three dinarim that were of the second tithe, he may not transfer the holiness of the entire amount to one sela.38A sela is four dinarim. If, however, he has a half a dinar of produce and a half a dinar of money, he may transfer the holiness of both to one dinar.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
[The following rules apply when] ordinary money and money from the second tithe become scattered [in the same place]. If he gathered from both sides, what he gathers belongs to the second tithe until he reaches the original amount and then the remainder is ordinary produce.1And if some coins are lost, the loss is deducted from the ordinary coins [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:5)]. The rationale is that it is possible that the coins of only one type were lost. As a stringency, we assume that it was the ordinary coins that were lost. If he mixed the coins together2Before they fell (ibid.). and grabbed a handful or gathered only from one side, he should calculate the percentage proportionately.3Since they were all mixed together, it is not likely that the loss was suffered by one type of coin alone.The Radbaz maintains that even if the coins were mixed together after they fell, the money should be divided proportionally, because there is no way of knowing which type of coins one has in hand.What is implied? There were 200 coins of the second tithe and 100 ordinary coins. They became scattered. He mixed them and picked them all up, but found only 270, 180 are the second tithe and 90 are ordinary coins. This is the general principle. Those that are gathered are considered as the second tithe. Those that are mixed together are divided according to the percentage.He should4This applies in both instances, whether they are scattered or mixed together [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.)]. make a stipulation and say: "If those in my hand are from the second tithe, the remainder are ordinary money and if they are ordinary money, the holiness from the coins from the second tithe wherever they are is transferred to them."
When a sela of the second tithe becomes mixed with a sela of ordinary money, one should bring coins - even brass coins5It is, however, preferable to use silver (Radbaz). The Meiri differs and maintains that it is preferable to redeem the coins with brass. - worth a sela and say: "Wherever the sela of the second tithe is, its holiness is transferred to these coins." Afterwards, he should chose the better6As mentioned previously, in that time, the mintage of coins were not entirely standard and sometimes there were some fluctuations of weight. Also, some coins could have been affected by wear and tear. of the two [selaim] and transfer the holiness of the brass coins to it. Thus the better sela has been become the money of the second tithe.
When [a father] tells his son: "Produce from the second tithe is found in this corner," and is found in another corner, it is ordinary produce.7Since it was not found in the place where he told him it was located, we assume that the produce from the second tithe was lost and this is new produce. If he told him: "A maneh there,"8100 silver pieces. and 200 were discovered, the remainder is ordinary money.9I.e., we assume that his father did not mention the ordinary money that was there, but rather informed him only of the money that was from the second tithe, because only those funds were important from a ritual perspective. "There are 200," and only a maneh was discovered, it is ordinary money.10We assume that the money from the second tithe was taken and that these are different funds. If he left a maneh and discovered 200 or 200 and discovered a maneh, the entire amount is ordinary money.11Since the amount he discovered was not the same amount that he put there, we assume that the original funds were taken and that these are new funds. In this instance, the person placed the funds there himself. Hence, there is a difference between this instance and the first case in which he was conveyed the information by his father.The Ra'avad notes that the Rambam's ruling appears to be a departure from the ruling of the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:12) which states that all of the 100 are the second tithe. The Kessef Mishneh explains that the Rambam's ruling is based on Beitzah 10b which follows this line of thinking. [This applies] even if the money is found in two wallets.12In such an instance, one would have reason to think that one wallet contains the money that is the second tithe and the other ordinary money.
If his father told him: "I have a pouch [with produce] from the second tithe at home," and [the son] found three pouches, the greater one is [considered as containing produce from] the second tithe13This is a stringency since it was not known which of the pouches contained the produce of the second tithe. and the remainder are [considered as containing produce containing] ordinary produce. Nevertheless, he should not make use of [the produce from] the smaller pouches until he transfers their holiness to the greater one.14Lest in fact it had been the smaller ones that contain the produce from the second tithe.
[The following laws apply when] a person loses his power of speech. If he was asked: "Is your produce from the second tithe in this-and-this place?" and he nodded his head, he should be tested three times like he is tested with regard to a bill of divorce.15See Hilchot Gerushin 2:16 which explains that a person who has lost his ability to speak, but is of sound mind is asked three questions which require different answers, i.e., two positive and one negative or vice versa. If he answers them correctly, the court concludes that he is mentally sound and continues asking him concerning the bill of divorce. See also Hilchot Mechirah 29:3. [If it is proven that he understands what he is being told,] his message has consequences.
If one was told in a dream: "The produce from the second tithe of your father that you are seeking is in this-and-this place," [the statements are of no consequence.16And the produce is considered as ordinary produce. This applies even] if he found the produce there like he was told. For words communicated in a dream are of no significance at all.17See Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 10:7.
Although a person tells his sons: "Even if you are dying, do not touch [what is in] that corner,"18I.e., "even if you are dying of hunger do not take the money to spend on your own needs." if money is found there, it is considered as ordinary money.19I.e., we do not say that the father meant that the money was from the second tithe and should not be used for ordinary purposes. [Different laws apply if] he buried money in their presence and told them: "It belongs to so-and-so" or "It is from the second tithe." If it appears that he is speaking with guile,20So that he does not appear to be rich or so that his sons don't waste the money immediately. we do not pay attention to his words. If it appears that he is serious, his words are given weight.21See also Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 10:5.
When a person finds a container22An earthenware container, as indicated by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:10). with the letter mem written on it, its contents23Either money or produce. [are considered as] the second tithe.24The mem stands for ma'aser, "tithes." We do not think that the intent is the first tithe or the tithe for the poor, for the consumption of these is not restricted to a specific group. When there is a dalet written on it, its contents are considered demai; a tet, tevel; kuf, for a sacrifice. If the container was metal,25In which instance, the container itself has value and we assume he consecrated it as well. In contrast, an earthenware container is not valuable and would not be consecrated. the container and its contents were consecrated for a sacrifice. For in dangerous times,26I.e., in the era of Roman persecution when the Romans tried to stamp out the observance of the mitzvot and the Jews were afraid to write out the entire word. they would write one letter from the name [as a sign].
When coins - even golden dinarim, together with silver, and [brass] coins27Such a mixture might give the impression that this money was set aside for the second tithe, for generally people do not hold different types of coins together (Rav Yosef Corcus). - are found in Jerusalem, they are considered as ordinary money. [The rationale is that] the streets of Jerusalem are swept every day.28Generally, we assume that the money found in Jerusalem is ordinary money, because during the majority of the year, there are not that many pilgrims there. Thus we assume that the money fell from one of the inhabitants of Jerusalem. One might, however, object and say that perhaps the money fell from one of the pilgrims during the festivals (see below), but was not discovered until afterwards. Our Sages (Bava Metzia 26a) resolve that query by explaining that since - as a precaution, to remove dead lizards or other objects that impart ritual impurity - the streets of Jerusalem are swept every day, we can assume that any money lost on the festivals would already have been discovered and these are ordinary funds. If a shard upon which was written ma'aser,29"Tithes," i.e., the second tithe, for it is the only money of the tithes that may not be used in an ordinary manner. it is considered as the second tithe.30We do not suspect that perhaps the person was carrying ordinary money and the shard from a container in which he had once stored money from the second tithe [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:9)].When does the above apply? During the majority of the days of the year. On the pilgrimage festivals, by contrast, all [the money found] is considered as from the second tithe.31For then the majority of people in Jerusalem are pilgrims. They bring the money from the second tithes that they collected throughout the year to purchase food in Jerusalem. Thus at that time, most of the money circulating in Jerusalem is from the second tithe.
Money which is found in front of a seller of livestock in Jerusalem is always32I.e., not only during the pilgrimage festivals, but throughout the year. considered as from the second tithe. We operate under the assumption that the majority of the clients are bringing money from the second tithe and using it to purchase animals.33Animals could be purchased with the funds from the second tithe and this indeed was the practice of the majority of the pilgrims [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:4)]. Even during the remainder of the year, there were some pilgrims who came to Jerusalem and they were the majority of the purchasers of animals for slaughter. [Money] which is found on the Temple Mount is always considered as ordinary funds. We operate under the assumption that it came from the Temple treasury and the treasurers had already transferred its holiness to an animal.34People were not allowed to bring money to the Temple Mount (Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 7:2). Hence it is most likely that the money found there came from the Temple treasury. Now the priests would not take the money from the Temple treasury until they transferred its holiness to an animal. Hence we can assume that the holiness of the money had already been transferred and the status of the money found was ordinary [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Shekalim 7:2)].
[The following rules apply when] money is found in a chest that had been used for both ordinary produce and the second tithe. If the majority of the people who placed money [in the chest placed money] from the second tithe, the money is considered as from the second tithe. If the majority placed ordinary money, the money is considered as ordinary money.35The Kessef Mishneh notes that this situation is discussed in greater detail in Pesachim 7a and questions why the Rambam does not cite all the particulars mentioned there. If the ratio is half and half, the money is considered as ordinary money.36The Ra'avad states that we should rule stringently and consider the majority as from the second tithe. The Radbaz also suggests that they should be considered as from the second tithe and redeemed for other money.
When one find produce between produce of the second tithe and produce that is terumah, it should be included among the type to which it is closest.37See parallels in Hilchot Shekalim 3:15; Hilchot Gezeilah ViAveidah 15:18. If it is equidistant [from both], it should be eaten according to the stringencies that apply to both. Thus it is forbidden to non-priests; one must wash his hands [before partaking of it],38As required by Hilchot Terumah 11:7. and must wait until sunset [on the day of one's purification before partaking of it]39See ibid. 7:2. like terumah. [Similarly,] it is forbidden to one in an acute state of mourning40See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. and must be brought [to Jerusalem] as required of the second tithe.Similar principles apply with regard to coins that are found between ordinary coins and coins from the second tithe.
When produce that is from the second tithe of demai and produce that is definitely from the second tithe are mixed together, [the mixture] must be eaten according to the more stringent requirements.41The Radbaz states that this is also speaking about a situation where the mixed produce is equidistant from the other two. Chasdei David emphasizes that the Rambam does not say "according to the stringencies that apply to both," because there are no stringencies in the laws applying to the second tithe of demai over produce that is definitely from the second tithe. The stringencies applying to produce that is definitely from the second tithe are mentioned in Chapter 3, Halachot 8-9, Chapter 5, Halachah 4, and Chapter 11, Halachah 8.
When produce from the second tithe becomes mixed with ordinary produce, [the mixture] should be eaten in a state of ritual purity in Jerusalem or the second tithe should be redeemed. Therefore if such a mixture takes place in Jerusalem,42Where it is forbidden to redeem produce from the second tithe (Chapter 2, Halachah 8). even the smallest amount of the same species43Our translation differs from the standard published text of the Mishneh Torah and is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings. Note the Kessef Mishneh which offers an alternative explanation.See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:12 which states that the stringency governing an entity that can be permitted applies only to mixtures of the same species. becomes forbidden [to be eaten as ordinary produce]. Since the produce is in Jerusalem, it is considered as an entity that can be permitted44Therefore, the produce of the second tithe is not nullified regardless of the amount of ordinary progress present. Therefore, since the mixture is located in Jerusalem, no prohibition will be violated in its consumption, provided – as the Rambam continues – the entire mixture will be eaten in a state of ritual purity. and should be eaten in a state of ritual purity.
When a person sows produce from the second tithe after it had entered Jerusalem,45When it can no longer be redeemed. the produce which grows is considered as produce from the second tithe.46And must be treated with all the restrictions incumbent on such produce. This applies even if the seed from which the produce grows decomposes. If he sows it before it enters Jerusalem,47At which point it can still be redeemed. the produce which grows is considered as ordinary produce even if its seed does not decompose. [Preferably, however,] it should be redeemed at the time it was sown.48Preferably, one should redeem it so that one is not nullifying a prohibition by leaving it in the ground, for this should not be done as an initial preference (Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:12). After the fact, however, the prohibition is nullified.
When produce from the second tithe is mixed with other substances, it is considered as nullified when mixed with a simple majority.49As opposed to other prohibited substances that require 60 or more times the amount of the prohibited substance.To which produce from the second tithe does this apply? To produce that entered Jerusalem and then departed from there and afterwards, the walls of the city fell. Thus it is impossible to return it to [the holy city] and it is impossible to redeem since it has already entered that place. [This applies] even though [its fifth] is not worth a p'rutah.50In which instance, the obligation to separate the second tithe is merely Rabbinic in origin (see Chapter 2, Halachah 9, and notes). It is a substance that has no way to be permitted and is therefore nullified by a simple majority, as stated in Hilchot Issurei Ma'achalot.51Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:11 places restrictions on nullifying substances that can become permitted. Implied is that if a substance cannot become permitted, no such restrictions apply.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
Produce that was purchased with money from the second tithe1The rationale is that since the produce was redeemed once, it should not be redeemed a second time. should not be redeemed outside Jerusalem unless they contracted ritual impurity from a primary source of ritual impurity. Instead, they should be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.
This is the stringency of produce purchased with money from the second tithe over the produce of the second tithe itself. If, however, it contracted ritual impurity from a secondary source of ritual impurity,2Our translation follows authoritative manuscripts and early printings. The standard printed text of the Mishneh Torah adds the phrase "because of Rabbinic decree." it should be redeemed and eaten in Jerusalem.3The rules governing this produce have a double dimension of severity. Since according to Scriptural Law, this produce is ritually pure, our Sages were stringent and required it to be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there. Nevertheless, to support their decree of ritual impurity, they also required that it be redeemed (Kessef Mishneh).
Money from the second tithe should be used only to purchase food for humans4I.e., and not animal fodder. that grows from the earth or grows from the products of the earth, e.g., those entities explicitly mentioned in the Torah [Deuteronomy 14:26]: "Cattle, sheep,5I.e., these types of livestock do not grow from the earth, but they derive their nature by pasturing on the earth's products. wine, and strong drink."
For this reason, we do not purchase water, salt,6Moreover, even if water and salt are mixed together with produce, that produce should not be purchased with money from the second tithes (Radbaz). See Halachah 14 with regard to such purchases. truffles, and mushrooms7Truffles and mushrooms do not have roots and do not derive nurture from the earth. with money from the second tithes, because they are not products of the earth. Similarly, one should not purchase produce that is attached to the earth or produce that cannot be brought to Jerusalem,8I.e., it will spoil in the course of the journey. because this does not resemble cattle and sheep.9Which are detached entities that can make the journey to Jerusalem without being spoiled.
Honey, eggs, and milk are considered like cattle and sheep. Even though they are not products of the earth, they are the products of its products.10Eggs and milk are animal products and the animals receive their nurture from the earth and honey is actually the sap of flowers.
A mixture of water and grapes11In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:3), the Rambam explains that timed is made by mixing grape dregs with water and leaving it to turn into vinegar. that has not turned to vinegar should not be purchased with money from the second tithe, because it is like water. Once it turns to vinegar, it can be purchased [with these funds] like wine or strong drink.12For the water originally included in it is not considered significant. If one purchased it before it fermented and then it fermented, it is acquired by the second tithe.13The Radbaz explains that when the transaction was first made, it was invalid. Hence, the money remained holy. Afterwards, when the mixture turns into vinegar, the transaction is completed and the holiness of the money is transferred. Rashi (Chulin 25b) offers a different explanation.
When does the above14I.e., the restriction against purchasing a mixture of grape dregs and water with money from the second tithe. apply? When one mixed three units of water and received less than a fourth unit of the mixture. If, however, one mixed three units and received four,15And thus the water drew out a significant amount of grape juice from the dregs. the mixture is considered as diluted wine and may be purchased with money from the second tithe.
Buds from branches16In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Shvi'it 7:5; Uktzin 3:4), the Rambam explains that branches of shrubs that grow in vineyards are pickled in brine while they are still soft and then eaten. They are, nevertheless, not eaten by all people and the money from the second tithe may only be used to purchase food. and carob trees17This refers to branches of the carob tree, because the carobs themselves are considered as food, as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 3. before they become sweet may not be purchased [with money from the second tithe].18Because in this state, they are not fit to be eaten.The commentaries have noted that the Rambam's ruling in Hilchot Shabbat 18:6 implies the direct opposite: that before they become sweet, they are considered as food for humans and after they become sweet, they are considered as food for animals. This issue is discussed by the later commentaries. After they become sweet, they may be purchased [with those funds]. But luf,19A sub-species of the onion family. mustard, vetch, and other produce that is pickled may be purchased [with these funds], whether they have already become sweet or not.20Since these species are more commonly eaten, they are considered as food even though they are not yet fit to be to eaten. Date hearts21In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Uktzin 3:4), the Rambam defines this term as referring to the tip of the date palm which is like dried cheese and is eaten by people. may be purchased with money from the second tithe.
Safron may not be purchased [with these funds], for it serves only as a coloring. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations involving herbs that provide an aroma, color, or taste. Since these herbs are not [included] in foods to be eaten for their substance, only for their flavor, they should not be purchased with money from the second tithe. Therefore spices,22In his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:5), the Rambam gives cinnamon, nutmeg, spikenard, and other similar species as examples. pepper, costus, chiltit,23A sharp and pungent herb. safflower, and the like may not be purchased with money from the second tithes.
Anise, when used to flavor a cooked dish, should not be purchased with money from the second tithe. If it is used for a dip24This refers to a mixture of milk and bread crumbs referred to in the Talmud as kutach. or the like, in which instance, it is part of the food itself, it can be purchased with money from the second tithe.25See Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 1:7 which makes similar statements with regard to anise. If one mixed water and salt and put oil into it, it is considered as brine and may be purchased with money from the second tithe. The cost of the water and the salt should be included in the cost of the oil.26For in truth, only the oil can be purchased with the money of the second tithe. Nevertheless, the water and the salt are considered as subordinate to the oil and hence, can be included in its price.
One may not use money of Maaser Sheni to purchase produce that is terumah,27The Rambam uses a plural term for terumah, for he includes both the great terumah and terumat ma'aser in this prohibition. because by doing so, one limits the consumption of both [the terumah] and [the second tithe]. For terumah may only be eaten by priests on the evening [after they immersed themselves].28See Hilchot Terumah 7:2. Needless to say, it may also be eaten by priests who were ritually impure and who did not need to immerse themselves, but the Rambam is mentioning the aspect of the laws in which it differs from the second tithe, as he proceeds to state. It is permitted to those in the acute state of onein mourning and can be eaten in any place.29As indicated by the following clause, the second tithe differs from terumah in all these matters. The second tithe, by contrast, is permitted to non-priests and those who immersed themselves that day.30The second tithe must also be eaten in a state of ritual purity. Nevertheless, in contrast to terumah, it may be eaten directly after one immerses oneself in a mikveh. He need not wait until the evening. It is forbidden to one in the acute state of onein mourning and must be eaten in Jerusalem. Thus, [by purchasing terumah with such funds,] one restricts the consumption of the second tithe and the consumption of terumah.31And it is forbidden to restriction the consumption of sacred foods. See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashin 6:12 and Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 10:10.
A domesticated animal to be offered as a peace offering may be purchased32In Jerusalem. See Halachah 16 and Chapter 4, Halachah 6. from the money of the second tithes,33See the Commentary of Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura to Ma'aser Sheni 1:2 which states that the fundamental mitzvah is to use the money from the second tithe to purchase peace offerings. since peace offerings may be eaten by non-priests. At the outset, [pilgrims] would purchase animals with the money of the second tithe to partake of them as ordinary meat so that they would not be offered on the altar.34For by offering them on the altar, they would have to give certain portions of the meat to the priests. [Hence,] the court decreed that one could not use these funds to purchase a domesticated animal unless it was brought as a peace offering. One may, however, use these funds to purchase non-domesticated animals35E.g., deer. Our Sages did not include the purchase of these animals in their decree. or fowl, for these are unfit for peace offerings.
The produce of the Sabbatical year may not be purchased with money from the second tithes, because there is an obligation to destroy it, as will be explained.36See Hilchot Shemitah VeYoval 7:1 which explains that after the Sabbatical year, the produce that remains must be destroyed. Thus by purchasing this produce with funds from the second tithe, one would be reducing its use.
When a person purchases salt, produce that is still attached [to the ground], or produce that cannot be brought to Jerusalem,37All of these should not be purchased with money from the second tithe as stated in Halachah 4. they are not acquired by the second tithe38The holiness of the money of the second tithe is not transferred to them. even though the money is now considered as ordinary funds.39The Ra'avad challenges the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that the holiness of the second tithe remains associated with the money and the seller must return it to the purchaser. The Radbaz explains that the Rambam derives his ruling from the wording of the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:5). There the Mishnah has two clauses: one quoted in this halachah which states that that the items are not acquired and one quoted in the following halachah which states that the money should be returned. The variance in wording indicates that there is a difference in law. The Radbaz states, however, that the Rambam would agree that the holiness of the funds of the second tithe is not nullified entirely. Instead, the purchaser must eat an equivalent amount of food in Jerusalem keeping all the restrictions applying to the produce of the second tithe. See Halachah 17.
When a person inadvertently purchases produce outside of Jerusalem with money from the second tithe,40I.e., he purchased produce with money from the second tithe without knowing that he used such funds. the seller is compelled to return the money to the owner41The produce purchased does not receive the holiness of the second tithe, but instead, must be returned to the seller [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:5)]. and it is considered as the second tithe as it was originally.42Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura explains that since he made the purchase inadvertently, it is as if the transaction was conducted in error and hence it is nullified. If he makes the purchase intentionally,43I.e., knowing that he was using money from the second tithe. the produce he purchased must be taken to Jerusalem and eaten there.44The transaction is binding and the purchaser is compelled to treat the produce he purchased as produce of the second tithe. [In the age when] the Temple no longer exists,45See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. they should be put aside until they rot.46Since the transaction is binding, the produce receives that holiness and hence, may not be used for any other purpose.
Similarly, a domesticated animal47We are speaking about a kosher animal that does not have a blemish and hence is fit to be offered as a sacrifice. should not be purchased with money from the second tithe outside of Jerusalem. If one purchased it unknowingly, the money should be returned to its [owner]. If it was done intentionally, it should be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there. [In the age when] the Temple no longer exists, [the animal] and its hide should be buried.48When it dies. It is not killed before its time. Burying it prevents one from benefiting from it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:6)]. See also Chapter 8, Halachah 6; Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 19:11.
[The following laws apply when] one purchases servants, land, or an unkosher animal, whether intentionally or unintentionally,49The equation between transgressing intentionally and unintentionally represents a change of approach on the part of the Rambam. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:7), the Rambam states that if the transgression was intentional, in all instances, the purchaser should use an equivalent amount of money to buy food in Jerusalem. The sale is nullified only when the sale is made unintentionally. The Rambam's ruling here is based on Kiddushin 56b. [with money from the second tithe]. If the seller fled,50So that the money could not be returned and the sale nullified. [the purchaser] should [purchase food] with the amount of money he spent and eat it in Jerusalem under the restrictions applying to the second tithe. This is the general principle: If the seller fled or died, whenever one spent the money of the second tithe on matters other than food, drink, and daubs, he must partake of an equivalent [value of food in Jerusalem]. If the seller was present, the money should be returned to [the original owner].51And the sale nullified. Similarly, if a person brought burnt offerings, sin offerings, or guilt offerings from the money of the second tithe,52This is forbidden, because the animal - partially or entirely - is offered on the altar and/or eaten by the priests. Thus the money from the second tithe is not being used for its designated purpose. he must partake of an equivalent [value of food in Jerusalem].53For once the offerings were brought, the transaction cannot be nullified.
When a person [used money from the second tithe to] purchase a non-domesticated animal for a peace offering54This is unacceptable, because peace offerings may be brought only from domesticated animals. or a domesticated animal to be eaten as ordinary meat,55This is also unacceptable, because as stated in Halachah 12, our Sages forbade using money from the second tithe for such a purpose [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:4)]. it is as if he [used it to] purchase an ox for plowing and the animal is not designated as a peace offering.56Instead, the sale is nullified. If the animal was already slaughtered, the hide is considered as consecrated with the holiness of the second tithe and the proceeds from its sale must be used as the money of the second tithe. If he purchased a domesticated animal to be offered as a peace offering and it became blemished, the holiness of the second tithe leaves it. It should be redeemed57As is required when an animal designated as a peace offering becomes blemished in a manner that prevents it from being sacrificed. and the funds are not considered as money from the second tithe. Nevertheless, if he redeems it himself,58If, however, one redeems a sacrifice for someone else, a fifth need not be added, as stated in Hilchot Arachin 7:4. he must add a fifth of its value.59The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's wording, for he considers it obvious that a fifth must be added. The Radbaz explains that one might think a fifth is unnecessary based on the following reasoning: Since the animal is a peace offering, from the standpoint of the second tithe, it does not belong to him, because it is not his private property, but instead is consecrated. From the standpoint of the peace offering, it can be said that it does not belong to him, because it is the second tithe which is "the property of the Most High."Alternatively, the explanation of the Rambam's wording depends on a concept explained in Hilchot Arachin, loc. cit.: "[One is] obligated to add a fifth [when redeeming the article that was] consecrated originally, but one [need] not add a fifth [when redeeming an article] whose consecration was a derivative." A derivative means that it was consecrated in the process of redeeming another article (see ibid.:5).To apply those concepts to the question at hand: Since the consecration of the animal as a peace offering comes as part of the redemption of the money from the second tithe, one might think that there is no need to add a fifth. For that reason, the Rambam [based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 3:2)] emphasizes that in this instance, the additional fifth is necessary, because since the holiness of the second tithe was removed from it, it is as if it was consecrated initially and it is not considered as a derivative (Rambam LeAm)
When one consecrates money from the second tithe for [the purpose of purchasing] a peace offering, the consecration is not effective,60As mentioned in Halachah 12, one can - and according to many opinions, it is desirable - to purchase an animal to be sacrificed as a peace offering with money from the second tithe. Here, however, we are speaking about a situation where the person designates the money to be used for that purpose, but does not make the purpose as of yet. The Rambam is clarifying that the designation is not effective and the money may be used to purchase any other types of food. for the sanctity of the peace offering does not encompass [an entity already] sanctified to the second tithe. For the second tithe is the property of the Most High.61Chapter 3, Halachah 17. I.e., when a person consecrates his own money for a peace offering, the consecration is effective, because the money belongs to him and he has the authority to consecrate it. Money from the second tithe, by contrast, does not belong to him. Hence, it cannot be consecrated as a peace offering. Needless to say, this applies if he consecrates the produce of the second tithe itself for the purpose of purchasing] a peace offering, the consecration is not effective.
[The following laws apply when a person] partakes of entities consecrated to the second tithe as ordinary produce [outside of Jerusalem], even intentionally. If he partook of the produce from the second tithe itself, he should cry out to heaven.62I.e., he should cry out to G‑d in repentance. He, however, has no other way of atoning for his conduct, because he has eaten the produce upon which the holiness of the second tithe rested.Our text follows manuscript versions of the Mishneh Torah and the versions suggested by the Ra'avad, the Radbaz, and the Kessef Mishneh. The standard printed text follows a different version. If he [used] money from the second tithe [to purchase other food that] he ate, the money should be returned to its [owner]63Since the money exists, the holiness from the second tithe has not departed from it. Hence, if it is returned to the owner or its holiness transferred by the owner purchasing other food with its value, the owner fulfills his obligation. and he should bring them to Jerusalem and partake of them there. Alternatively, if the money cannot be returned, he should [purchase food] with the amount of money he spent and eat it in Jerusalem.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
When a person [used money from the second tithe to] purchase a domesticated animal for a peace offering or a non-domesticated animal for ordinary meat from a person who is not a merchant and is not precise, the hide is considered as ordinary property.1I.e., the sacred quality of the second tithe no longer applies to it. It is as if the seller gave it to him as a present.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 1:3), the Rambam explains that when a seller is not meticulous in his business dealings and thinks that he sold only the meat and does not think about the hide, none of the money of the second tithe was used for the hide. Hence, the hide is considered as ordinary property. This applies even if the value of the hide is greater than the value of the meat. When, by contrast, a person purchases an animal from a merchant, the hide is not considered as ordinary property.2For a merchant is careful about getting a full price for his merchandise and will make sure to include the value of the hide in the price. Since the person will be using the money from the second tithe for the purchase, that purchase will also encompass the hide. Hence the hide is considered as the servants and land mentioned in Chapter 7, Halachah 17, and one must eat an equivalent amount of food in Jerusalem. Although ordinarily, one may not purchase non-food items with money from the second tithe, in this instance, an exception is made, because the meat cannot be purchased without the hide. See Radbaz.
Similar laws apply when a person purchases jugs of wine that are sealed.3But not while they are open as the Rambam continues stating. In a place where it is customary for these jugs to be sold while sealed from a person who is not a merchant, the jugs are considered as ordinary property.4I.e., like the sale of the hides mentioned in the previous halachah, when an ordinary person buys or sells wine, he does not take the value of the jugs into consideration. For the container is considered as subservient to the wine it contains. Indeed, the flavor of the wine is somewhat dependent on its container. Accordingly, the two are considered as a single entity. (See Eruvin 27b which derives this concept through Biblical exegesis.) Hence, the money of the second tithe is not used for the containers. Therefore the seller must open the tops of the jugs so that they will not become ordinary property.5By opening the jugs, the seller indicates that he desires to consider the jugs independently [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 3:13)]. By opening a jug, the seller indicates that he wants the purchaser to pour it into his own containers. If the seller wishes to be stringent with himself and sell the wine in exact measure, the container is considered ordinary property.6Since he is selling the wine at an exact fee per measure, he is not including the price of the jug in the price of the wine (Kessef Mishneh).
If he purchased [the jugs of wine] while they were open7As mentioned above, opening the container is an indication that the container should be considered as an independent entity. or sealed in a place where it is customary to sell them open8Since it is customary in this place to sell the containers open, even if one sells them while sealed, he is considered to have followed the general practice of considering the container as a separate entity. or he purchased them from a merchant who is precise in his sale,9Following the same reasoning as in Halachah 1. the jugs are not considered as ordinary property. If a person purchases baskets of figs and grapes together with their container,10I.e., the basket. the container is not considered as ordinary property.11For the fruit is sold independently of the baskets (Radbaz).
If a person purchases nuts, almonds, or the like, the shells are considered as ordinary property.12For they are obviously secondary to the fruit within them. Even a merchant is not concerned about them. Hence, one may benefit from them without worrying about purchasing their worth in food to be eaten in Jerusalem. If a person purchases a frond of dates,13The dates together with the branches from which they are suspended. the frond is considered as ordinary property.14Since the dates are crushed, the container is obviously subservient to them, for they could not be sold without it. Hence, it is not considered as a separate entity.[The following rules apply if] one purchases containers of dates. If they are pressed, the containers are considered as ordinary property.15For the containers are considered as subservient to the dates. If not, they are not considered as ordinary property.
When a person has wine16As opposed to other liquids as indicated by the conclusion of the halachah. from the second tithe and he lends17We are speaking about a person using his own jugs. Nevertheless, the term "lends" is used because the person desires to retain possession of the jugs as ordinary property. He is merely "lending" them temporarily to be used for the second tithe. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 3:12), the Rambam writes that the person must make an explicit statement of the above intent. his jugs for that [wine from] the second tithe, the second tithe does not acquire the jugs, even though he seals them.[The following laws apply if] he stored the wine in them without making any statement:18I.e., he stored wine from which the second tithe had not been separated in jugs and then desired to set aside several jugs as the second tithe. This reflects a reversal of the Rambam's understanding in his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). The Radbaz explains, however, that the two rulings are not contradictory. If he designated [certain jugs] as the second tithe before he sealed their openings, the second tithe does not acquire the jugs.19Thus after the wine is poured out from them, he may use the jugs as ordinary property, without any further measures. If he designated [the jugs] as the second tithe after he sealed their openings, the second tithe acquires the jugs.20For the wine and the container have an integral relationship as mentioned above. Indeed, our Sages compare it to separating wine in its jug to separating fruit in its peal. Thus if the value of the wine is transferred to money, the value of the jugs must also be included (Radbaz). Nevertheless, if one drinks the wine, the jug is no longer considered as consecrated to the second tithe and may be used for other purposes (Rambam LeAm). If [the owner] stored a revi'it21A measure of 86 or 150 cc depending on which Rabbinic authority one follows. of ordinary wine in the jug,22By putting ordinary wine in the jug, he indicates that he does not desire that the jug be acquired by the second tithe. or put oil, vinegar, brine,23I.e., brine that was purchased with money from the second tithe. or honey from the second tithe without making any statement - whether before or after he sealed [the jugs] - the second tithe does not acquire the jugs.24For in contrast to wine and its containers, the containers of these liquids are not necessary for the liquid itself and are always considered as separate from them.
When a deer that was purchased with money from the second tithe dies, it should be buried with its hide.25Since the animal was never eaten, the hide is not considered as a separate entity. Thus since it and the animal are consecrated with the holiness of the second tithe, they must be buried. The deer may not be redeemed, because "we do not redeem consecrated entities in order to use their meat to feed dogs [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 3:11); Hilchot Issurei Mizbeiach 2:10]. Rabbi Akiva Eiger questions this ruling, citing sources which indicate that in similar circumstances, the hide can be considered a separate entity and should be redeemed. If it was purchased while alive and slaughtered and then it became impure, it should be redeemed like other produce that became impure.26See Chapter 2, Halachah 8; Chapter 7, Halachah 1. Needless to say, this same law applies when a person purchases meat and later that meat becomes impure (Radbaz, based on the above mishnah).[The following laws apply when a person] sets aside a dinar of money of the second tithe to purchase food against until he has exhausted its value and it becomes ordinary funds27In other words, the person set aside money that was consecrated from the second tithe. Nevertheless, instead of using that money, used ordinary money with the intent that the holiness associated with the second tithe is transferred to the ordinary money as that money was spent to purchase food. [and then the value of the coinage changes. For example,] the rate of exchange for a dinar was 20 me'ah.28The Rambam is obviously speaking in hyperbole. The ordinary exchange rate of a dinar is six me'ah (Hilchot Eruvin 1:12). The person consumed ten me'ah's worth of food and then the value of the latter coinage decreased. Afterwards, the rate of exchange of a dinar was 40 me'ah. The person must spend another 20 me'ah on food before [the dinar] is considered as ordinary money.29I.e., he must use half a dinar for food. Now, however, the value of that half a dinar in me'ah has doubled. The rationale is that the value of the coinage from the second tithe is calculated at the time and place it is transferred.If the value of a me'ah increased and the rate of exchange for a dinar was ten me'ah, he must spend another five me'ah on food. Afterwards, [the dinar] is considered ordinary money.30Again, he is using half a dinar, but now the value of that half a dinar in me'ah has been halved.
When a person purchases produce with a sela of money from the second tithe and draws the produce into his domain, but did not pay for it before the value of the produce increased and it became worth two selaim, he is required to pay only a sela for the [produce]. [This is derived from the phrase]:31The Rambam's wording has attracted the attention of the commentaries who note that there is no Biblical verse which uses that exact wording. See Leviticus 27:19 which uses somewhat similar expressions. "And he paid the money and it was acquired by him." [Implied is that the produce] is acquired by paying money.32The Rambam's wording has attracted the attention of the commentaries. Seemingly, the reason for the Rambam's ruling is that once the purchaser performed meshichah, he acquired the produce. Hence, when he pays for it, he pays the price at the time of its acquisition. This is not implied by the Rambam's wording. Indeed, as the Ra'avad emphasizes, the Rambam's wording implies the very opposite. The profit is realized by the second tithe.33I.e.., he must eat the entire amount of produce according to the stringencies required of produce of the second tithe. One might think that the purchaser would profit from the rise of the value of the produce, i.e., he could eat half of it as the second tithe and use the other half as his private property. Hence, the Rambam clarifies that this is not so. The Radbaz explains the Rambam's wording, explaining that the transfer of the holiness does not take place until he pays the money, but that afterwards, the produce is acquired by the second tithe according to its price at the time of acquisition.
If he drew the produce into his possession when it was worth two selaim, but did not pay for it until the value of the produce decreased and it was worth only a sela, he should pay only one sela for them from the money of the second tithe. He must add another sela from ordinary funds and give it to the seller.34I.e., since he drew the produce into his possession when it was worth two selaim, he must pay that amount to the seller. Nevertheless, he may not pay that entire amount from the money of the second tithe, because now the produce is not worth that amount. Indeed, if the purchaser would give the seller the second sela from the money of the second tithe, the holiness of that money would not be transferred to the produce and the seller would be obligated to use it to purchase food which he would eat according to the stringencies of the second tithe. If the seller was a common person, it is permitted for him to give him a second sela from money from the second tithe of demai.35In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:6), the Rambam explains the rationale for this ruling. Since we are speaking about demai, there is only a question if there is a prohibition involved. Accordingly, since a common person is more lax in his observance and will violate even more severe prohibitions, we assume that he is not precise in his observance of demai. Hence, it can be given to him. The commentaries question that explanation, for even though he is not careful in his observance, we should not be responsible for him possibly performing a transgression. See Halachah 13 where this concept is also mentioned.If [the purchaser] gave the seller a sela of money from the second tithe, but did not draw the produce into his possession until they were worth two [selaim], what he redeemed is redeemed36I.e., the entire amount of produce is considered as produce of the second tithe, because as soon as the money from the second tithe is paid, its holiness is transferred to the produce. and there is a judgment between the two of them.37I.e., were it ordinary produce, the law would be that the seller should keep his word and complete the transaction. Nevertheless, since according to Rabbinic Law, a transaction is not completed with the payment of money, but rather when the purchaser draws the object into his possession, the purchaser does have the option of retracting. If he does so, however, he must be given the adjuration mi shepara (Hilchot Mechirah 7:1). Should the seller choose that option and retract entirely, he must treat the produce in his possession as produce of the second tithe. If he still wants to carry out the sale at one sela, he must give the purchaser back a sela. The purchaser must consider all the produce as the second tithe, but the sela he was given is ordinary money.
If [the purchaser] gave the seller two selaim of money from the second tithe, but did not draw the produce into his possession until its worth decreased to a sela, what he redeemed is redeemed,38I.e., the entire amount of produce is considered as produce of the second tithe, because as soon as the money from the second tithe is paid, its holiness is transferred to the produce. and the attribute of judgment must be exercised between them.39I.e., the holiness of the second tithe is transferred to the produce. Nevertheless, from the financial point of view, the purchaser has the option of accepting the adjuration mi shepara and retracting from the transaction. If he takes that option, the seller must return the two selaim to him and from that time on, he may treat them as ordinary money. And the seller must treat the produce as produce of the second tithe. [The rationale for these laws is that] the redemption40The exchange of money for produce or vice versa. of the second tithe is like drawing it into possession.41I.e., just as a business transaction is completed when the purchaser draws it into his possession, the transfer of the holiness of the second tithe is completed upon the payment of money.
If a person possessed ordinary produce in Jerusalem and money from the second tithe outside of Jerusalem, he may say: "The holiness of that money is transferred to this produce," and partake of them there in a state of ritual purity. The money then becomes ordinary funds in its location.42As the Rambam states at the conclusion of the following halachah, the money and the produce do not have to be in the same place when the holiness of one is transferred to the other.
If one had money from the second tithe in Jerusalem and produce outside of Jerusalem, he may say: "The holiness of this money is transferred to that produce." The money then becomes ordinary money and the produce must be brought to Jerusalem and eaten there.43In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:4), the Rambam mentions another general principle that can be derived from this law: the holiness of money in the second tithe can be transferred even when the money is in Jerusalem. As mentioned above, the holiness of produce from the second tithe may not be transferred when that produce is in Jerusalem. For it is not necessary that the money and the produce be in the same place when the holiness of one is transferred to the other.
When a person possesses money from the second tithe in Jerusalem which he needs [for other purposes]44I.e., for purposes other than food, drink, or smearing. and a colleague possesses ordinary produce that he desires to eat, he should tell his colleague: "The holiness of this money is transferred to your produce." Thus that produce is considered as purchased with the money of the second tithe. The colleague should then partake of them in a state of ritual purity. Thus he does not lose anything and [his] money becomes as ordinary funds.45Which he may use at will, in Jerusalem or outside that holy city.
When does the above apply? When his friend who owns the produce is a chavair.46A person who is precise in the observance of the laws of the agricultural laws and the laws of ritual purity. See Hilchot Ma'aser, ch. 10. For produce that is definitely of the second tithe may be given only to a chavair.47For this produce must be eaten in a state of ritual purity and a common person is not precise in his observance of those laws. See Chapter 3, Halachot 8-9. Therefore if the produce was [the second tithe of] demai, he may make such a stipulation with a common person as well.48As mentioned in the notes to Halachah 8, since the obligation above is only Rabbinic in origin, we allow it to be given to a common person even if he might be lax in its observance.It is permitted to transfer the holiness of produce from the second tithe to produce or money belonging to a common person. We are not concerned that perhaps they are from the second tithe.49Since the common person is not careful in his observance of the second tithe, one might think that he already separated it from his produce, but is considering it as ordinary produce regardless. Were that the case, one could not transfer the holiness of other produce from the second tithe to it [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (T'vul Yom 4:5)].The Ra'avad cites the Tosefta (Ma'aser Sheni 4:9) which places certain limitations on making such a transfer. The Radbaz explains that it is possible that these limitations were not accepted as halachah.
[The following laws apply when a person] sets aside a dinar from the second tithe to [which to transfer the holiness of food that] he eats continuously. If he proceeded to do so to the extent that less than a p'rutah's worth [of its value] remained [consecrated],50I.e., he continued using that coin to redeem produce from the second tithe until all but less than a p'rutah's worth of the coins value had been used to redeem produce. the coin is considered as ordinary money.51And may be used for purposes other than the purchase of food and drink. The rationale is that anything less than a p'rutah's worth of value is not financially significant [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 4:8)].When does the above apply? With regard to [the second tithe of] demai.52Since the obligation is only of Rabbinic origin, we are more lenient. With regard to produce that is definitely of the second tithe, [the coin] is not considered as ordinary money until less than a p'rutah's worth [of its value] remained [consecrated] after a fifth was added to it, e.g., less than four fifths of a p'rutah's worth [of its value] remain.53In that way, when the fifth (one fifth of the new total) is added, the worth of the entire amount will be less than a p'rutah (ibid.).
[The following laws apply when people who are] ritually impure and others who are ritually pure were eating together in Jerusalem and those who were ritually pure desired to [use their money from] the second tithe for food. They should place a sela from the second tithe aside and say: "The holiness of this sela is transferred to everything which those who are ritually pure eat."54The Ra'avad [based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 2:10)] states that we are speaking about a situation where the person says: "When the person eats or drinks, what he eats or drinks will be retroactively considered as the second tithe from the present time." It is necessary to make this qualification, because otherwise, at the time he eats or drinks, he will be partaking of ordinary food and the consecration would not take effect until the object no longer exists.The Ra'avad also states that this ruling depends on the principle of bereirah, that retroactively the status of an object can be changed. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that there is somewhat of a difficulty in ascribing such a position to the Rambam, for the Rambam maintains that in questions of Scriptural Law, the principle of bereirah does not apply. The Radbaz explains that since there is no prohibition involved, merely the question of when the transfer of holiness takes effect, all authorities agree that the principle of bereirah applies. The sela is then considered as ordinary property, for they eat and drank its value in a state of ritual purity. [This applies] provided the people who are impure do not touch the food55In certain instances, they may, however, touch the container in which the food is stored. See Ma'aser Sheni 2:10 and the Rambam's commentary for more details.The commentaries suggest that the restrictions mentioned in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 9:21 should also be observed. and thus cause it to contract impurity.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
The produce of the fourth year (neta reva'i)1I.e., the fourth year of a tree's growth. This has nothing to do with the seven year agricultural cycle. This mitzvah applies to all trees, not only vines. See Berachot 35a and commentaries. is holy, as [Leviticus 19:24] states: "And in its fourth year, all of its produce shall be holy, consecrated unto God." The law applying to it is that it must be eaten in Jerusalem by its owners2Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 119) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 247) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. in the same way as the second tithe.3Because of this connection, the Rambam includes the laws pertaining to this mitzvah in this section of the Mishneh Torah. There is, however, a difference between neta reva'i and the second tithe. The second tithe must be separated by man and then it is deemed holy. Neta reva'i, by contrast, is inherently holy. There is no need for any activity on man's part. Just as the laws of the second tithe do not apply in Syria,4See Chapter 2, Halachah 1. See Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:15. so too, the laws of neta reva'i do not apply in Syria.5Needless to say according to the Rambam, these laws do not apply in the Diaspora. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:7) mentions the Rambam's ruling only as a minority opinion. That text rules according to Rabbenu Yonah who maintains that the mitzvah applies in the Diaspora as well as in Eretz Yisrael. The Rama adds a third view: that neta reva'i must be observed with regard to grapes, but not with regard to any other type of produce.With regard to neta reva'i, [Numbers 5:10] states: "A person's consecrated property shall be his."6I.e., he may keep it as his own without giving it to anyone. For there is no other consecrated property about which the Torah does not inform to whom it should be given with the exception of neta reva'i.7I.e., in general, the Torah instructs to have consecrated articles offered on the altar or given to a priest. The Rambam is speaking here in broad terms, for in particular - as he mentions in his statements concerning neta reva'i in Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit.,, quoting the Sifri, there are other consecrated articles, e.g., the second tithe, the tithe of domesticated animals, and the peace, thanksgiving, and Paschal sacrifices, which remain the private property of the owner.
A person who desires to redeem neta reva'i should redeem it in the same manner as which he redeems the produce of the second tithe.8See Chapter 5 above. See also Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:17 for more particulars concerning this redemption. If he redeems it for his own self, he must add a fifth [to its value].9I.e., in general, the Torah instructs to have consecrated articles offered on the altar or given to a priest. The Rambam is speaking here in broad terms, for in particular - as he mentions in his statements concerning neta reva'i in Sefer HaMitzvot, loc. cit.,, quoting the Sifri, there are other consecrated articles, e.g., the second tithe, the tithe of domesticated animals, and the peace, thanksgiving, and Paschal sacrifices, which remain the private property of the owner. It may not be redeemed until it reaches the "phase of tithing,"10I.e., when the produce reaches at least a third of its growth. See Hilchot Ma'aser 2:3-5. as [implied by Leviticus 19:25]: "To increase its produce for you," [i.e., these laws do not apply] until [the crops] have become produce.11I.e., developed to a state where the produce itself has begun to form.[Neta reva'i] may not be redeemed while it is attached [to the ground],12The Kessef Mishneh quotes a responsa of the Ramban who states that theoretically, there are grounds to say that neta reva'i can be redeemed even while it is attached to the ground. Certainly, in the present age, when the produce need not be redeemed for its full worth, it can be redeemed while attached. as is the law with regard to the second tithe. And it is the property of the Most High, as is the second tithe.13See Chapter 3, Halachah 17. Therefore, it cannot be acquired when given as a present14The Kessef Mishneh quotes a responsa of the Ramban who states that theoretically, there are grounds to say that neta reva'i can be redeemed even while it is attached to the ground. Certainly, in the present age, when the produce need not be redeemed for its full worth, it can be redeemed while attached. unless it was given when it was not yet ripe.15The Rambam's ruling is somewhat difficult to accept, because unripened fruit has still reached one third of its growth. The Tzafnat Paneach (gloss to Hilchot Arachin 6:19) explains that with regard to unripened fruit, the prohibition against using it for mundane purposes takes effect immediately, but it is not endowed with its holiness until it is ready to be eaten.With regard to other matters, e.g., eating, drinking, and redemption, the laws that apply to it are those applying to the second tithe.
When a person redeems a vineyard in its fourth year of growth, he may redeem it as grapes or he may redeem it as wine. Similarly, olives [may be redeemed as fruit or as oil].16For wine and oil are considered as ordinary uses of grapes and olives. Indeed, when the Torah refers to the obligation to tithe these fruits, it refers to them as wine and oil {the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumah 11:3)}. Other fruits, by contrast, may only be redeemed in their natural state.17For this is not the ordinary manner in which they are used. See Hilchot Terumah 11:2.
The laws of shichachah, pe'ah, peret, and ollelot do not apply to a vineyard that is in its fourth year.18These are different types of presents given to the poor from one's fields, as described in Hilchot Matanot Aniyim. These requirements do not apply in a vineyard of the fourth year, because that produce does not belong to one individually, but instead, is "the property of the Most High" [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 5:3)]. Nor should terumah and the tithes be separated from it, as they are not separated from the second tithe.19I.e., if one separated the second tithe before separating terumah and the first tithe, it is not necessary to separate terumah and the first tithe from the produce separated as the second tithe. Instead, it should be brought to Jerusalem in its entirety or redeemed and the money taken to Jerusalem [and used for food there] like the second tithe.
Our Sages ordained that grapes from a vineyard in its fourth year from a radius of a one-day journey from Jerusalem should be brought there to embellish the marketplaces of Jerusalem with fruit.20The Jerusalem Talmud explains that in the time of the Temple, the people would prepare wine in a state of ritual purity. Hence, there were few grapes offered for sale in the marketplaces of the holy city. To offset that difficulty, our Sages ordained this practice.The Rambam LeAm raises a question: It is forbidden to sell produce of the second tithe (Chapter 3, Halachah 17). Seemingly, this restriction should also apply to neta reva'i. How then should people bring their grapes to Jerusalem and sell them to merchants there who will resell them to people at large? That text explains that first the fruit should be redeemed and then sold after it was redeemed. Alternatively, there are authorities who explain that since each person will eat his grapes from the fourth year, there will be a surplus of fruit in the holy city. After the Temple was destroyed, it may be redeemed even directly outside the city's wall.21But not within the city itself. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:2), the Rambam explains that the leniency was granted because, since the city is in the hands of the gentiles, there is no point in having its marketplaces embellished. Other types of produce22Since other types of fruits were not used for wine, there was not a scarcity of them in Jerusalem's marketplaces. may be redeemed even directly outside the city's wall even during the time the Temple was standing.
How is neta reva'i redeemed? One should evaluate [the size of] a basket [of fruit] through the agency of three men who estimate how much produce would a person [want] for a sela that he would pay for this fruit when it is considered that [in addition] he would have to pay the cost of watchmen, donkey-drivers,23To transport the produce. and workers. After the rate is established, he should place down the money and say: "The holiness of all [the produce] gathered from this [orchard] is transferred to this money," estimating how many baskets worth a sela [the orchard] contains.In the Sabbatical year,24The seventh year of the agricultural cycle in Eretz Yisrael. As obvious from the laws that follow, the reckoning of the years for neta reva'i continues despite that cycle. he should redeem [the produce of the orchard] for its worth. For in that year, there are no watchmen or workers [to pay].25For it is forbidden to work the land or guard one's field that year [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.:5)]. If [the orchard] was declared ownerless,26This applies in other years, not the Sabbatical year. all that is necessary to deduct is the wages for gathering it.27Like the Sabbatical year, he need not pay for guards, he may, however, have to pay for workers to harvest the produce. This does not apply in the Sabbatical year. Then each person gathers for himself (ibid.).
When a person had [an orchard that was in] its fourth year of growth in the Sabbatical year when everyone is allowed equal access to it, he must mark it with mounds of earth so that [those who take the produce] will recognize [its sacred quality] and not partake of it until they redeem it.28I.e., anyone is allowed to take the produce which grows in the Sabbatical year. Hence, we are afraid that an outsider will unwittingly come and take it and partake of it without redeeming it. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 5:1; based on Bava Kama 69a), the Rambam explains that it is necessary to make such provisions in the Sabbatical year alone. In an ordinary year, one need not do so, because it is forbidden to take produce from another person's field. Why should he? He knows the status of his own fruit and he need not make any provisions so that a thief will not transgress the prohibition against partaking of this produce. If [the produce is] within the [three] orlah years,29I.e., the first three years if its growth when it is forbidden to partake of it entirely. it should be marked with baked clay30Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). so that [people] will shun it. [We use clay instead of mounds of earth], lest the latter crumble.31And the sign not be noticed. [The rationale is that] the prohibition of orlah is more severe, because benefit from it is forbidden.32See Chapter 10, Halachah 2, Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 10:10. There is no prohibition against benefiting from fruits of the fourth year, by contrast.Those who are meticulous in their observance of the Torah's prohibitions33Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). would set aside money in the Sabbatical year and say: "The holiness of everything harvested from these fruits of the fourth year is transferred to this money."34This will remove any possibility of a person transgressing, for as the produce is harvested, its holiness will be transferred to the money. [The redemption must be carried out in this fashion,]35I.e., there is a problem with redeeming the produce in this manner, because redeeming the produce in this manner, resembles the concept of bereirah, i.e., the money is set aside at the outset and the consecration takes effect only retroactively. According to the Rambam, bereirah is not effective in questions involving Scriptural Law. In truth, however, in this instance, we are not relying on bereirah, because the money is set aside and the redemption does not take place until the produce is harvested (Radbaz).In addition, there is a further problem. When the reaper takes the produce, it is no longer in the owner's possession, and hence, one might think that it is not in his power to redeem it (see the Responsa of the Ramban, quoted by the Kessef Mishneh). For these reasons, it is not fully desirable to redeem the produce in this manner, but there is no real alternative as the Rambam continues to explain. because it is forbidden to redeem [the produce] while it is attached to the ground, as explained.36See Halachah 2.
The first of Tishrei37I.e., Rosh HaShanah. See the following halachah with regard to the consideration given to the 15th of Shvat (Tu BeShvat) which is "the New Year of the Trees." is the beginning of the year with regard to the reckoning of orlah and neta reva'i.When do we begin counting the year with regard to these prohibitions? From the time the trees are planted. [A year does not have to be] from Rosh HaShanah to Rosh HaShanah. Instead, 30 days within a year are considered a year.38I.e., we count neither from the "birthday" of each tree, nor from Rosh HaShanah. Rather the first year is considered as from the time the tree is planted and then each year, we begin count the coming years from Rosh HaShanah.The concept that 30 days can be considered as a year is relevant in other halachic contexts. See Hilchot Ishut 2:4; Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot 1:14. [This applies] provided the planting takes root before these thirty days [begin]. How long does it take? Generally, the time for all trees to take root is two weeks.
Thus when a person plants a tree 44 days before Rosh HaShanah, it is considered as if the tree had been planted for an entire year.39Note the parallel in Hilchot Shemitah 3:11. Nevertheless, due to the prohibition of orlah, in the fourth year, the fruit from this planting is not permitted until the fifteenth of Shvat, which is "the New Year of the Trees."40Similarly, in the fifth year, until Tu BeShvat, the produce is considered as neta reva'i.
What is implied? When a person plants a fruit tree on the fifteenth of Av41Thus there are 44 complete days before Rosh HaShanah. The same laws apply to any tree planted between Tu BeShvat and that date. of the tenth year in the Jubilee cycle, it is considered as being orlah until the fifteenth of Shvat of the thirteenth year of the Jubilee cycle. Whatever fruit produced42I.e., it reached the "phase of tithing," one third of its growth. See Chapter 1, Halachah 2; Hilchot Shemitah 4:9. See also Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:4). by the tree during this time is orlah, even though it did not ripen until several days43Or weeks. after [that date]. From the fifteenth of Shvat from the thirteenth year of the Jubilee cycle until the fifteenth of Shvat of the fourteenth year, the produce is neta reva'i. Whatever fruit produced during this time is neta reva'i and must be redeemed.44Or taken to Jerusalem. If the year is declared a leap year, [the produce grown in] the extra month is considered as orlah or neta reva'i.45Since the Torah speaks in terms of years and does not mention twelve months, all of the produce that grows during the year is included in the prohibition (Radbaz).
If it was planted on the sixteenth of Av46This holds true for any tree planted between the 16th of Av and Rosh HaShanah. in the tenth year, the tenth year is not reckoned for it. Instead, it is orlah throughout the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth years. And it is neta reva'i from Rosh HaShanah47I.e., the reckoning is made from Rosh HaShanah, not from the fifteenth of Shvat. Although there are Rishonim who maintain that in this instance as well, we should reckon from the fifteenth of Shvat, the Ra'avad cites proof from the Jerusalem Talmud (Rosh HaShanah 1:2) to support the Rambam's view. of the fourteenth year until its conclusion.
If one planted the tree between the first of Tishrei and the fifteenth of Shvat, he should count three years from day to day for orlah and [four years] from day to day for neta reva'i.48Despite the Ra'avad's interpretation that the years should be counted from Tu BeShvat, Rav Yosef Corcus and the Kessef Mishneh interpret the Rambam's words simply: We count three years from the day it was planted (or perhaps two weeks later, to allow for rooting). Thus if a tree was planted on the 28th of Tishrei, three years later on the 28th of Tishrei, its fruit is permitted as neta reva'i. I have seen Geonim who have a different approach49The Kessef Mishneh interprets this as referring to the approach of the Halachot Gedolot (as quoted by Tosafot, Rosh HaShanah 10a), Rabbenu Shimshon (Ma'aser Sheni 5:1), and Rabbenu Asher (at the conclusion of his Hilchot Orlah). regarding the reckoning of orlah and neta reva'i. It is not appropriate to elaborate in rebuttal of them. Theirs is a scholarly error and we have already outlined the true path.
Leaves, blossoms, sap, and fruit buds,50Our definition of all these terms is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:7). are permitted in [the years of] orlah and neta reva'i.51For the prohibition is against partaking of fruit and these are not fruit (ibid.). Grapes that were devastated by the west wind and ruined, grape seeds, grape peels, water mixed with grape dregs, the peels of pomegranates, their flowers, the shells of nuts, and seeds within a fruit are forbidden with regard to orlah52Because it is forbidden to derive any benefit whatsoever from orlah (ibid.:8). and permitted with regard to neta reva'i.53For the prohibition against neta reva'i involves only eating and these are not considered as food. Fruit that withers and falls from the tree are forbidden in all instances.54With regard to both prohibitions.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
[The restrictions of] neta reva'i applies to all [plants to which] the prohibition of orlah applies.1This is speaking about plants within Eretz Yisrael. As mentioned above, according to the Rambam, the laws of neta reva'i do not apply in the Diaspora (Kessef Mishneh). And all [plants] that are exempt from orlah are not obligated for neta reva'i, as [Leviticus 19:23-24] states: "For three years [your plants] will be orlah.... In the fourth year..."2Since the Torah mentions them in direct sequence with each other, we assume that it is referring to the same type of trees in both instances.
When a person plants a fruit tree with the intent that it serve as a hedge for a garden or he planted it to use it as lumber and not for its fruit, it is exempt from the prohibition of orlah.3In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:1), the Rambam explains that this concept is alluded to by Leviticus 19:23. When that verse states the prohibition against orlah, it says: "When you plant a tree of which you eat...," i.e., for the prohibition to apply, one must have the intent of partaking of the tree's fruit.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:23) states that it must be evident that the owner did not desire to grow the trees for their fruit, e.g., he planted them to close together to grow fruit properly. If he planted it to serve as a hedge and then changed his mind and thought to use its fruit or he planted it for the sake of its fruit and then thought to use it as a hedge, since an intent that obligates it was involved, he is liable.4The three years of orlah are counted from the time the tree is planted regardless of when he thought of using it for food (Radbaz). If he planted it for three years as a hedge and afterwards, intended to use it for food, the laws of neta reva'i do not apply,5Similarly, the prohibition of orlah does not apply, because he did not have the intent of growing it for its fruit until the three years in which the prohibition of orlah would apply were completed. because whenever the laws of orlah do not apply, the laws of neta reva'i do not apply.
When one planted a tree with the intent that the inner side will produce food and the outer side will serve as a hedge or the lower portion will produce food and the upper portion will serve as a hedge,6The converse is also true. Even when the lower portion is prohibited because it was intended for food and the upper portion is permitted, because it was intended to be used as a hedge, we do not say that the lower portion causes the upper portion to be forbidden. Even though it grows from it, it remains permitted [Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah294:23; Siftei Cohen 294:34). the portion that was intended for food is liable in the prohibitions of orlah and the portion intended as a hedge or for lumber is exempt. For the matter is dependent on the intent of the one who plants it.The prohibition of orlah applies to only the caper berries of the caper tree, but its leaves are permitted.7Although they are edible, they are not considered as food to this extent. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:3) differs and accepts the Rambam's ruling only in the Diaspora. In Eretz Yisrael, even the leaves are considered as food.
When a person plants trees for the sake of people at large8I.e., he does not plant the trees in order to partake of the food himself, but to leave it as ownerless, for any passersby to partake of them (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:2)]. in his own field, the prohibition of orlah applies. For the term "And you shall plant..."9More particularly, Pesachim 23a and the Sifra (as quoted in the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah) derive this concept from the word lachem in that prooftext.[used in the prooftext cited above] implies even for the sake of people at large.When does the above apply? In Eretz Yisrael. In the Diaspora, by contrast, [such trees] are exempt.10The rationale for this ruling is that there is a difference of opinion concerning this ruling and we follow the general principle (Berachot 36a): Whenever a Sage rules leniently with regard to the situation in Eretz Yisrael, we follow his opinion in the Diaspora."
When a person plants trees in the public domain11In all the situations mentioned in this halachah, there is reason to think that the prohibition of orlah does not apply. When trees are planted in the public domain, the land is not his. Based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Orlah 2:1), we can conclude that we are speaking about an instance where the person plants for his own self. If he plants trees in the public domain for people at large, the prohibition of orlah does not apply. or on a ship,12One might think that since the ship is not connected to the ground, the prohibition of orlah does not apply. Instead, however, the ship is considered as a large flowerpot in which instance, a tree planted within it is obligated in the laws of orlah, as stated in Halachah 8. when trees grow on their own accord13Since no one planted them, one might think the prohibition of orlah does not apply. in a private domain,14If, however, trees grow by their own accord in the public domain, they are ownerless and the prohibition of orlah does not apply [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:2)]. when a gentile plants a tree whether for himself15I.e., and afterwards, a Jew purchased the tree from him (ibid.).The above explanation is taken from Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah and is also reflected in one of the Rambam's responsa. In Rav Kappach's notes, he explains that this represents an emendation of his original text (which is printed in the standard translations of the Commentary to the Mishnah). Those texts state that even if a gentile raises a tree himself, the prohibition of orlah apply. That view is followed by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:8). or for a Jew,16Since a gentile is not obligated in any of the mitzvot, one might think the prohibition of orlah does not apply. See also Halachah 9. or when a thief plants a tree,17We are not speaking about a person who steals land, because the ownership of the land is never stolen. At all times, it and the trees that grow on it are the property of the original owner (Bava Kama 117a). Instead, we are speaking about a person who stole a sapling and planted it. Whether or not the owner despairs of his loss, the prohibition of orlah apply. the laws of orlah and neta reva'i apply.
[Trees] that grow on their own accord in rocky terrain18This law is taken from the Jerusalem Talmud (Orlah 1:1), only the standard versions of that text read chorshin, "forests," instead of torshin, "rocky terrain." Rav Yosef Corcus suggests that the version of the Jerusalem Talmud available to the Rambam read like his text here. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh suggest emending the text here to read like the standard version of the Jerusalem Talmud. are exempt.19This applies even if the rocky terrain is a person's private property. We are forced to say that for the previous halachah already mentioned a tree that grew on its own accord in the public domain (Radbaz).The rationale for this law is that since the soil is not good, the trees will not grow well and will only produce a minimal amount of fruit. Hence, it is considered as if one has planted these trees for purposes other than their fruit and the prohibition of orlah does not apply as stated in Halachah 2. Even one who plants trees in an unsettled place is exempt, provided the tree does not produce enough fruit so that it would be worthwhile for a person to care for its produce until he brings it to a settled land.20Even if the person who planted the tree shows concern for the tree's fruit, he is not considered to have planted a tree for the purpose of fruit, for the nature of the situation prevents us from considering it as such. If, however, the tree produces enough that it is worthwhile to maintain it, the prohibition of orlah applies to it.
When a person plants a tree for the sake of a mitzvah, e.g., he plants an esrog21When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:24) mentions both planting a lulav and an esrog. That version is also acceptable, because the tree used for the lulav must be a date palm whose species produce edible fruit. tree [to fulfill] the mitzvah of lulav [and esrog] or an olive tree [to produce oil] for the Menorah,22The candelabrum in the Temple. the prohibition of orlah applies.23For even though he is not seeking personal benefit from the fruit, he is seeking to use it for a mitzvah. Thus his intent is on the fruit itself. If he consecrated [a tree] and then planted it, it is exempt.24Because the prohibition of orlah does not apply to consecrated property. If he planted it and then consecrated it, the prohibition of orlah applies.25Because as soon as the tree was planted, the prohibition of orlah took effect. The obligation to observe them is not nullified by the consecration of the tree.
When a person plants [a tree] in a flowerpot26Whether of wood or earthenware (Radbaz). without a hole, the prohibition of orlah applies. [Although planting in such a pot] is not considered as [planting] in the earth with regard to smaller plants, it is considered as planting in the earth with regard to trees.27A smaller plant that is planted in a flowerpot without a hole does not derive nurture from the ground. A tree's roots, by contrast, have more power and can derive nurture from the ground even when there is no hole [Jerusalem Talmud (Orlah 1:2)].
When a tree is planted in a house, the prohibition of orlah applies. Trees planted by gentiles before our ancestors entered the [Holy] Land28Before the conquest of the land by Joshua. were exempt.29This law is not merely a historical point. It shares an element of contemporary relevance. At present, all of the agricultural laws relevant to Eretz Yisrael are observed only by virtue of Rabbinic decree. It will not be until the entire Jewish people return in the era of Mashiach, that these mitzvot will have the status of Scriptural commandments (see Hilchot Terumah 1:26 and notes). Thus the prohibition of orlah does not apply to trees planted by gentiles in Eretz Yisrael at present. If such trees are less than three years of age when Mashiach leads the entire people back into the land, the laws of orlah will not apply to them (Rambam LeAm). After our ancestors entered the land, the prohibition applies even to [trees] planted by gentiles,30If the plant was for the sake of a Jew, as stated in the notes to Halachah 5. as Leviticus 19:23] states: "When you enter the land and you plant...." [The prohibition begins from] the time of the entry into the land.
When a gentile grafts31As stated in Halachah 14, grafting is equivalent to planting. a fruit tree on a non-fruitbearing tree, the prohibition of orlah applies.32It is forbidden for a Jew to make such a graft. Once it is made, however, a Jew can benefit from the fruit. He must, however, wait the three orlah years (Radbaz). If a gentile desires to observe the mitzvah of neta reva'i,33See Hilchot Melachim 10:10 which states that, with a few exceptions, if a gentile desires, he may observe any of the mitzvot of the Torah and he receives a reward for doing so. its laws apply to him and it is consecrated like neta reva'i belonging to a Jew.
[With regard to] the prohibition of orlah, [planting a tree refers to] planting a seed,34The Radbaz mentions that in warmer climates, it is possible for a tree to grow from a seed to the point that it can produce fruit in three years. In his Guide to the Perplexed, Vol. III., ch. 37, the Rambam states that the Torah mentions three years because it speaks about the majority of instances where trees are grown by planting boughs from other trees. a bough from a tree, or uprooting the entire tree from one place and planting it in another.35Rambam LeAm questions why it is necessary for the Rambam to mention "another place." Even if he replanted the tree in its original place, the laws of orlah apply. We begin counting [the three years] from the time of the planting.36I.e., in the case of a replanted tree, we do not consider the years it grew in its previous place.[The following laws apply if] a tree was shaken from its place, but not uprooted and then one filled the surrounding area with earth.37Replanting it, as it were. If it could live without the surroundings having been filled with earth,38I.e., if the connection via its roots was strong enough to sustain it without filling the earth in around its roots. it is exempt. If not, it is considered as if it was uprooted and replanted, and the prohibition does apply.
Similarly, when a tree was uprooted and there remained a root, even one as thin as a needle over which embroiderers wind thread,39See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:4; Keilim 11:15; 13:5) for a more particular definition of this term. if one returned it to its original place and replanted it, it is exempt [from the prohibitions of orlah], because it could live.40That thin root would be sufficient to provide it with its nurture even if one would not have replanted it.[The following rules apply if] the tree was uprooted entirely together with the clod of earth41The Rambam, quoting Orlah 1:3, uses the term sela, usually translated as "rock" for the clod of earth, because the earth hardens around the mass of roots, as he explains in his Commentary to the Mishnah. to which its roots were attached and he replanted it as it is, together with that earth. If it could live from that clod of earth even if it was not replanted, it is as if it was not uprooted. If not, [the laws of orlah] apply.
When a tree was cut down from above the earth42The Rambam's wording implies that if the stump of the tree is above the earth, the laws of orlah do not apply. The commentaries have noted that this ruling appears to conflict with his ruling in Hilchot Shemitah 3:8. and [a new tree grew from its roots], the prohibition of orlah applies.43For this is considered like a new tree. See also Halachah 19. [The three years] are counted from the time [the first tree] was cut down.
Whether one plants a tree, one extends one,44Havrachah, translated as "extending," is a technique that was used particular with regard to vines. After a vine had grown for a long time, the head of the vine is planted in the ground where it grows new roots and thus has the potential to better nurture the new growth. As evident from the continuation of the halachah, sometimes the connection to the original vine is severed and it continues to grow as entirely independent plant. Other times, the connection is allowed to continue and then it is considered only as an extension of the original plant. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 1:5) and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:16). or grafts it, [the laws of orlah] apply. When does the above apply? When one cut off a bough from the tree and planted it in the earth or grafted it to another plant. If, however, one extended a branch of an elder plant and then implanted it in the earth or grafted it onto another tree,45Thus the grafted branch will be receiving nurture from two sources (ibid.). [leaving] the bough connected to the elder tree, [the new growth] is exempt [from the prohibition of orlah].
If the new growth which was originally extended grew and produced fruit and, afterwards, the source from which it was connected to the elder tree was separated, we count [the years of orlah] from the time that it was separated.46For severing the connection is considered like planting it. The fruit [that was growing on the tree before it was separated] is, however, permitted, because it grew while permitted. If he left [the fruit on the new tree] after the connection to the original tree was severed until their growth increased by a two-hundredth,47See Hilchot Kilayim 5:22 which explains how this measure is calculated. the fruit is forbidden.48For the prohibition of orlah is nullified in a mixture one/twohundredth the size of the forbidden matter. In the instance mentioned above, once the connection to the original tree is severed, everything which grows is considered as orlah. Thus the fruit remaining on the tree has both permitted and forbidden elements to its existence. If it grows more than the amount stated above, the prohibited substance within it is not nullified and it causes the entire fruit to become forbidden.
When a young tree49I.e., one that was not yet three years old. was grafted on to an elder tree and there were fruit on the younger tree, the fruit on the younger tree50Which are forbidden because they are orlah. are forbidden even if the fruit increases 200 times its size.51From the Rambam's wording [which is quoted by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 294:22), the Siftei Cohen 294:32 infers that the new fruit that grows on the grafted branch afterwards is permitted. For the basic fruit that comes from a forbidden entity52I.e., since at the outset, this fruit was forbidden, its fundamental nature is considered as forbidden and everything added to it is incidental. cannot be elevated by the new permitted substances that grow.
[The following rule applies when] a branch was extended from a tree and implanted in the earth and afterwards, the tree itself was entirely uprooted and it derives its nurture only from the branch implanted in the earth. The tree is considered as if it was planted at this time and the prohibition of orlah applies to it.53Since its original connection to the earth was severed, the tree is considered as having been planted at this time. [The three years] are counted for the tree and for whatever grew from the implanted branch from the time it was uprooted.54For until then, whatever grew from the implanted branch was considered as part of the original tree and the years of orlah were never counted for it. Even though the years of orlah were counted for the original tree, since it is now being considered as part of the implanted branch, we must count the years of orlah again.
When a person extended a branch and implanted it in the earth and it grew, he then extended and implanted a branch from the new growth and it grew, and then he extended and implanted a branch from the third growth - and continued doing so even for 100 implants each connected with each other - since the connection with the primary plant has not been severed, all [of the fruit]55Even from the later implants. is permitted.56Because they are all considered as part of the original plant. If [the connection to] the original plant is severed,57The implanted plants are considered as new entities and the prohibition of orlah applies to them. [the orlah years] are counted from the time of the severance.
A tree which grows from a stump is exempt from the prohibitions of orlah.58For the new growth is considered as an extension of the previous tree. [If it grows] from the roots,59I.e., it did not have a portion that projects above the ground (Bava Batra 82a). the prohibition of orlah applies.60For it is considered as an entirely new tree.The prohibition of orlah applies to a dwarf vine which is less than a handbreadth high throughout its entire life,61This is a Rabbinic decree, enacted for the reason stated by the Rambam. because it looks like a tree that is one year old. When does the above apply? To one tree or to [a group of five, planted in a pattern where] two are planted opposite another pair and a fifth is planted behind them.62This was a common pattern to plant trees and was referred to as "a small vineyard" (Hilchot Kilayim 7:7). Even though it is a separate entity, because it is small, it is subject to the above Rabbinic decree. If, however, an entire vineyard is less than a handbreadth high, it would be a matter of common knowledge and its age is calculated in the same way as other trees.
We may plant a branch from a tree that is orlah,63Because the prohibition against orlah applies only to the fruit and not to the plant as a whole [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah1:9)]. but we may not plant a nut that is orlah, because it is produce and it is forbidden to benefit from it, as we explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.64Chapter 10, Halachah 9. If one transgressed and planted a nut that is orlah, [the tree] that grows from it is permitted like other trees.65It is even permitted to partake of its fruit, as explained in the following halachah.
Similarly, one may not graft underdeveloped clusters of dates,66Our translation is taken from Rav Kappach's translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). The standard published text of that work and similarly, the gloss of the Radbaz to this halachah understands the term differently. that are orlah, because they are considered as food. If one transgressed and grafted them, the fruits are permitted. [The rationale is that] whenever an entity has two causes, one forbidden67The date cluster. and one which is permitted,68The permitted date tree. since it comes as a result of both of them, it is permitted. Therefore [a plant] that grows from fruit that is orlah is permitted, because its growth was caused by the forbidden fruit and the earth which is permitted.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
It is a positive commandment to make a declaration1In other contexts, the term used by the Rambam here (and by the previous Rabbinic sources) usually means "confession." Among the reasons why this term is used is because the fact that the terumah and the tithes are given to the priests and Levites is a result of the Jews' sin. Had that not occurred, these agricultural separations would have been given to the firstborn. before G‑d2I.e., in the Temple. after all the presents3See Halachah 12. from the agricultural products.4Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 131) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 607) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. This is called the declaration of the tithes.
This declaration is made only after the year in which the tithe for the poor is separated,5The third and the sixth years of the seven year cycle. as [Deuteronomy 26:12-13] states: "When you complete tithing, and you shall declare before God your Lord: 'I have removed all the sacred substances from the house...'"
When is this declaration made? On the afternoon of the last festival6Rashi and others, by contrast, maintain that this declaration should be made on the first day of the Pesach holiday. The Rambam's opinion is based on the Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aser Sheni 5:10) which states that the Jews were given the opportunity to partake of the second tithe throughout the Pesach holiday so that they would have ample resources with which to celebrate and partake of this food. For that same reason, the declaration is delayed until the afternoon. of the Pesach holiday7For on Sukkot, there are still many fruits from the sixth year in the field (Radbaz; Siftei Cohen 331:159). of the fourth and seventh year, as [the prooftext] states: "When you complete tithing...," i.e., on the festival when all the tithes are completed. Pesach of the fourth year will not arrive before all of the produce - both those that grow from the earth and those that grow from trees - have been tithed.
The declaration may only be made during the day.8A declaration made at night is unacceptable. The entire day9From sunrise to sunset. The above statement that it is made in the afternoon was a leniency intended to provide a person with latitude. is appropriate for this declaration. Whether the Temple is standing or not,10For, as stated in Hilchot Terumah 1:1, the laws of terumah and the other agricultural requirements apply even if the Temple is not standing. he is obligated to remove [all the agricultural presents from his possession] and make the declaration.11The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the mitzvah to make a declaration applies only in the Temple. The Radbaz supports the Rambam's ruling, explaining that it is based on Halachah 6. Since, after the fact, one fulfills his obligation if he makes the declaration outside the Temple, when there is no Temple, there is no choice but to accept that alternative.
This declaration may be made in any language,12It must, however, be an exact translation. Note the contrast to the declaration made when bringing the first fruits (Hilchot Bikkurim 3:10). as [indicated by the prooftext]: "You shall declare before God your Lord," i.e., in any language in which you declare.Each person should make this declaration individually.13I.e., this is the desirable manner of performing the mitzvah (Siftei Cohen 331:161). If many desire to recite it together, they may.14Not the Minchat Chinuch (Mitzvah 607) which states that the Rambam is speaking about a situation where one person speaks out loud and the others fulfill their obligation by listening.
[The proper way of performing] the mitzvah is to recite the declaration in the Temple, as [implied by] the phrase: "before God." [Nevertheless,] if he made the declaration in any other place, he fulfilled his obligation.
A person may not make this declaration until he has disposed of all the agricultural presents in his possession.15The Minchat Chinuch and others question why the removal of the presents from one's property is not considered as an independent mitzvah. For in the declaration he states: "I have removed all the sacred substances from the house."16And if he still possessed these presents, he would be lying. See the following halachot. On the day before the final day of the Pesach festival,17The standard published text of Ma'aser Sheni 5:6 states "The day before the first holiday of the Pesach festival." The Rambam apparently had a different version of that mishnah. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's version, explaining that on the passage from the Jerusalem Talmud cited above which explains that the declaration was delayed so that the people would be able to partake of the presents during the festival indicates that they would not have to remove the presents from their possession until the festival's conclusion. one must remove [the last of the presents] and on the following day, the declaration is made.
What must one do? If he has terumah or terumat ma'aser in his possession, he should give them to a priest. The first tithe should be given to a Levite and tithe of the poor to the poor. If produce that was definitely from the second tithe or neta reva'i18This halachah is based on Ma'aser Sheni 5:6. That mishnah does not mention neta reva'i. Nevertheless, the Rambam adds it because all the laws that apply to the second tithe apply to it (Kessef Mishneh). or money from their redemption remained in his possession, he must destroy it and cast it in the sea or burn it.19Thus there are two types of biur, removal of agricultural presents: giving presents to those to whom they are supposed to be given and destroying, those which one keeps for oneself (ibid.). If the second tithe of demai remains in his possession, he is not obligated to destroy it.20Since the obligation to separate it was imposed only because of a doubt, we rule leniently. If the first fruits remain in his possession, they may be destroyed in any place.
When does the obligation to burn and remove apply? When there remains in his possession [fresh] produce that one cannot consume before the commencement of the holiday. If, however, cooked food from the second tithe or neta reva'i remain, it need not be removed, for cooked food is considered as if it was removed.21For if it is left for any significant amount of time, it will spoil [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 5:6)]. Similarly, wine and spices are considered as if they were removed.22For they also will spoil if left for any significant amount of time.
Produce that has not reached the "phase of tithing"23One third of its growth, as stated in Hilchot Ma'aserot 2:5. by the time the removal [of the agricultural presence] arrives does not prevent a person from making a declaration, nor is he obligated to remove them from his possession.24Since the produce has not reached this stage of development, there is no obligation to tithe it. Hence, it need not be removed or included in the declaration.
When produce belonging to a person was distant from him [when] the time for its removal arrived,25Ma'aser Sheni 5:9 relates that once when the time to remove produce arrived, Rabban Gamliel was on a sea journey and could not physically give the produce to anyone else. He therefore transferred the presents to other sages in the manner described here. Since Rabbi Elazar ben Arach was a priest, he gave him terumah, Rabbi Yehoshua was a Levite and so he gave him the tithes, and since Rabbi Akiva was a collector of gifts for the poor, he gave him the tithes for the poor. he should designate the presents [appropriately]26And specify in which portion of the grainheap they are located. and transfer them to their owners by giving them together with land.27See Hilchot Mechirah, ch. 6, which describes how this transfer of property operates. This means of transfer is used, because this is the only way the ownership of the produce can be given to these individuals without an actual physical transfer. Alternatively, [he may give them to] someone who will acquire them for their owners. He may then recite the declaration the following day.[The rationale is] that transferring movable property to a person together with landed property is a present that has been strengthened. He may not, however, transfer [the produce from] the tithes to them via an exchange,28The term "exchange" is translated from the Hebrew kinyan chilipin, a legal act that formalizes a transaction. See Hilchot Mechirah, ch. 5, for a description. Although this legal act is frequently employed, it is not appropriate in this instance, because the gift would resemble a sale and not a present. because it resembles a sale and [the Torah] speaks of giving, not selling, the tithes, terumah, and the other presents.29As stated in Deuteronomy 26:13.
What source teaches that he cannot recite the declaration until he removes all the presents [from his possession]? [It is written:] "I have removed all the sacred substances from the house." "The sacred substances" refers to the second tithe and neta reva'i which are called "sanctified."30See Chapter 9, Halachah 1. "From the house" refers to challah, for it is a present given to the priests in one's home.31I.e., it is not given until the grain is made into dough [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 5:10)]. [The prooftext continues:] "I gave it to the Levite" - this refers to the first tithe. "And I also gave it" - this implies that it was preceded by another present, i.e., the great terumah and terumat ma'aser. "To the stranger, the orphan, and the widow" - this refers to the tithe given to the poor, leket, shichachah, and pe'ah. [The latter three are mentioned] even though [the failure to give them] does not prevent recitation of the declaration.32The commentaries have pointed out a difference between leket, shichachah, and pe'ah and the other presents. For the Torah does not prescribe giving the latter three to the poor, but rather leaving them for them.
The presents must be separated according to the desired order33See Hilchot Terumah 3:23 with regard to the desired order of the presents. and afterwards, the declaration is made, as [implied by the continuation of the verse:] "according to all Your mitzvot which You commanded me." Thus if he gives the second tithe before the first tithe, he cannot recite this declaration.34For he cannot say: "As You commanded me," since by deviating from the desired order, he did not fulfill the mitzvot "as commanded." Indeed, he committed a transgression.If a person's tevel is burnt, he cannot make this declaration, for he did not separate the presents or give them to the people designated. In the era when the first tithe was given to the priests,35When Ezra led the Jews back to Eretz Yisrael after the Babylonian exile, by and large, the Levites did not accompany him. Therefore, he punished them, decreeing that the tithes should be given to the priests instead (Hilchot Ma'aser 1:4). From the Rambam's statements here and also in that source, some have inferred that Ezra's decree applied only in his generation and not in later eras. This conclusion is not, however, borne out by his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid. 5:15)]. the declaration was not made, [because it contains the words:] "I gave it to the Levite."
When a person possesses only the second tithe, he should make the declaration, for the fundamental dimension of the declaration concerns the [second] tithe.36Of them all, it is the only one that must be destroyed as stated in Halachah 8. Similarly, if he possesses only the first fruits, he should make the declaration, for [the prooftext] states: "I removed the holy substances" and the first type of produce that is holy is the first fruits.37And it must also be removed from one's possession. When, however, a person only possesses terumah, he does not recite the declaration,38The Kessef Mishneh states that the same rule applies to the first tithe. For neither of them must be removed from one's possession at a given time. because terumah [in and of itself] does not require a declaration except as part of all the presents [together].
[The prooftext continues:] "I did not violate your commandments,"39Although the Rambam explains the details of this declaration, the intent is not that one should explain it while reciting it. Instead, he should merely read the passage as it is stated in the Torah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 5:13)]. i.e., he did not separate from one species for another, nor from produce that has been reaped for produce that is still attached to the ground, nor from produce that is attached to the ground for produce that has been reaped, nor from produce from the present year for that of the previous year, nor from produce of the previous year for that of the present year.40See Hilchot Terumah 5:18; 5:9, 5:11, and Hilchot Ma'aser 1:12 which explains that separating the presents in such a manner is forbidden.[The prooftext continues:] "I did not forget," I did not forget to bless Him and recall His name with regard to them.41Some interpret this as referring to the recitation of a blessing when making the separations. The commentaries question these interpretations, however, because the blessings were instituted by the Rabbis and here we are speaking of the exegesis of a Biblical verse. Others maintain that it refers to reciting grace after partaking of the grain, for that is a Scriptural command. "I did not partake of it in a state of acute mourning";42See Chapter 3, Halachah 5ff. thus if he partakes of it in a state of acute mourning, he does not recite the declaration. "I did not partake of it in a state of impurity," thus if he separates it in a state of acute mourning, he does not recite the declaration. "I did not give of it to a corpse." This implies that he did not use [money from the redemption of the tithes] for a coffin or shrouds, nor did he give it to other people in a state of mourning. "I heeded the voice of God my Lord," i.e., I brought it to the Temple.43This refers to the first fruits. The second tithe need not be brought to the Temple. "I performed everything that You commanded me," I rejoiced. And I shared that rejoicing with others with it, as [Deuteronomy 26:11]: "And you share rejoice in all the good."
[The passage continues:] "Look down from Your holy habitation heaven... as You swore to our ancestors, a land flowing with milk and honey." This is a prayer that the fruits be flavorful.
Israelites and mamzerim44A child born out of an adulterous or incestuous union. Even though they are forbidden to marry, they are considered heirs and are granted their ancestral heritage. may make this declaration, but not converts and freed slaves, because they do not have an ancestral portion in Eretz Yisrael45Although they may purchase land in Eretz Yisrael, they were not granted an ancestral heritage when the land was divided among the tribes and thus there is no portion of Eretz Yisrael that is theirs in an ultimate sense. For during the Jubilee year, any purchased land will return to its owner. Note the contrast to the declaration concerning the first fruits which they are required to make (Hilchot Bikkurim 4:3). and in the declaration one says: "And the land that You gave us." Priests and Levites may make the declaration. Although they did not receive a portion in the division of the land, they were granted cities in which to dwell.46As related in Numbers, ch. 35, in addition to the six cities of refuge, the Levites were given 42 cities that were scattered throughout the entire land of Eretz Yisrael.
