=== 1 | Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. 1: The Divine Plan of the Ages ===
I'm


BX  8526    .R7   1914  v.l
Russell,   C,   T.  1852-1916.
Studies  in  the  Scriptures


Digitized  by

the  Internet  Archive

in  2014

https://archive.org/details/studiesinscriptu01russ


ser!) .


WRITE  DOWN  THE  VISION  AND  MAKE  IT  PLAIN  UPON  TABLES,  THAT  EVERYONE  MAY  READ  IT  FLUENTLY'

HabakkiIk  2  :  2,


THB

TABERNACLE

or  THE  WILDERNESS

THE  HARMONY  OF  ITS  TEACHINGS


-A-


A.


A.


RESTORED


THE  WORLD  OF  MANKIND
LIFTED  UP  TO
HUMAN  PERFECTION  AND  LIFE


CHi^RT  OF  THK  AOES

ILLUSTRHTING  THE  PLKN  OF  COD  FOR  BRINGING  KHNY  SONS  TO  GLORY.  KND  HIS  PURPOSE-

IN  OF  THE  FUU^ES•  OF  TH«  «PP01NTE0  TIME!,  TO  BE-UNITE  All  THINGS  UNOE«  ONE  HEAD,  EVEN  UNDER  TMI  ANOINTED  ONi:  THE  THINGS  IN  HEAVEN  AND  THl  THINM  ON  EABl


Its  teachings  are  in  harmony  with
the  Chart  of  Uie  Ages,  showing  the
same  STEPS  as  necessary  Ui  com-
ing from  sin  to  glory.

The  entire  ground  of  the  Taher-
nacle  enclosure  was  called  "Holy."
Outside  the  court  all  was  unholy,
and  is  the  equivalent  of  the  unjustir
fledplaneintheChartofAges.  The
COURT  encloKure  parallels  the  jus-
tified or  PERFECT  HUMAN
plane.  The  "Holy"  represenU  the


Most  Holy  beyond  the  second  vail,
represents  thePERFECT SPIRIT-
XJALt  conditimi  when  "we  shall  be
like  HIM."  The  glory  plane  isstlll
furtlier  alony  the  grand  climax  of
hme—""'       "--  •  "

talUy.'


STUDIES^^'^


IN  THE


SCRIPTURES

"The  Path  of  the  Just  is  as  the  Shining  Light,
Which  Shineth   More   and  More
Unto  the  Perfect  Day."


SERIES  1


The  Plan  of  the  Ages


4,520,000  Edition


A  Vindication  of  the  Divine  Character  and  Gov-
ernment :  Showing,  by  a  Recognition  and  Harmoniz-
ing of  all  the  Scriptures,  that  the  Permission  of
Evil,  Past  and  Present,  is  Educational  and  Pre-
paratory   to   the     Ushering     of     Mankind  Into

THE  GOLDEN  AGE  OF  PROPHECY

In  Which  All  the  Families  of  the  Earth  Will
Be  Blessed  with  a  Full  Knowledge  of  God  and  a
Full  Opportunity  for  Attaining  Everlasting  Life
Through  the  Redeemer,  Who  Then  Will  Be  the
Great  Restorer   and   Life-Giver.  -  Acts  3  :  19-2L


INTERNATIONAL  BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION
BROOKLYN,  LONDON.  MELBOURNE.  BARMEN.
ELBERFELD,  OREBRO.  CHRISTL\NIA-
1914


So  tlie  ^ing  of  ^ii^gs  ar^d  Lord  of  Lords


IN  THE  INTEREST  OP

HIS  CONSECRATED  SAINTS,

WAITING  FOR  THK  ADOPTION,

—  AND  OF

"  ALL  THAT  IN  EVERY  PLACE  CALL  UPON  THE  LORD,"  *•
"  THE  HOUSEHOLD  OF  FAITH,"

—  AND  OF  —

THE  GROANING  CREATION,  TRAVAILING  AND  WAITING  FOR  THE
MANIFESTATION  OF  THE  SONS  OF  GOD,

TJ-IIS  W©p[^  IS  f)Et)ICATEC>.


"  To  make  all  see  what  is  the  fellowship  of  the  mystery  which  from  the  beginning
of  the  world  hath  been  hid  in  God."  "  Wherein  He  hath  abounded  toward
us  in  all  wisdom  and  prudence,  having  made  known  unto  us  the
mystery  of  His  will,  according  to  His  good  pleasure  which
He  hath  purposed  in  Himself ;  that  in  the  dispen-
sation of  the  fulness  of  the  times  He  might
gather  together  in  one  all  things,
under  Christ."
Eph.  3  : 4,  5,  9  ;  i  :  8-io.


COPYRIGHT  i3S6.

WATCH  TOWER  BIBLE  &  TRACT  SOCIETY,

BROOKLYN,  N.  Y.,  U.  S.  A.

Written  by  Pastor  'RtissFi.i.  in  i886


N.B.— This  volume  can  also  be  supplied  in  the  German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian,
Finnish,  French,  Greek,  Italian,  Hungarian,  Spanish,  Polish  and  Hollandish  lan-
guages; also  Braille  (for  the  blind).   Arabic  and  Turko-Armeniaa  editions  in  prep-


StuMes  in  tbe  Scriptures,


Christian  people  are  becoming  more  and  more  awake
to  the  fact  that  a  great  tidal  wave  of  imbelief  is  sweep-
ing over  Christendom; — not  the  blasphemous  atheism
voiced  by  Thomas  Paine  and  Robert  Ingersoll,  but  the
cultured  kind  represented  in  the  scholarship  of  our
day,  which  makes  the  danger  all  the  more  insidious.

Not  only  are  the  great  Colleges  and  Seminaries  un-
dermining the  faith  of  the  better  educated,  but  the
Common  School  books,  and  especially  those  used  in
the  High  Schools,  are  similarly  inculcating  a  distrust
in  the  Bible,  a  contradiction  of  its  teachings.  For  a
college  graduate  of  to-day  to  declare  his  faith  in  the
inspiration  of  the  Scripttu-es  would  bring  upon  him  the
scorn  of  his  companions — a  scorn  which  few  would
co-urt,  or  could  endure.  At  very  best,  a  few  will  be
found  to  claim  that  they  believe  that  Jesus  and  his
Apostles  were  sincere,  though  they  blimdered  in  quoting
from  the  Old  Testament  as  inspired.

Such  a  belief  in  Jesus  and  his  Apostles  is  no  belief
at  all;  for  if  present-day  "higher  critics"  are  wise  enough
to  know  when  and  where  our  Lord  and  his  Apostles
erred  in  their  quotations  from  the  Old  Testament,
then  these  wise  men  of  our  day  are  otu-  proper  guides,
— more  inspired  than  Jesus  and  his  Apostles.

Out  Society,  realizing  the  need,  is  seeking  to  do  all
in  its  power  to  stem  the  tide  and  lift  up  the  Lord's
"standard  for  the  people."  It  has  prepared  six  sets
of  Bible  Studies  (of  which  this  volume  is  one)  for
Christian  people  of  all  denominations  to  use  in  lending
a  helping  hand  to  all  perplexed  inquirers  with  whom
they  may,  by  God's  providence,  come  in  contact.
These  are  supplied  at  bare  cost,  and  can  be  had  direct
from  the  Society's  warerooms  or  of  its  colporteurs,
who  are  gradually  reaching  forth  these  helping  hands
far  and  near.    These  valuable  "studies"  are  supplied


at  little  more  than  two  cents  each; — 15  of  them  well

bound  in  a  cloth  case,  embossed  in  gold,  for  35  cents.

The  thought  is  this:  As  a  Christian  man  or  woman
you  have  children  or  relatives  or  neighbors  or  friends
open  to  your  influence — perhaps,  indeed,  asking  your
counsel — asking,  "How  do  we  know  that  there  is  a
God?"  or,  "What  proofs  have  we  that  the  Bible  is
inspired?"  It  is  no  longer  wise  to  call  these  silly  ques-
tions, nor  to  ask,  "Are  you  an  infidel?"

However  competent  you  might  be  to  prepare  an-
swers to  these  and  a  score  of  other  questions,  you  may
not  have  the  needed  time  and  opportunity  to  do  so.
How  convenient  then  to  step  to  your  book-case,  take
down  the  proper  study  on  the  subject,  and  to  say  to
the  inquirer,  Sit  down  and  read  that  short  study,
and  the  whole  matter  of  your  question  will  be  fully
and  satisfactorily  settled;  and  if  your  doubts  ever
again  arise  come  over  and  read  the  same  afresh.

Possibly  you  may  be  a  member  of  an  Epworth
League  or  Christian  Endeavor  Society,  or  of  a  Baptist
Young  People's  Union,  and  may  be  called  on  for  an
essay  on  some  Scripture  topic.  How  convenient  to
select  one  among  these  numerous  studies  (covering
almost  every  topic)  and  to  find  therein  the  appropriate
Scriptures  cited.  Ministers  use  them  thus  when  com-
posing special  sermons  and  addresses.

Ministers  who  have  large  libraries  touching  every
conceivable  religious  topic — many  volumes  costing  $6
to  $8  per  volume — may  not  feel  their  need  of  these
"Bible  Studies,"  but  to  others  they  are  almost  indis-
pensable. Indeed,  in  addition  to  the  price  feature,
which  brings  them  within  the  reach  of  everybody — six
volumes  of  over  3,000  pages  for  $2.00 — the  usual  price
of  one  such  volume — they  are  written  in  pure,  but
simple  English,  whereas  the  "scholarly  works"  are
replete  with  technical  terms  and  only  for  the  few.

We  invite  Christian  people  of  all  denominations  to
join  us  in  otir  work  of  extending  these  "helping  hands"
to  the  rising  generation.  A  single  friend  or  relative
helped — rescued  from  doubt  or  unbelief — would  repay
the  cost  of  these  lessons  a  thousand  times.


CONTENTS.


STUDY  I.

EARTH'S  NIGHT  OF  SIN  TO  TERMINATE  IN  A
MORNING  OF  JOY.

A  Night  op  Wbeping  and  a  Morning  op  Joy.— Two  Methods  op  Seeking
Truth.— Thb  Method  Herein  Pursued.— Scope  of  the  Work.— A  Dif-
ference between  the  Reverent  Study  of  tub  Scriptures  and  the  Dan-
CEROus  Habit  of  Speculation. — Thb  Object  of  Prophecy. — The  Present
IIeligious  Condition  of  thb  World  Viewed  prom  Two  Standpoints.—'
Egyptian  Darkness. — A  Bow  of  Promise. — The  Path  of  thb  Just  Pro-
gressive.— Cause  of  thb  Great  Apostasy. — The  Reformation. — The  Samb
Cause  Again  Hinders  Real  Progress.— Perfection  op  Knowlbdcb  Not
A  Thing  of  thb  Past,  but  of  the  Future.         ....  9

STUDY  II.

THE  EXISTENCE  OF  A  SUPREME  INTELLIGENT
CRE.\TOR  ESTABLISHED.

K\^DBNCB  ASIDB  FROM  TUB    BiBLE,  EXAMINED  IN  THB  LiGHT  OP  RbASON.— AN

Untenable  Theory. — A  Reasonable  Theory. — The  Chabacter  of  God
Demonstrated. — Reasonablb  Deductions.         ....  29

STUDY  III.

THE  BIBLE  -AS  A  DIVINE  REVELATION  VIEWED
IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  REASON.

Ihb  Claims  op  the  Biblb  and  its  Surpacb  Evidence  of  Credibilitt. — Its
Antiquity  and  Preservation. — Its  Moral  Influence. — Motives  of  thb
Writers.— General  Character  op  the  Writings.— The  Books  of  Moses.
—The  Law  OP  Moses. — Peculiarities  of  ihb  Government  Instituted  by
Moses.— It  was  not  a  System  of  Priestcraft.— Instructions  to  Civil
Rulers.- Rich  anu  Poor  on  a  Common  Level  Before  thb  Law.— Safb-
CUARD3  Against  Tampering  With  the  Rights  of  the  People.— The
Priesthood  Not  a  Favored  Class,  How  Supported,  etc. — Oppression  op
Foreigners,  Widows,  Orphans  and  Servants  Guarded  Against.— The
Prophets  of  thb  Bible. — Is  Therb  a  Common  Bond  of  Union  Between
THE  Law,  thb  Prophets  and  the  New  Testament  Writers ?— Miracles
Not  UNRBASONABtB.— Thb  Rbasowablb  Conclusion.        ...  37


STUDY  IV.


THE  EPOCHS  AND  DISPENSATIONS  MARKED  IN  THE
DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  DIVINE  PLAN.

iSod's  Plan  Definitb  and  Systhmatic— Three  Great  Epochs  of  ti«
World's  History. — Their  Distinctive  Features. — "The  Earth  Abideth
Forever." — The  World  to  Come,  the  New  Heavens  and  Earth. — Subdi-
visions OF  These  Great  Epochs. — The  Important  Features  of  God's  Plan
thus  Brought  to  View.— Order  Recognized  Discloses  Harmony.—
Rightly  Dividing  the  Word  of  Truth.  .....

STUDY  V.

«THE  MYSTERY  HID  FROM  AGES  AND  FROM  GENERA-
TIONS,  BUT  NOW  MADE  MANIFEST  TO
HIS  SAINTS."— COL.  i  :  26.
TfiWE  Glimmering  Light  of  the  First  Promise. — The  Promise  to  Abraham. —
Hope  Deferred. — The  Mystery  Begins  to  Unravel  at  Pentecost. — What
the  Mystery  Is. — Why  So  Long  Kept  a  Mystery. — Still  a  Mystery  to
*HB  World.— In  Due  Time  to  be  Made  Manifestto  All.— When  the  Mts-
fTBRT  Will  be  Finished.  .         .         .  .

STUDY  VI.

OUR  LORD'S  RETURN— ITS  OBJECT,  THE  RESTITU-
TION OF  ALL  THINGS.
Lord's  Second  Advent  Personal  and  Pre-Millennial.— Its  RELATioii-
ship  to  THE  First  Advent. — The  Selection  of  the  Church  and  the  Con-
version of  the  World. — Election  and  Free  Grace. — Prisoners  op  Hope. —
Prophetic  Testimony  Regarding  Restitution. — Our  Lord's  Return  Man-
ifestly the  Hope  of  the  Church  and  the  World.       .         .         .  .

STUDY  VII.

THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO
GOD'S  PLAN.

Why  Evil  was  Permitted.— Right  and  Wrong  as  Principles.— The  MoraIi
Sense. — God  Permitted  Evil,  and  will  Overrule  it  for  Good. — God  not
WE  Author  of  Sin.— Adam's  Trial  not  a  Farce.— His  Temptation  Sb-
«TgRE.— He  Sinned  Wilfully.— The  Penalty  of  Sin  not  Unjust,  nor  Too
S«VBRB. — The  Wisdom,  Love  and  Justice  Displayed  in  Condemning  All
an  Adam, — God's  Law  Universal.

STUDY  VIII.

THE  DAY  OF  JUDGMENT.

JaiB  Gbnbral  View  of  the  Day  of  Judgment.— Is  it  Scriptural T-Tw
Terms,  Judgment  and  Day,  Defined.— Several  Judgment  Days  Rbpbrrbd
30  lu  TH8  Scripturbs.— The  First  Judgment  Day  and  its  Results.— Ai»»


OTHER  AppoifTTEn  — The  Judge. — The  Character  of  the  Coming  Judg-
ment—Similarity AND  Dissimilarity  of  the  First  and  Second  Judg-
ments.—The  World's  Present  Accountability.— Two  Intervening  Judg-
mnNTs  and  Their  Objects. — Widely  Different  Estimates  op  the  Coming
Judgment. — How  Prophets  and  Apostles  Viewed  it.         .         .         .  157

STUDY  IX.

RANSOM  AND  RESTITUTION.

The  Restitution  Guaranteed  by  the  Ransom.— Not  Everlasting  Life,
but  a  Trial  for  it.  Secured  by  the  Ransom.— The  Conditions  and  Ad-
vantages OF  THE  Trial.— Christ's  Sacrifice  Necessary.— How  the  Rack
Could  be  and  was  Redeemed  by  the  Death  op  One. — Faith  and  Works
Still  Necessary- The  Wages  of  Wilful  Sin  Certain. — Will  there  bb
Room  on  the  Earth  for  the  Resurrected  Millions? — Restitution  ver-
sus Evolution.         .........  249

STUDY  X.

SPIRITUAL  AND  HUMAN  NATURES  SEPARATE  AND
DISTINCT.

Common  Misapprehensions. — Earthly  or  Human  and  Heavenly  or  Spir-
itual Natures. — Earthly  Glory  and  Heavenly  Glory.— Bible  Testi-
mony Regarding  Spirit  Beings. — Mortality  and  Immortality. — Can
Mortal  Beings  Have  Everlasting  Life?— Justice  in  the  Bestowment
OF  Favors. — A  Supposed  Principle  Examined. — Variety  in  Perfection. —
God's  Sovereign  Rights. — God's  Provision  for  Man  a  Satisfying  Por-
tion.—The  Election  of  the  Body  of  Christ.— How  their  Change  of
JJature  is  Effected.         ........  173

STUDY  XL

THE  THREE  WAYS— THE  BROAD  WAY,  THE  NARROW
WAY,  THE  HIGHWAY.

The  Broad  Road  to  Destruction. — The  Narrow  Way  to  Life. — What  is
Life?— The  Divine  Nature.— The  Relationship  of  the  Divine  and
Human  Natures. — The  Reward  at  the  End  of  the  Narrow  Way. — Thk
High  Calling  Limited  to  the  Gospel  Age. — Difficulties  and  Dangers  of
THE  Narrow  Way. — ^Thb  Highway  of  Holiness.      ....  205

STUDY  XII.

EXPLANATION  OF  CHART  REPRESENTING  THE  PLAN
OF  THE  AGES.

The  Ages. — ^Thb  Harvests. — Planes  of  Actual  and  Reckoned  Standing.
The  Course  op  our  Lord  Jesus.— The  Course  of  His  Followers. — Three
Classes  in  the  Nominal  Church. — Separation  in  the  Harvest. — The
Anointed  Class  Glorified. — The  Great  Tribulation  Class. — ^1'he  Tare.->
Burned.— The  World  Bijssbb.— Tas  Outcomb  Glorious.  .        .  219


STUDY  XIII.


THE  KINGDOMS  OF  THIS  WORLD.

Trb  First  Dominion. — Its  Forpeiturb. — Its  Redemption  and  Restoratiow.
—The  Typical  Kingdom  of  Goo.— The  Usurper.— Two  Phases  of  the
Present  Dominion. — The  Powers  that  be.  Ordained  of  God. — Nebuchad-
nezzar's View  op  Them. — Daniel's  View  and  Interpretation. — The  King-
doms OF  this  World  viewed  prom  another  Standpoint.— The  Proper  Re-
lationship OP  THE  Church  to  Present  Governments. — The  Divine  Right
OP  Kings  Briefly  Examined.— Claims  op  Christendom  False.— A  Better
Hops  in  thb  Fifth  Universal  Empire.     .      .        .        .        .  .343

STUDY  XIV.
THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

"Prominence  op  the  Subject.— The  Character  op  the  Kingdom.— Thb
Kingdom  During  the  Gospel  Age.— False  Views  Corrected  by  Paul.—
Results  of*  False  Ideas  of  the  Kingdom. — Two  Phases  op  the  Kingdom
OP  God. — The  Spiritual  Phase  and  its  Work. — The  Earthly  Phase
AND  its  Work.— Their  Harmonious  Operation.— The  Glory  of  thb
Earthly  Phase.— The  Glory  of  the  Heavenly  Phase.— The  Covenant
Root  from  which  These  Branches  Grow. — The  Earthly  Phase  of  the
Kingdom,  Israelitish.— The  Lost  Tribes.— The  Heavenly  Jerusalem.—
Israel  a  Typical  People. — Israel's  Loss  and  Recovery. — The  Elect
Classes. — The  Heirs  of  the  Kingdom.— The  Iron  Rule.— An  Illustra-
tion of  the  Object  of  the  Millennial  Reign. — The  Kingdom  Delivered
TO  THE  Father.— God's  Original  Design  Fully  Accompusheb.    .      .  273

STUDY  XV.
THE  DAY  OF  JEHOVAH.

Thr  "  Day  op  Jehovah,"  the  "  Day  of  Vengeance,"  the  "  Day  op  Wrath."
— A  Time  of  Great  Trouble. — Its  Cause. — The  Bible's  Testimony  Regard-
ing IT. — Its  Fire  and  Storm,  Its  Shaking  and  Melting,  Shown  to  be  Sym-
bolic—David's Testimony.— The  Revelator's  Testimony.— The  Present
Situation  and  the  Future  Outlook  as  Viewed  by  the  Opposing  Parties,
Capitalists  and  Wage-Workers.— A  Remedy  Which  Will  Not  Succeed.—
The  Veil  Lifted  and  Light  Admitted  Just  in  Due  Time. — The  Proof  op
This  — The  Condition  of  the  Saints  During  the  Trouble,  and  Their
Proper  Attitude  Toward  It.      .         .         .         ,        .        .  -307

STUDY  XVI.
CONCLUDING  THOUGHTS.


Our  Duty  Toward  tub  Truth.— Its  Cost,  Its  Value,  Its  Profit.


343


Scripture  Studies.


STUDY  I.


EARTH'S  NIGHT  OF  SIN  TO  TERMINATE  IN  A
MORNING  OF  JOY.


ANiGHT  OP  Weeping  and  a  Morning  op  Joy. — Two  Methods  of  Sbbkinq
Truth. — The  Method  Herein  Pursued. — Scope  op  the  Work. — A  Dip.
PERENCE  Between  the  Reverent  Study  of  the  Scriptures  and  the  Dan-
gerous Habit  of  Speculation. — The  Object  op  Prophecy. — The  Presbn-*
Religious  Condition  of  the  World  viewed  from  Two  Standpoints.^
Egyptian  Darkness. — A  Bow  of  Promise. — The  Path  of  the  Just  Pro-
gressive.— Cause  op  the  Great  Apostasy. — The  Reformation. — The  Same
Cause  Again  Hinders  Real  Progress. — Pbhbection  of  Knowledge  Not
A  Thing  of  the  Past,  but  of  the  Future.


*HE  TITLE  of  this  series  of  Studies— "The  Divine


Plan  of  the  Ages,"  suggests  a  progression  in  the  Di-
vine arrangement,  foreknown  to  our  God  and  orderly.  We
believe  the  teachings  of  Divine  revelation  can  be  seen  to  be
both  beautiful  and  harmonious  from  this  standpoint  and
from  no  other.  The  period  in  which  sin  is  permitted  has
been  a  dark  night  to  humanity,  never  to  be  forgotten ;  but
the  glorious  day  of  righteousness  and  divine  favor,  to  be
ushered  in  by  Messiah,  who,  as  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,
shall  arise  and  shine  fully  and  clearly  into  and  upon  all,
bringing  healing  and  blessing,  will  more  than  counterbal-
ance the  dreadful  night  of  weeping,  sighing,  pain,  sick-
ness and  death,  in  which  the  groaning  creation  has  been  so
long.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh
in  the  morning." — Psa.  30:5.  (9)


lO


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


As  though  by  instin6l,  the  whole  creation,  while  it  groans
and  travails  in  pain,  waits  for,  longs  for  and  hopes  for  the
DAY,  calling  it  the  Golden  Age ;  yet  men  grope  blindly,
because  not  aware  of  the  great  Jehovah's  gracious  purposes.
But  their  highest  conceptions  of  such  an  age  fall  far  short
of  what  the  reality  will  be.  The  great  Creator  is  preparing
a  "feast  of  fat  things,"  which  will  astound  his  creatures,
and  be  exceedingly,  abundantly  beyond  what  they  could
reasonably  ask  or  expe6t.  And  to  his  wondering  creatures,
looking  at  the  length  and  breadth,  the  height  and  depth  of
the  love  of  God,  surpassing  all  expeftation,  he  explains :
"  My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways
my  ways,  saith  the  Lord  ;  for  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than
the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  my
thoughts  than  your  thoughts." — Isa.  55  :  8,  9.

Though  in  this  work  we  shall  endeavor,  and  we  trust  with
success,  to  set  before  the  interested  and  unbiased  reader  the
plan  of  God  as  it  relates  to  and  explains  the  past,  the  pres-
ent and  the  future  of  his  dealings,  in  a  way  more  harmonious,
beautiful  and  reasonable  than  is  generally  understood,  yet
that  this  is  the  result  of  extraordinary  wisdom  or  ability  on
the  part  of  the  writer  is  positively  disclaimed.  It  is  the
light  from  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  in  this  dawning  of  the
Millennial  Day  that  reveals  these  things  as  "  present  truth,"
now  due  to  be  appreciated  by  the  sincere — the  pure  in  heart.

Since  skepticism  is  rife,  the  very  foundation  of  true  re-
ligion, and  the  foundation  of  truth,  is  questioned  often,
r  even  by  the  sincere.  We  have  endeavored  to  uncover
I  enough  of  the  foundation  upon  which  all  faith  should  be
built — the  Word  of  God — to  give  confidence  and  assurance
in  its  testimony,  even  to  the  unbeliever.  And  we  have  en-
deavored to  do  this  in  a  manner  that  will  appeal  to  and  can
be  accepted  by  reason  as  a  foundation.  Then  we  have  en-
deavored to  build  upon  that  foundation  the  teachings  of


Joy  in  ihe  Morning.


II


Scripture,  in  such  a  manner  that,  so  far  as  possible,  purely
human  judgment  may  try  its  squares  and  angles  by  the  most
exadling  rules  of  justice  which  it  can  command.

Believing  that  the  Scriptures  reveal  a  consistent  and  har-
monious plan,  which,  when  seen,  must  commend  itself  to
every  san6lified  conscience,  this  work  is  published  in  the
hope  of  assisting  students  of  the  Word  of  God,  by  suggest-
ing lines  of  thought  which  harmonize  with  each  other  and
with  the  inspired  Word.  Those  who  recognize  the  Bible
as  the  revelation  of  God's  plan — and  such  we  specially  ad-
dress—  will  doubtless  agree  that,  if  inspired  of  God,  its  teach-
ings must,  when  taken  as  a  whole,  reveal  a  plan  harmonious
and  consistent  with  itself,  and  with  the  character  of  its
Divine  Author.  Our  objedl  as  truth-seekers  should  be  to
obtain  the  complete,  harmonious  whole  of  God's  revealed
plan ;  and  this,  as  God's  children,  we  have  reason  to  expedl,
since  it  is  promised  that  the  spirit  of  truth  shall  guide  us
into  all  truth. — John  i6  :  13.

As  inquirers,  we  have  two  methods  open  to  us.  One  is
to  seek  among  all  the  views  suggested  by  the  various  se6ls
of  the  church,  and  to  take  from  each  that  element  which
we  might  consider  truth — an  endless  task.  A  difficulty  which
we  should  meet  by  this  method  would  be,  that  if  our  judg-
ment were  warped  and  twisted,  or  our  prejudices  bent  in
any  dire6tion — and  whose  are  not? — these  difficulties  would
prevent  our  corredl  sele6lion,  and  we  might  choose  the  er-
ror and  rejedl  the  truth.  Again,  if  we  should  adopt  this  as
our  method  we  should  lose  much,  because  the  truth  is  pro-
gressive, shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfefl  day,  to
those  who  search  for  it  and  walk  in  the  light  of  it,  while
the  various  creeds  of  the  various  sefts  are  fixed  and  station-
ary, and  were  made  so  centuries  ago.  And  iach  of  them
must  contain  a  large  proportion  of  error,  since  each  in  some
important  respe6ts  contradidls  the  others.    This  method


12


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


would  lead  into  a  labyrinth  of  bewilderment  and  confusion.
The  other  method  is  to  divest  our  minds  of  all  prejudice,
and  to  remember  that  none  can  know  more  about  the  plans
of  God  than  he  has  revealed  in  his  Word,  and  that  it  was
given  to  the  meek  and  lowly  of  heart ;  and,  as  such,  earnest-
ly and  sincerely  seeking  its  guidance  and  instrudtion  only,
we  shall  by  its  great  Author  be  guided  to  an  understanding
of  it,  as  it  becomes  due  to  be  understood,  by  making  use
of  the  various  helps  divinely  provided.  See  Eph.  4  :  ii-r6.

As  an  aid  to  this  class  of  students,  this  work  is  specially
designed.  It  will  be  noticed  that  its  references  are  to  Scrip-
ture only,  except  where  secular  history  may  be  called  in  to
prove  the  fulfilment  of  Scripture  statements.  The  testimony
of  modern  theologians  has  been  given  no  weight,  and  that
of  the  so-called  Early  Fathers  has  been  omitted.  Many  of
them  have  testified  in  harmony  with  thoughts  herein  ex-
pressed, but  we  believe  it  to  be  a  common  failing  of  the
present  and  all  times  for  men  to  believe  certain  dodlrines
because  others  did  so,  in  whom  they  had  confidence.  This
is  manifestly  a  fruitful  cause  of  error,  for  many  good  people
have  believed  and  taught  error  in  all  good  conscience.  (A6ts
26  :  9.)  Truth-seekers  should  empty  their  vessels  of  the
muddy  waters  of  tradition  and  fill  them  at  the  fountain  of
truth — God's  Word.  And  no  religious  teaching  should  have
weight  except  as  it  guides  the  truth-seeker  to  that  fountain.

For  even  a  general  and  hasty  examination  of  the  whole
Bible  and  its  teaching,  this  work  is  too  small ;  but,  recogniz-
ing the  haste  of  our  day,  we  have  endeavored  to  be  as  brief
as  the  importance  of  the  subjecfts  seemed  to  permit.

To  the  interested  student  we  would  suggest  that  it  will
be  useless  for  him  merely  to  skim  over  this  work,  and  hope
to  obtain  the  force  and  harmony  of  the  plan  suggested,  and
the  Scripture  evidences  herein  presented.  We  have  endeav-
ored throughout  to  present  the  various  fragments  of  truth,


Joy  in  the  Morning.


13


not  only  in  such  language,  but  also  in  such  order,  as  would
best  enable  all  classes  of  readers  to  grasp  the  subjedl  and
general  plan  clearly.  While  thorough  and  orderly  study  is
necessary  to  the  appreciation  of  any  of  the  sciences,  it  is
specially  so  in  the  science  of  Divine  revelation.  And  in
this  work  it  is  doubly  necessary,  from  the  fadl  that  in  addi-
tion to  its  being  a  treatise  on  divinely  revealed  truths,  it  is
an  examination  of  the  subjedl  from,  so  far  as  we  know,  an
altogether  different  standpoint  from  that  of  any  other  work.
We  have  no  apology  to  offer  for  treating  many  subjedls  usually
negledted  by  Christians — among  others,  the  coming  of  our
Lord,  and  the  prophecies  and  symbolism  of  the  Old  and
New  Testaments.  No  system  of  theology  should  be  pre-
sented, or  accepted,  which  overlooks  or  omits  the  most
prominent  features  of  Scripture  teaching.  We  trust,  how-
ever, that  a  wide  distinflion  will  be  recognized  between  the
earnest,  sober  and  reverent  study  of  prophecy  and  other
scriptures,  in  the  light  of  accomplished  historic  fadls,  to
obtain  conclusions  which  sanctified  common  sense  can  ap-
prove, and  a  too  common  praiftice  of  general  speculation,
which,  when  applied  to  divine  prophecy,  is  too  apt  to  give
loose  rein  to  wild  theory  and  vague  fancy.  Those  who
fall  into  this  dangerous  habit  generally  develop  into  proph-
ets (?)  instead  of  prophetic  students.

No  work  is  more  noble  and  ennobling  than  the  reverent
study  of  the  revealed  purposes  of  God — "  which  things  the
angels  desire  to  look  into."  (i  Pet.  i  :  12.)  The  fadl  that
God's  wisdom  provided  prophecies  of  the  future,  as  well  as
statements  regarding  the  present  and  the  past,  is  of  itself  a
reproof  by  Jehovah  of  the  foolishness  of  some  of  his  chil-
dren, who  have  excused  their  ignorance  and  negledl  of  the
study  of  His  Word  by  saying:  "There  is  enough  in  the
fifth  chapter  of  Matthew  to  save  any  man."  Nor  should  we
suppose  that  prophecy  was  given  merely  to  satisfy  curiosity


14


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


concerning  the  future.  Its  objedl  evidently  is  to  make  the
consecrated  child  of  God  acquainted  with  his  Father's  plans,
thus  to  enlist  his  interest  and  sympathy  in  the  same  plans,
and  to  enable  him  to  regard  both  the  present  and  the  future
from  God's  standpoint.  When  thus  interested  in  the  Lord's
work,  he  may  serve  with  the  spirit  and  with  the  understand-
ing also ;  not  as  a  servant  merely,  but  as  a  child  and  heir.
Revealing  to  such  what  shall  be,  countera6ts  the  influence
of  what  now  is.  The  effedt  of  careful  study  cannot  be  other-
wise than  strengthening  to  faith  and  stimulating  to  holiness.

In  ignorance  of  God's  plan  for  the  recovery  of  the  world
from  sin  and  its  consequences,  and  under  the  false  idea  that
the  nominal  church,  in  its  present  condition,  is  the  sole
agency  for  its  accomplishment,  the  condition  of  the  world
to-day,  after  the  Gospel  has  been  preached  for  nearly  nine-
teen centuries,  is  such  as  to  awaken  serious  doubts  in  every
thoughtful  mind  so  misinformed.  And  such  doubts  are  not
easily  surmounted  with  anything  short  of  the  truth.  In  faiSl,
to  every  thoughtful  observer,  one  of  two  things  must  be  ap-
parent :  either  the  church  has  made  a  great  mistake  in  sup-
posing that  in  the  present  age,  and  in  her  present  condition,
her  office  has  been  to  convert  the  world,  or  else  God's  plan
has  been  a  miserable  failure.  Which  horn  of  the  dilemma
shall  we  accept  ?  Many  have  accepted,  and  many  more
doubtless  will  accept,  the  latter,  and  swell  the  ranks  of  in-
fidelity, either  covertly  or  openly.  To  assist  such  as  are
honestly  falling  thus,  is  one  of  the  objedts  of  this  volume.

On  page  sixteen  we  present  a  diagram,  published  by  the
"  London  Missionary  Society,"  and  afterward  in  the  United
States  by  the  "  Women's  Presbyterian  Board  of  Missions."
It  is  termed  "A  Mute  Appeal  on  Behalf  of  Foreign  Mis-
sions." It  tells  a  sad  tale  of  darkness  and  ignorance  of  the
only  name  given  under  heaven,  or  among  men,  whereby
we  must  be  saved.


Joy  in  the  Morning.


15


The  Waichmaft — the  "  Y.  M.  C.  A."  journal  of  Chicago
— published  this  same  diagram,  and  commenting  on  it  said :

"  The  ideas  of  some  are  very  misty  and  indefinite  in  re-
gard to  the  world's  spiritual  condition.  We  hear  of  glorious
revival  work  at  home  and  abroad,  of  fresh  missionary  efforts
in  various  dire6tions,  of  one  country  after  another  opening
to  the  gospel,  and  of  large  sums  being  devoted  to  its  spread:
and  we  get  the  idea  that  adequate  efforts  are  being  made
for  the  evangelization  of  the  nations  of  the  earth.  It  is  es-
timated to-day  that  the  world's  population  is  1,424,000,000,
and  by  studying  the  diagram  we  will  see  that  considerably
more  than  one-half — nearly  two-thirds — are  still  totally
heathen,  and  the  remainder  are  mostly  either  followers  of
Mohammed  or  members  of  those  great  apostate  churches
whose  religion  is  pra6lically  a  Christianized  idolatry,  and
who  can  scarcely  be  said  to  hold  or  teach  the  gospel  of
Christ.  Even  as  to  the  116  millions  of  nominal  Protest-
ants, we  must  remember  how  large  a  proportion  in  Ger-
many, England  and  this  country  have  lapsed  into  infi-
delity— a  darkness  deeper,  if  possible,  than  even  that  of
heathenism — and  how  many  are  blinded  by  superstition,  or
buried  in  extreme  ignorance ;  so  that  while  eight  millions
of  Jews  still  reje£l  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  while  more  than
300  millions  who  bear  his  name  have  apostatized  from  his
faith,  170  millions  more  bow  before  Mohammed,  and  the
vast  remainder  of  mankind  are  to  this  day  worshipers  of
stocks  and  stones,  of  their  own  ancestors,  of  dead  heroes
or  of  the  devil  himself ;  all  in  one  way  or  other  worshiping
and  serving  the  creature  instead  of  the  Creator,  who  is  God
over  all,  blessed  forever.  Is  there  not  enough  here  to  sad-
den the  heart  of  thoughtful  Christians?"

Truly  this  is  a  sad  pidlure.  And  though  the  diagram
represents  shades  of  difference  between  Heathens,  Moham-
medans and  Jews,  all  are  alike  in  total  ignorance  of  Christ.
Some  might  at  first  suppose  that  this  view  with  reference  to
the  proportion  of  Christians  is  too  dark  and  rather  over-
drawn, but  we  think  the  reverse  of  this.  It  shows  nominal
Christianity  in  the  brightest  colors  possible.   For  instance.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


DIAGRAM

SXHIBITING  THB  ACTUAL  AND  ReI^TIVS  NUMBERS  OP  MANKIND  CtASSmOl

AccoROiim  TO  Religion.
I     A   .    '  '  I


Joy  in  the  Morning.


17


ihe  116,000,000  put  down  as  Protestant  is  far  in  excess  of
the  true  number.  Sixteen  millions  would,  we  believe,  more
nearly  express  the  number  of  professing  church  members  of
adult  years,  and  one  million  would,  we  fear,  be  far  too  lib-
eral an  estimate  of  the  "little  flock,"  the  "sandlified  in
Christ  Jesus,"  who  "walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the
Spirit."  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  a  large  propor-
tion of  church  members,  always  numbered  in  the  reckoning,
are  young  children  and  infants.  Specially  is  this  the  case
in  the  countries  of  Europe.  In  many  of  these,  children
are  reckoned  church  members  from  earliest  infancy.

But  dark  as  this  pidture  appears,  it  is  not  the  darkest
pidlure  that  fallen  humanity  presents.  The  above  cut  rep-
resents only  the  present  living  generations.  When  we  con-
sider the  fadt  that  century  after  century  of  the  six  thousand
years  past  has  swept  away  other  vast  multitudes,  nearly  all
of  whom  were  enveloped  in  the  same  ignorance  and  sin,
how  dark  is  the  scene !  Viewed  from  the  popular  stand-
point, it  is  truly  an  awful  pidlure.

The  various  creeds  of  to-day  teach  that  all  of  these  bil-
lions of  humanity,  ignorant  of  the  only  name  under  heaven
by  which  we  must  be  saved,  are  on  the  straight  road  to
everlasting  torment ;  and  not  only  so,  but  that  all  of  those
116,000,000  Protestants,  except  the  very  few  saints,  are  sure
of  the  same  fate.  No  wonder,  then,  that  those  who  believe
such  awful  things  of  Jehovah's  plans  and  purposes  should
be  zealous  in  fonvarding  missionary  enterprises — the  won-
der is  that  they  are  not  frenzied  by  it.  Really  to  believe
thus,  and  to  appreciate  such  conclusions,  would  rob  life  of
every  pleasure,  and  shroud  in  gloom  every  bright  prospedl
of  nature.

To  show  that  we  have  not  misstated  "Orthodoxy"  on
the  subjecfl  of  the  fate  of  the  heathen,  we  quote  from  the
pamphlet — "  A  Mute  Appeal  on  Behalf  of  Foreign  Mis-

2


1 8  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

sions  " — in  which  the  diagram  was  published.  Its  conclud-
ing sentence  is :  "  Evangelize  the  mighty  generations  abroad
— the  one  thousand  million  souls  who  are  dying  in  Christ-
less  despair  at  the  rate  of  100,000  a  day."

But  though  this  is  the  gloomy  outlook  from  the  stand-
point of  human  creeds,  the  Scriptures  present  a  brighter
view,  which  it  is  the  purpose  of  these  pages  to  point  out.
Instrufled  by  the  Word,  we  cannot  believe  that  God's  great
plan  of  salvation  was  ever  intended  to  be,  or  ever  will  be,
such  a  failure.  It  will  be  a  relief  to  the  perplexed  child  of
God  to  notice  that  the  Prophet  Isaiah  foretells  this  very
condition  of  things,  and  its  remedy,  saying:  "Behold,  the
darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people ;
but  the  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  his  glory  shall  be  seen
upon  thee.  And  the  Gentiles  [heathen]  shall  come  to  thy
light."  (Isa.  60:  2,  3.)  In  this  prophecy,  the  gross  dark-
ness is  lighted  by  the  bow  of  promise :  "  The  Gentiles
[the  nations  of  earth  in  general]  shall  come  to  thy  light. ' '
Not  only  have  the  continued  misery  and  darkness  of  the
world,  and  the  slow  progress  of  truth,  been  a  mystery  to
the  Church,  but  the  world  itself  has  known  and  felt  its
condition.  Like  that  which  enveloped  Egypt,  it  has  been
a  darkness  that  could  be  felt.  In  evidence  of  this,  note  the
spirit  of  the  following  lines,  clipped  from  a  Philadelphia
journal.  The  doubt  and  gloom,  intensified  by  the  clashing
creeds  of  the  various  schools,  had  not  yet  been  dispelled
from  the  writer's  mind  by  the  rays  of  divine  truth  diredl
from  the  Word  of  God  : —

"  Life!  great  mystery !    Who  shall  say

What  need  hath  God  of  this  poor  clay  ?

Formed  by  his  hand  with  potent  skill —

Mind,  matter,  soul  and  stubborn  will ;

Bom  but  to  die  :  sure  destiny — death.

Then  where,  oh !  where  this  fleeting  breath  ?

Not  one  of  all  the  countless  throng,


Joy  in  ihe  Morning.


19


'  Who  lived  and  died  and  suffered  long,
Returns  to  tell  the  great  design —
That  future,  which  is  yours  and  mine.
We  plead,  O  God !  for  some  new  ray
Of  light  for  guidance  on  our  way ;
Based  not  on  faith,  but  clearer  sight.
Dispelling  these  dark  clouds  of  night ;
This  doubt,  this  dread,  this  tremt)ling  fear;
This  thought  that  mars  our  blessings  here.
This  restless  mind,  with  bolder  sway,
Rejec'b  the  dogmas  of  the  day
Taught  by  jarring  secfts  and  schools.
To  fetter  reason  with  their  rules.
We  seek  to  know  Thee  as  thou  art —
Our  place  with  Thee — and  then  the  part
We  play  in  this  stupendous  plan.
Creator  Infinite,  and  man.
Lift  up  this  veil  obscuring  sight ;
Command  again  :  '  Let  there  be  light ! '
Reveal  this  secret  of  Thy  throne ;
We  search  in  darkness  the  unknown."
To  this  we  reply  : —

Life's  unsealed  mystery  soon  shall  say
What  joy  hath  God  in  this  poor  clay.
Formed  by  his  hand  with  potent  skill.
Stamped  with  his  image — mind  and  will ;
Bom  not  to  die — no,  a  second  birth
Succeeds  the  sentence — "  earth  to  earth."
For  One  of  all  the  mighty  host,
Who  lived  and  died  and  suffered  most.
Arose,  and  proved  God's  great  design —
That  future,  therefore,  yours  and  mine.
His  Word  discloses  this  new  ray
Of  light,  for  guidance  on  our  way  ;
Based  now  on  faith,  but  sun  as  sight,
Dispelling  these  dark  clouds  of  night  :
The  doubt,  the  dread,  the  trembling  fear.
The  thoughts  that  marred  our  blessings  here.
Now,  Lord,  these  minds,  whose  bolder  sway


20


The  Plan  of  the  Ages,


Rejedls  the  dogmas  of  to-day,

Taught  by  jarring  sedls  and  schools.

Fettering  reason  with  their  rules.

May  seek,  and  know  Thee  as  TTiou  art^

Our  place  with  Thee,  and  then  the  part

We  play  in  this  stupendous  plan.

Creator  Infinite,  and  man.

Uplifts  the  veil,  revealing  quite

To  those  who  walk  in  heaven's  light

The  glorious  mystery  of  His  throne

Hidden  from  ages,  now  made  known.

Such  a  blessing  is  now  coming  to  the  world  through  the
unfolding  of  the  divine  purpose  and  the  opening  of  the
divine  Word,  of  which  blessing  and  revealing  this  volume
we  trust  is  a  part.

Those  who  will  turn  away  from  the  mere  speculations  of
men,  and  devote  time  to  searching  the  Scriptures,  not  ex-
cluding reason,  which  God  invites  us  to  use  (Isa.  i  :  i8),
will  find  that  a  blessed  bow  of  promise  spans  the  heavens.
It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  those  without  faith,  and
consequent  justification,  should  be  able  to  apprehend  clearly
the  truth:  it  is  not  for  such.  The  Psalmist  says,  "Light
[truth]  is  sown  for  the  righteous."  (Psa.  97  :  11.)  For  the
child  of  God  a  lamp  is  provided  whose  light  dispels  from
his  pathway  much  of  the  darkness.  "  Thy  word  is  a  lamp
unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  path."  (Psa.  119  :  105.)
But  it  is  only  the  path  of  the  just  "  that  "  is  as  the  shin-
ing light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect
day."  (Prov.  4:18.)  Actually,  there  is  none  just,  "  none
righteous,  no,  not  one"  (Rom.  3  :  10);  the  class  referred
to  is  "justified  by  faith."  It  is  the  privilege  only  of  this
class  to  walk  in  the  pathway  that  shines  more  and  more —
to  see  not  only  the  present  unfoldings  of  God's  plan,  but
also  things  to  come.  While  it  is  true  that  the  path  of  each
individual  believer  is  a  shining  one,  yet  the  special  applica-


Joy  in  the  Morning.


21


tion  of  this  statement  is  to  the  just  (justified)  as  a  class.
Patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles  and  saints  of  the  past  and
present  have  walked  in  its  increasing  light ;  and  the  light
will  continue  to  increase  beyond  the  present — "  unto  the
perfe6l  day. "  It  is  one  continuous  path,  and  the  one  con-
tinuous and  increasing  light  is  the  Divine  Record,  illumin-
ating as  it  becomes  due.

Therefore,  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord,  ye  righteous,"  expedl-
ing  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  Many  have  so  little
faith  that  they  do  not  look  for  more  light,  and,  because  of
their  unfaithfulness  and  unconcern,  they  are  permitted  to
sit  in  darkness,  when  they  might  have  been  walking  in  the
increasing  light.

The  Spirit  of  God,  given  to  guide  the  Church  into  truth,
will  take  of  the  things  written  and  show  them  unto  us ;  but
beyond  what  is  written  we  need  nothing,  for  the  Holy
Scriptures  are  able  to  make  wise  unto  salvation,  through
faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. — 2  Tim.  3  :  15.

While  it  is  still  true  that  "  darkness  covers  the  earth  and
gross  darkness  the  people, ' '  the  world  is  not  always  to  re-
main in  this  condition.  We  are  assured  that  "  the  morning
Cometh."  (Isa.  21  :  12.)  As  now  God  causes  the  natural
sun  to  shine  upon  the  just  and  the  unjust,  so  the  Sun  of
Righteousness  will,  in  the  Millennial  day,  shine  for  the  bene-
fit of  all  the  world,  and  "  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things
of  darkness."  (i  Cor.  4:  5.)  It  will  dispel  the  noxious
vapors  of  evil,  and  bring  life,  health,  peace  and  joy.

Looking  into  the  past  we  find  that  then  the  light  shone
but  feebly.  Dim  and  obscure  were  the  promises  of  past
ages.  The  promises  made  to  Abraham  and  others,  and
typically  represented  in  the  law  and  ceremonies  of  fleshly
Israel,  were  only  shadows  and  gave  but  a  vague  idea  of
God's  wonderful  and  gracious  designs.  As  we  reach  the
days  of  Jesus  the  light  increases.    The  height  of  expedl-


22


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ancy,  until  then,  had  been  that  God  would  bring  a  deliv-
erer to  save  Israel  frora  their  enemies,  and  to  exalt  them  as
the  chief  nation  of  the  earth,  in  which  position  of  power  and
influence  God  would  use  them  as  his  agency  for  blessing  all
the  families  of  the  earth.  The  offer  given  them  of  heir-
ship in  the  kingdom  of  God  was  so  different,  in  the  con-
ditions demanded,  from  what  they  had  expetled,  and  the
prospers  of  the  class  being  selected  ever  attaining  the
greatness  promised  were,  outwardly  and  humanly  consid-
ered, so  improbable,  that  all  but  the  few  were  thereby
blinded  to  the  message.  And  their  blindness  and  hostility
to  it  were  naturally  increased  when,  in  the  process  of  God's
plan,  the  due  time  came  for  extending  the  message,  and
making  the  invitation  to  share  in  the  promised  Kingdom
applicable  to  every  creature  under  heaven  who  should  by
the  exercise  of  faith  be  reckoned  a  child  of  faithful  Abra-
ham and  an  heir  of  the  promise  made  to  him.

But  when  the  gospel  which  Jesus  taught  came  to  be  under-
stood after  Pentecost,  it  was  seen  by  the  Church  that  the
blessings  for  the  world  were  to  be  of  an  enduring  character,
and  that  for  the  accomplishment  of  this  purpose  the  King-
dom would  be  spiritual,  and  composed  of  Israelites  indeed,
a  "little  flock"  sele6led  from  among  both  Jews  and  Gen-
tiles to  be  exalted  to  spiritual  nature  and  power.  Hence  we
read  that  Jesus  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  through
the  gospel.  (2  Tim.  i  :  10.)  And  since  Jesus'  day  yet  more
light  shines,  as  he  foretold  it  would,  saying,  "  I  have  many
things  to  say  unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now:  how-
beit  when  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you
into  all  truth  .  .  .  and  he  will  show  you  things  to  come."
— John  16  :  12,  13.

There  came  a  time,  however,  after  the  apostles  fell  asleep,
when  the  majority  of  the  Church  began  to  negledl  the  lamp,
and  to  look  to  human  teachers  for  leading :  and  the  teach-


Joy  in  the  Morning.


-3


ers,  puffed  up  with  pride,  assumed  titles  and  offices,  and
began  to  lord  it  over  God's  heritage.  Then  by  degrees
there  came  into  existence  a  special  class  called  "the  clergy,"
who  regarded  themselves,  and  were  regarded  by  others,  as
the  proper  guides  to  faith  and  pradlice,  aside  from  the  Word
of  God.  Thus  in  time  the  great  system  of  Papacy  was  de-
veloped by  an  undue  respedt  for  the  teachings  of  fallible
men  and  a  neglect  of  the  Word  of  the  infallible  God.

Serious  indeed  have  been  the  evil  results  brought  about  by
this  negle6l  of  truth.  As  all  know,  both  the  church  and
the  civilized  world  were  almost  wholly  enslaved  by  that  sys-
tem, and  led  to  worship  the  traditions  and  creeds  of  men.
From  this  slavery  a  bold  and  blessed  strike  for  liberty  and
the  Bible  was  made,  in  what  is  known  as  The  Reformation.
God  raised  up  bold  champions  for  his  Word,  among  whom
were  Luther,  Zwingli,  Melanchthon,  Wycliffe,  Knox  and
others.  These  called  attention  to  the  fa6l  that  Papacy  had
laid  aside  the  Bible  and  substituted  the  decrees  and  dogmas
of  the  church,  and  pointed  out  a  few  of  its  erroneous  teach-
ings and  pradlices,  showing  that  they  were  built  upon  tra-
dition, contrary  to  truth,  and  opposed  to  God's  Word.
These  reformers  and  their  adherents  were  called  Protestants,
because  they  protested  against  Papacy,  and  claimed  the
Word  of  God  as  the  only  corredl  rule  of  faith  and  pra6lice.
Many  faithful  souls  in  the  days  of  the  Reformation  walked
in  the  light,  so  far  as  it  was  then  shining.  But  since  their
day  Protestants  have  made  little  progress,  because,  instead
of  walking  in  the  light,  they  have  halted  around  their  favor-
ite leaders,  willing  to  see  as  much  as  they  saw  but  nothing
more.  They  set  boundaries  to  their  progress  in  the  way  of
truth,  hedging  in,  with  the  little  truth  they  had,  a  great
deal  of  error  brought  along  from  the  "mother"  church.
For  the  creeds  thus  formulated  many  years  ago,  the  majori-
ty of  Christians  have  a  superstitious  reverence,  supposing


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


that  no  more  can  be  known  of  God's  plans  now  than  was
known  by  the  Reformers.

This  mistake  has  been  an  expensive  one ;  for,  aside  from
the  fadl  that  but  few  great  principles  of  truth  were  then  re-
covered from  the  rubbish  of  error,  there  are  special  features
of  truth  constantly  becoming  due,  and  of  these  Christians
have  been  deprived  by  their  creed  fences.  To  illustrate :
It  was  a  truth  in  Noah's  day,  and  one  which  required  the
faith  of  all  who  would  walk  in  the  light  then,  that  a  flood
was  coming,  while  Adam  and  others  had  known  nothing  of
it.  It  would  not  be  preaching  truth  now  to  preach  a  com-
ing flood,  but  there  are  other  dispensational  truths  constant-
ly becoming  due,  of  which,  if  walking  in  the  light  of  the
lamp,  we  shall  know ;  so,  if  we  have  all  the  light  which  was
due  several  hundred  years  ago,  and  that  only,  we  are  meas-
urably in  darkness.

God's  Word  is  a  great  storehouse  of  food  for  hungry
pilgrims  on  the  shining  pathway.  There  is  milk  for  babes,
and  strong  meat  for  those  more  developed  (i  Pet.  2:2;
Heb.  5  :  14)  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  it  contains  food  adapted
to  the  different  seasons  and  conditions ;  and  Jesus  said  the
faithful  servant  should  bring  forth  meat  in  due  season  for
the  household  of  faith — "things  new  and  old,"  from  the
storehouse.  (Luke  12  :  42;  Matt.  13  :  52.)  It  would  be
impossible  to  bring  forth  such  things  from  any  se6larian
creed  or  storehouse.  We  might  bring  forth  some  things
old  and  good  from  each,  but  nothing  new.  The  truth  con-
tained in  the  creeds  of  the  various  sefls  is  so  covered  and
mixed  with  error  that  its  inherent  beauty  and  real  value  are
not  discernible.  The  various  creeds  continually  confli6l
and  clash ;  and  as  each  claims  a  Bible  basis,  the  confusion
of  thought,  and  evident  discord,  are  charged  to  God's
Word.  This  has  given  rise  to  the  common  proverb : ' '  The
Bible  is  an  old  fiddle,  upon  which  any  tune  can  be  played."


/oy  in  the  Morning.


How  expressive  is  this  of  the  infidelity  of  our  times,  oc-
casioned by  misrepresentations  of  God's  Word  and  charac-
ter by  human  traditions,  together  with  the  growth  of  intel-
ligence which  will  no  longer  bow  in  blind  and  superstitious
reverence  to  the  opinions  of  fellow-men,  but  demands  a
reason  for  the  hope  that  is  in  us.  The  faithful  student  of
the  Word  should  be  able  always  to  give  a  reason  for  his
hope.  The  Word  of  God  alone  is  able  to  make  wise,  and
is  profitable  for  doctrine,  instruflion,  etc.,  "that  the  man  of
God  may  be  perfedl,  thoroughly  furnished.'"  (i  Pet.  3:15;
2  Tim.  3  :  15-17.)  Only  this  one  storehouse  contains  an
exhaustless  supply  of  things  both  new  and  old — meat  in
due  season  for  the  household.  Surely  no  one  who  believes
the  Scripture  statement  that  "the  path  of  the  just  shineth
more  and  more  unto  the  perfedl  day ' '  will  claim  that  the
perre<5l  day  came  in  Luther's  time ;  and  if  not,  we  do  well
that  v/e  take  heed  to  our  lamp  as  unto  "a  light  that  shineth.
in  a  dark  place  until  the  day  dawn." — 2  Pet.  i  :  19.

Nor  is  it  sufficient  that  we  find  ourselves  now  in  the  path
of  light ;  we  must  '■^  walk  in  the  light,"  continue  to  make
progress,  else  the  light,  which  does  not  stop,  will  pass  on
and  leave  us  in  darkness.  The  difficulty  with  many  is  that
they  sit  down,  and  do  not  follow  on  in  the  path  of  light.
Take  a  concordance  and  examine  the  texts  under  the  words
sit  and  stand,  then  compare  these  with  those  found  under
the  words  walk  and  i^n,  and  you  will  find  a  great  contrast :
Men  ' '  sit  in  darkness, ' '  and  with  ' '  the  scornful, ' '  and  stand
among  the  ungodly,  but  "walk  in  the  light,"  and  "7-un
for  the  prize." — Isa.  42  :  7 ;  Psa.  1:1;  Heb.  12:1.

Perfedlion  of  knowledge  is  not  a  thing  of  the  past,  but
of  the  future — the  very  near  future,  we  trust ;  and  until  we
recognize  this  fadl  we  are  unprepared  to  appreciate  and  ex-
pefl  fresh  unfoldings  of  our  Father's  plan.  True,  we  still
go  back  to  the  words  of  the  prophets  and  apostles  for  aU


26


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


knowledge  of  the  present  and  the  future ;  not,  however,  be-
cause they  always  understood  God's  plans  and  purposes  better
than  we,  but  because  God  used  them  as  his  mouthpieces  to
communicate  to  us,  and  to  all  the  Church  throughout  the
Christian  Age,  truth  relative  to  his  plans,  as  fast  as  it  becomes
due.  This  fadl  is  abundantly  proven  by  the  apostles.  Paul
tells  us  that  God  has  made  known  to  the  Christian  Church
the  mystery  (secret)  of  his  will  which  he  had  purposed  in
himself,  and  had  never  before  revealed,  though  he  had  it
recorded  in  dark  sayings  which  could  not  be  understood
until  due,  in  order  that  the  eyes  of  our  understanding  should
be  opened  to  appreciate  the  "high  calling''  designed  ex-
clusively for  believers  of  the  Christian  Age.  (Eph.  i  :  9,  10,
17,  18;  3:  4-6.)  This  shows  us  clearly  that  neither  the
prophets  nor  the  angels  understood  the  meaning  of  the
prophecies  uttered.  Peter  says  that  when  they  inquired
anxiously  to  know  their  meaning,  God  told  them  that  the
truths  covered  up  in  their  prophecies  were  not  for  them-
selves, but  for  us  of  the  Christian  Age.  And  he  exhorts  the
Church  to  hope  for  still  further  grace  (favor,  blessing)  in
this  dire6lion — yet  more  knowledge  of  God's  plans. — ■
I  Pet.  I  :  10-13.

It  is  evident  that  though  Jesus  promised  that  the  Church
should  be  guided  into  all  truth,  it  was  to  be  a  gradual  unfold-
ing. While  the  Church,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  was
free  from  many  of  the  errors  which  sprang  up  under  and  in
Papacy,  yet  we  cannot  suppose  that  the  early  church  saw  as
deeply  or  as  clearly  into  God's  plan  as  it  is  possible  to  see
to-day.  It  is  evident,  too,  that  the  different  apostles  had
different  degrees  of  insight  into  God's  plan,  though  all  their
writings  were  guided  and  inspired  of  God,  as  truly  as  were
the  words  of  the  prophets.  To  illustrate  differences  of
knowledge,  we  have  but  to  remember  the  wavering  course,
for  a  time,  of  Peter  and  the  other  apostles,  except  Paul,


Joy  in  the  Morning.


27


when  the  gospel  was  beginning  to  go  to  the  Gentiles.  (A6ls
10:  28;  II  :  1-3;  Gal.  2  :  11-14.)  Peter's  uncertainty  was
in  marked  contrast  with  Paul's  assurance,  inspired  by  the
words  of  the  prophets,  God's  past  dealings,  and  the  diredl
revelations  made  to  himself.

Paul  evidently  had  more  abundant  revelations  than  any
other  apostle.  These  revelations  he  was  not  allowed  to
make  known  to  the  Church,  nor  fully  and  plainly  even  to
the  other  apostles  (2  Cor.  12:4;  Gal.  2  :  2),  yet  we  can
see  a  value  to  the  entire  church  in  those  visions  and  revela-
tions given  to  Paul ;  for  though  he  was  not  permitted  to  tell
what  he  saw,  nor  to  particularize  all  he  knew  of  the  myster-
ies of  God  relating  to  the  "ages  to  come,"  yet  what  he
saw  gave  a  force,  shading  and  depth  of  meaning  to  his
words  which,  in  the  light  of  subsequent  fa£ts,  prophetic
fulfilments  and  the  Spirit's  guidance,  we  are  able  to  appre-
ciate more  fully  than  could  the  early  church.

As  corroborative  of  the  foregoing  statement,  we  call  to
mind  the  last  book  of  the  Bible — Revelation,  written  about
A.  D.  96.  The  introdu6tory  words  announce  it  as  a  special
revelation  of  things  not  previously  understood.  This  proves
conclusively  that  up  to  that  time,  at  least,  God's  plan  had
not  been  fully  revealed.  Nor  has  that  book  ever  been,  until
now,  all  that  its  name  implies — an  unfolding,  a  revelation.
So  far  as  the  early  church  was  concerned,  probably  none
understood  any  part  of  the  book.  Even  John,  who  saw
the  visions,  was  probably  ignorant  of  the  significance  of
what  he  saw.  He  was  both  a  prophet  and  an  apostle ;  and
while  as  an  apostle  he  understood  and  taught  what  was  then
"  meat  in  due  season,"  as  a  prophet  he  uttered  things  which
would  supply  "meat"  in  seasons  future  for  the  household.

During  the  Christian  Age,  some  of  the  saints  sought  to
understand  the  Church's  future  by  examining  this  symbolic
book,  and  doubtless  all  who  read  and  understood  even  a


28


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


part  of  its  teachings  were  blessed  as  promised.  (Rev.  1:3.)
The  book  kept  opening  up  to  such,  and  in  the  days  of  the
Reformation  was  an  important  aid  to  Luther  in  decidmg
that  the  Papacy,  of  which  he  was  a  conscientious  minister,
was  indeed  the  "Antichrist"  mentioned  by  the  Apostle,
the  history  of  which  we  now  see  fills  so  large  a  part  of  that
prophecy.

Thus  gradually  God  opens  up  his  truth  and  reveals  the
exceeding  riches  of  his  grace ;  and  consequently  much  more
light  is  due  now  than  at  any  previous  time  in  the  Church's
history.

*•  And  still  new  beauties  shall  we  see.
And  still  increasing  light,"


STUDY  II.


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  A  SUPREME  INTELLIGENT
CREATOR  ESTABLISHED.

BvIDBtlCB  ASIDB  FROM  THB    BiBLB,  EXAMINED  IN  THE  LiGKT  OF  RbASON.  AN

Untbnablb  Theory.— a  Rbasonablb  Theory.— The  Character  of  God
Demonstrated. — Reasonable  Deductions.

"C  VEN  from  the  standpoint  of  the  skeptic,  a  reasonable  and
^  candid  search  into  the  unknown,  by  the  light  of  what
is  known,  will  guide  the  unbiased,  intelligent  reasoner  in
the  direcSlion  of  the  truth.  Yet  it  is  evident  that  without
a  direcft  revelation  of  the  plans  and  purposes  of  God,  men
could  only  approximate  the  truth,  and  arrive  at  indefinite
conclusions.  But  let  us  for  the  moment  lay  aside  the  Bible,
and  look  at  things  from  the  standpoint  of  reason  alone.

He  who  can  look  into  the  sky  with  a  telescope,  or  even
with  his  natural  eye  alone,  and  see  there  the  immensity  of
creation,  its  symmetry,  beauty,  order,  harmony  and  diver-
sity, and  yet  doubt  that  the  Creator  of  these  is  vastly  his
superior  both  in  wisdom  and  power,  or  who  can  suppose  for
a  moment  that  such  order  came  by  chance,  without  a  Crea-
tor, has  so  far  lost  or  ignored  the  faculty  of  reason  as  to  be
properly  considered  what  the  Bible  terms  him,  a  fool  (one
who  ignores  or  lacks  reason)  :  "The  fool  hath  said  in  his
heart.  There  is  no  God."  However  it  happened,  at  least
that  much  of  the  Bible  is  true,  as  every  reasonable  mind
must  conclude;  for  it  is  a  self-evident  truth  that  effe(5ls
must  be  produced  by  competent  causes.  Every  plant  and
every  flower,  even,  speaks  volumes  of  testimony  on  ihi^

(29)


so


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


subject.  Intricate  in  constru6lion,  exquisitely  beautiful  in
form  and  texture,  each  speaks  of  a  wisdom  and  skill  above
the  human.  How  short-sighted  the  absurdity  which  boasts
of  human  skill  and  ingenuity,  and  attributes  to  mere  chance
the  regularity,  uniformity  and  harmony  of  nature ;  which
acknowledges  the  laws  of  nature,  while  denying  that  nature
has  an  intelligent  Lawgiver.

Some  who  deny  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  Creator
claim  that  nature  is  the  only  God,  and  that  from  nature  all
forms  of  animal  and  vegetable  developments  proceeded  with-
out the  ordering  of  intelligence,  but  governed,  they  say,  by
"the  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest"  in  a  process  of  evolution.

This  theory  lacks  proof,  for  all  about  us  we  see  that  the
various  creatures  are  of  fixed  natures  which  do  not  evolve
to  higher  natures ;  and  though  those  who  hold  to  this  theory
have  made  repeated  endeavors,  they  have  never  succeeded
either  in  blending  different  species  or  in  producing  a  new
fixed  variety.  No  instance  is  known  where  one  kind  has
changed  to  another  kind.*  Though  there  are  fish  that  can
use  their  fins  for  a  moment  as  wings,  and  fly  out  of  the  water,
and  frogs  that  can  sing,  they  have  never  been  known  to
change  into  birds ;  and  though  there  are  among  brutes  some
which  bear  a  slight  resemblance  to  men,  the  evidence  is
wholly  lacking  that  man  was  evolved  from  such  creatures.
On  the  contrary,  investigations  prove  that  though  different
varieties  of  the  same  species  may  be  produced,  it  is  impos-
sible to  blend  the  various  species,  or  for  one  to  evolve  from
another.  For  the  same  reason  the  donkey  and  the  horse,
though  resembling  each  other,  cannot  be  claimed  as  related,
for  it  is  well  known  that  their  offspring  is  imperfedl  and
cannot  propagate  either  species.

*  For  the  benefit  of  some  readers  we  remark  that  changes  such  as
the  transformation  of  caterpillars  into  butterflies  are  not  changes  of  n»
ture :  the  caterpillar  is  but  the  larva  hatched  from  the  butterfly's  egg.


An  Intelligent  Creator.


Surely  if  unintelligent  nature  were  the  creator  or  evolver
she  would  continue  the  process,  and  there  would  be  no  such
thing  as  fixed  species,  since  without  intelligence  nothing
would  arrive  at  fixed  conditions.  Evolution  would  be  a  fa6l
to-day,  and  we  would  see  about  us  fish  becoming  birds,  and
monkeys  becoming  men.  This  theory  we  conclude  to  be
as  contrary  to  human  reason  as  to  the  Bible,  when  it  claims
that  intelligent  beings  were  created  by  a  power  lacking  in-
telligence.

One  theory  regarding  the  creation  (excepting  man)  by
a  process  of  evolution,  to  which  we  see  no  serious  objedlion,
we  briefly  state  as  follows :  It  assumes  that  the  various  spe-
cies of  the  present  are  fixed  and  unchangeable  so  far  as  na-
ture or  kind  is  concerned,  and  though  present  natures  may
be  developed  to  a  much  higher  standard,  even  to  perfe6lion,
these  species  or  natures  will  forever  be  the  same.  This  theo-
ry further  assumes  that  none  of  these  fixed  species  were
originally  created  so,  but  that  in  the  remote  past  they  were
developed  from  the  earth,  and  by  gradual  processes  of  evolu-
tion from  one  form  to  another.  These  evolutions,  under
divinely  established  laws,  in  which  changes  of  food  and
climate  played  an  important  part,  may  have  continued  until
the  fixed  species,  as  at  present  seen,  were  established,  be-
yond which  change  is  impossible,  the  ultimate  purpose  of
the  Creator  in  this  respedl,  to  all  appearance,  having  been
reached.  Though  each  of  the  various  families  of  plants  and
animals  is  capable  of  improvement  or  of  degradation,  none
of  them  is  susceptible  of  change  into,  nor  can  they  be  pro-
duced from,  other  families  or  kinds.  Though  each  of  these
may  attain  to  the  perfedion  of  its  own  fixed  nature,  the
Creator's  design  as  to  nature  having  been  attained,  further
change  in  this  respedl  is  impossible.

It  is  claimed  that  the  original  plants  and  animals,  from
which  present  fixed  varieties  came,  became  extindl  before


$a  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

the  creation  of  man.  Skeletons  and  fossils  of  animals  and
plants  which  do  not  now  exist,  found  deep  below  the  earth's
surface,  favor  this  theory.  This  view  neither  ignores  nor
reje(5ls  the  Bible  teaching  that  man  was  a  dire6l  and  perfedl
creation,  made  in  the  mental  and  moral  image  of  his  IMaker,
and  not  a  development  by  a  process  of  evolution,  probably
common  to  the  remainder  of  creation.  This  view  would
in  no  sense  invalidate,  but  would  support,  the  Bible's  claim,
that  nature  as  it  is  to-day  teaches  that  an  Intelligent  Being
ordered  it,  and  was  its  first  cause.  Let  human  reason  do  her
best  to  trace  known  fads  to  reasonable  and  competent  causes,
giving  due  credit  to  nature's  laws  in  every  case ;  but  back
of  all  the  intricate  machinery  of  nature  is  the  hand  of  its
great  Author,  the  intelligent,  omnipotent  God.

We  claim,  then,  that  the  existence  of  an  Intelligent  Crea-
tor is  a  clearly  demonstrated  truth,  the  proof  of  which  lies
all  around  us :  yea,  and  within  us ;  for  we  are  his  workman-
ship, whose  every  power  of  mind  and  body  speaks  of  a
marvelous  skill  beyond  our  comprehension.  And  he  is  also
the  Designer  and  Creator  of  what  we  term  nature.  We
claim  that  he  ordered  and  established  the  laws  of  nature,
the  beauty  and  harmony  of  whose  operation  we  see  and  ad-
mire. This  one  whose  wisdom  planned  and  whose  power
upholds  and  guides  the  universe,  whose  wisdom  and  power
so  immeasurably  transcend  our  own,  we  instindtively  wor-
ship and  adore.

To  realize  the  existence  of  this  mighty  God  is  but  to
dread  his  omnipotent  strength,  unless  we  can  see  him  pos-
sessed of  benevolence  and  goodness  corresponding  to  his
power.  Of  this  fadl  we  are  also  fully  assured  by  the  same
evidence  which  proves  his  existence,  power  and  wisdom.
Not  only  are  we  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a  God,
and  that  his  power  and  wisdom  are  immeasurably  beyond
our  own,  but  we  are  forced  by  reason  to  the  conclusion  that


An  Tntelltgent  Creator.


3S


the  grandest  thing  created  is  not  superior  to  its  Creator ;
hence  we  must  conclude  that  the  greatest  manifestation  of
benevolence  and  justice  among  men  is  inferior  in  scope  to
that  of  the  Creator,  even  as  man's  wisdom  and  power  are
inferior  to  his.  And  thus  we  have  before  our  mental  vision
the  charadler  and  attributes  of  the  great  Creator.  He  is
wise,  just,  loving  and  powerful ;  and  the  scope  of  his  attri-
butes is,  of  necessity,  immeasurably  wider  than  that  of  his
grandest  creation.

But  further :  having  reached  this  reasonable  conclusion
relative  to  the  existence  and  charader  of  our  Creator,  let
us  inquire.  What  should  we  expe6l  of  such  a  being  ?  The
answer  comes,  that  the  possession  of  such  attributes  reason-
ably argues  their  exercise,  their  use.  God's  power  must  be
used,  and  that  in  harmony  with  his  own  nature — wisely,
justly  and  benevolently.  Whatever  may  be  the  means  to
that  end,  whatever  may  be  the  operation  of  God's  power,
the  final  outcome  must  be  consistent  with  his  nature  and
chara(5ler,  and  every  step  must  be  approved  of  his  infinite
■wisdom.

What  could  be  more  reasonable  than  such  exercise  of
power  as  we  see  manifested  in  the  creation  of  countless
worlds  about  us,  and  in  the  wonderful  variety  of  earth?
What  could  be  more  reasonable  than  the  creation  of  man,
endowed  with  reason  and  judgment,  capable  of  appreci-
ating his  Creator's  works,  and  judging  of  his  skill — of  his
wisdom,  justice,  power  and  love  ?  All  this  is  reasonable,
and  all  in  perfeft  accord  with  faefls  known  to  us.

And  now  comes  our  final  proposition.  Is  it  not  reason-
able to  suppose  that  such  an  infinitely  wise  and  good  being,
having  made  a  creature  capable  of  appreciating  himself  and
his  plan,  would  be  moved  by  his  love  and  justice  to  supply
the  wants  of  that  creature's  nature,  by  giving  him  some
REVELATION  ?    Would  it  not  be  a  reasonable  supposition,

3


34


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


that  God  would  supply  to  man  information  concerning  the
objedt  of  his  existence,  and  his  plans  for  his  future  ?  On  the
contrary,  we  ask,  would  it  not  be  unreasonable  to  suppose
that  such  a  Creator  would  make  such  a  creature  as  man,  endow
him  with  powers  of  reason  reaching  out  into  the  future,  and
yet  make  no  revelation  of  his  plans  to  meet  those  longings  ?
Such  a  course  would  be  unreasonable,  because  contrary  to
the  chara6ler  which  we  reasonably  attribute  to  God ;  con-
trary to  the  proper  course  of  a  being  controlled  by  justice
and  love.

We  may  reason  that  in  creating  man,  had  Divine  Wisdom
decided  it  inexpedient  to  grant  him  a  knowledge  of  his
future  destiny,  and  his  share  in  his  Creator's  plans,  then
surely  Divine  Justice,  as  well  as  Divine  Love,  would  have
insisted  that  the  being  should  be  so  limited  in  his  capacity
that  he  would  not  continually  be  tormented  and  perplexed
with  doubts,  and  fears,  and  ignorance;  and  as  a  conse-
quence Divine  Power  would  have  been  used  under  those
limitations.  The  fadt,  then,  that  man  has  capacity  for  ap-
preciating a  revelation  of  the  Divine  plan,  taken  in  con-
nedlion  with  the  conceded  character  of  his  Creator,  is  an
abundant  reason  for  expe6ting  that  God  would  grant  such
a  revelation,  in  such  time  and  manner  as  his  wisdom  ap-
proved. So,  then,  in  view  of  these  considerations,  even  if
we  were  ignorant  of  the  Bible,  reason  would  lead  us  to  ex-
pert and  to  be  on  the  lookout  for  some  such  revelation  as
the  Bible  claims  to  be.  And  furthermore,  noting  the  order
and  harmony  of  the  general  creation,  as  in  grand  procession
the  spheres  and  systems  keep  time  and  place,  we  cannot  but
conclude  that  the  minor  irregularities,  such  as  earthquakes,
cyclones,  etc.,  are  but  indications  that  the  working  together
of  the  various  elements  in  this  world  is  not  at  present  per-
fect. An  assurance  that  all  will  ultimately  be  perfe6t  and
harmonious  on  earth  as  in  the  heavens,  with  some  explana-


An  Intelligent  Creator.


35


tion  why  it  is  not  so  at  present,  are  requests  which  are  not
unreasonable  for  reasoning  men  to  ask,  nor  for  the  Creator,
whose  wisdom,  power  and  benevolence  are  demonstrated,
to  answer.  Hence  we  should  expe6t  the  revelation  sought
to  include  such  an  assurance  and  such  an  explanation.

Having  established  the  reasonableness  of  expecting  a
revelation  of  God's  will  and  plan  concerning  our  race,  we
will  examine  in  the  next  chapter  the  general  character  of
the  Bible  which  claims  to  be  just  such  a  revelation.  And  if
it  presents  the  charadler  of  God  in  perfedl  harmony  with
what  reason  as  above  considered  di6tates,  we  should  con-
clude that  it  thus  proves  itself  to  be  the  needed  and  reason-
ably expe(5led  revelation  from  God,  and  should  then  accept
its  testimony  as  such.  If  of  God,  its  teachings,  when  fully
appreciated,  will  accord  with  his  character,  which  reason
assures  us  is  perfedl  in  wisdom,  justice,  love  and  power.

"  Ye  curious  minds,  who  roam  abroad,
And  trace  creation's  wonders  o'er,
Confess  the  footsteps  of  your  God,
And  bow  before  him,  and  adore.

"  The  heavens  declare  thy  glory,  Lord ;
In  every  star  thy  wisdom  shines ;
But  when  our  eyes  behold  thy  Word,
We  read  thy  name  in  fairer  Hues."


36


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


SUNSHINE  OVER  ALL.

'What  folly,  then,"  the  faithless  critic  cries,
With  sneering  lip  and  wise,  world-knowing  eyes,
"  While  fort  to  fort  and  post  to  post  repeat
The  ceaseless  challenge  of  the  war-drum's  beat,
And  round  the  green  earth,  to  the  church-bell's  chime^
The  morning  drum-roll  of  the  camp  keeps  time,
To  dream  of  peace  amidst  a  world  in  arms ;
Of  swords  to  plowshares  changed  by  Scriptural  chatms;
Of  nations,  drunken  with  the  wine  of  blood.
Staggering  to  take  the  pledge  of  brotherhood,
Like  tipplers  answering  Father  Mathew's  call.

******
Check  Bau  or  Kaiser  with  a  barricade
Of  '  Olive  leaves '  and  resolutions  made ;
Spike  guns  with  pointed  Scripture  texts,  and  hope
To  capsize  navies  with  a  windy  trope ;
Still  shall  the  glory  and  the  pomp  of  war
Along  their  train  the  shouting  millions  draw ;
Still  dusky  labor  to  the  parting  brave
His  cap  shall  doff  and  beauty's  kerchief  wave;
Still  shall  the  bard  to  valor  tune  his  song ;
Still  hero-worship  kneel  before  the  strong ;
Rosy  and  sleek,  the  sable-gowned  divine.
O'er  his  third  bottle  of  suggestive  wine.
To  plumed  and  sworded  auditors  shall  prove
Their  trade  accordant  with  the  law  of  love ;
And  Church  for  State,  and  State  for  Church  shall  fight.
And  both  agree  that  might  alone  is  right."

Despite  the  sneers  like  these,  O  faithful  few,
Who  dare  to  hold  God's  Word  and  witness  true,
Whose  clear-eyed  faith  transcends  our  evil  time,
And  o'er  the  present  wilderness  of  crime
Sees  the  calm  future  with  its  robes  of  green,
Its  fleece-flecked  mountains,  and  soft  streams  between.
Still  keep  the  track  which  duty  bids  ye  tread.
Though  worldly  wisdom  shake  the  cautious  head.
No  truth  from  heaven  descends  upon  our  sphere
Without  the  greeting  of  the  skeptic's  sneer :
Denied,  and  mocked  at,  till  its  blessings  fall
Common  as  dew  and  sunshine  over  all.

—  Whittier.


STUDY  III.


THE  BIBLE  AS  A  DIVINE  REVELATION  VIEWED
IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  REASON

Thb  Claims  op  thb  Biblb  and  its  Surpacb  Evidbncb  op  Crbdibility. — Its
Ahtiquity  and  Prbservatiom. — Its  Moral  Influence. — Motives  of  thb
Writers. — General  Character  of  the  Writings. — The  Books  of  Moses.
— The  Law  of  Moses. — Peculiarities  of  thb  Government  Instituted  by
Moses.— It  was  not  a  System  of  Priestcraft.— Instructions  to  Civil
Rulers. — Rich  ani>  Poor  oh  a  Common  Le\-el  Before  the  Law. — Sapk-
GUARDS  Against  Tampering  With  the  Rights  of  the  People.— Thb
Priesthood  Not  a  Favored  Class,  How  Supported,  etc. — Oppression  op
FoREiGHERS,  Widows,  Orphans  and  Servants  Guarded  Against. — Thb
Prophets  of  thb  Biblb. — Is  There  a  Common  Bond  of  Union  Between
THB  Law,  thb  Prophets  and  the  New  Testament  Writers? — Miraclbs
Not  Unrbasonablb.— The  Rbasonablb  Conclusion.

'PHE  Bible  is  the  torch  of  civilization  and  liberty.  Its
influence  for  good  in  society  has  been  recognized  by
the  greatest  statesmen,  even  though  they  for  the  most  part
have  looked  at  it  through  the  various  glasses  of  conflidling
creeds,  which,  while  upholding  the  Bible,  grievously  mis-
represent its  teachings.  The  grand  old  book  is  uninten-
tionally but  wofully  misrepresented  by  its  friends,  many  of
whom  would  lay  down  life  on  its  behalf;  and  yet  they  do
it  more  vital  injury  than  its  foes,  by  claiming  its  support  to
their  long-revered  misconceptions  of  its  truth,  received
through  the  traditions  of  their  fathers.  Would  that  such
would  awake,  re-examine  their  oracle,  and  put  to  confusion
its  enemies  by  disarming  them  of  their  weapons  !

Since  the  light  of  nature  leads  us  to  expeft  a  fuller  rev-
elation of  God  than  that  which  nature  supplies,  the  reason-
able, thinking  mind  will  be  prepared  to  examine  the  claims
of  anything  purporting  to  be  a  divine  revelation,  which

37


38


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


bears  a  reasonable  surface  evidence  of  the  truthfulness  of
such  claims.  The  Bible  claims  to  be  such  a  revelation  from
God,  and  it  does  come  to  us  with  sufficient  surface  evidence
as  to  the  probable  corre6lness  of  its  claims,  and  gives  us  a
reasonable  hope  that  closer  investigation  will  disclose  more
complete  and  positive  evidence  that  it  is-indeed  the  Word
of  God.

The  Bible  is  the  oldest  book  in  existence ;  it  has  outlived
the  storms  of  thirty  centuries.  Men  have  endeavored  by
every  means  possible  to  banish  it  from  the  face  of  the  earth:
they  have  hidden  it,  burned  it,  made  it  a  crime  punishable
with  death  to  have  it  in  possession,  and  the  most  bitter  and
relentless  persecutions  have  been  waged  against  those  who
had  faith  in  it ;  but  still  the  book  lives.  To-day,  while
many  of  its  foes  slumber  in  death,  and  hundreds  of  volumes
written  to  discredit  it  and  to  overthrow  its  influence,  are
long  since  forgotten,  the  Bible  has  found  its  way  into  every
nation  and  language  of  earth,  over  two  hundred  different
translations  of  it  having  been  made.  The  fa6t  that  this
book  has  survived  so  many  centuries,  notwithstanding  such
unparalleled  efforts  to  banish  anddestroy  it,is  at  least  strong
circumstantial  evidence  that  the  great  Being  whom  it  claims
as  its  Author  has  also  been  its  Preserver.

It  is  also  true  that  the  moral  influence  of  the  Bible  is
uniformly  good.  Those  who  become  careful  students  of  its
pages  are  invariably  elevated  to  a  purer  life.  Other  writ-
ings upon  religion  and  the  various  sciences  have  done  good
and  have  ennobled  and  blessed  mankind,  to  some  extent ;
but  all  other  books  combined  have  failed  to  bring  the  joy,
peace  and  blessing  to  the  groaning  creation  that  the  Bible
has  brought  to  both  the  rich  and  the  poor,  to  the  learned
and  the  unlearned.  The  Bible  is  not  a  book  to  be  read
merely :  it  is  a  book  to  be  studied  with  care  and  thought ;
for  God's  thoughts  are  higher  than  our  thoughts,  and  his


A  Divine  Revelation.


39


ways  than  our  ways.  And  if  we  would  comprehend  the
plan  and  thoughts  of  the  infinite  God,  we  must  bend  all  our
energies  to  that  important  work.  The  richest  treasures  of
truth  do  not  always  lie  on  the  surface.

This  book  throughout  constantly  points  and  refers  to  one
prominent  charadter,  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  who,  it  claims,  was
the  Son  of  God.  From  beginning  to  end  his  name,  and
office,  and  work,  are  made  prominent.  That  a  man  called
Jesus  of  Nazareth  lived,  and  was  somewhat  noted,  about
the  time  indicated  by  the  writers  of  the  Bible,  is  a  fa6t  of
history  outside  the  Bible,  and  it  is  variously  and  fully  cor-
roborated. That  this  Jesus  was  crucified  because  he  had  ren-
dered himself  offensive  to  the  Jews  and  their  priesthood  is
a  further  fa6l  established  by  history  outside  the  evidence
furnished  by  the  New  Testament  writers.  The  writers  of
the  New  Testament  (except  Paul  and  Luke)  were  the  per-
sonal acquaintances  and  disciples  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
whose  do6lrines  their  writings  set  forth.

The  existence  of  any  book  implies  motive  on  the  part  of
the  writer.  We  therefore  inquire,  What  motives  could  have
inspired  these  men  to  espouse  the  cause  of  this  person  ?  He
was  condemned  to  death  and  crucified  as  a  malefa6lor  by
the  Jews,  the  most  religious  among  them  assenting  to  and
demanding  his  death,  as  one  unfit  to  live.  And  in  espous-
ing his  cause,  and  promulgating  his  do6lrines,  these  men
braved  contempt,  deprivation  and  bitter  persecution,  risked
life  itself,  and  in  some  cases  even  suffered  martyrdom.  Ad-
mitting that  while  he  lived  Jesus  was  a  remarkable  person,
in  both  his  life  and  his  teaching,  what  motive  could  there
have  been  for  any  to  espouse  his  cause  after  he  was  dead  ?
— especially  when  his  death  was  so  ignominious  ?  And  if  we
suppose  that  these  writers  invented  their  narratives,  and
that  Jesus  was  their  imaginary  or  ideal  hero,  how  absurd  it
would  be  to  suppose  that  sane  men,  after  claiming  that  he


4°


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


was  the  Son  of  God,  that  he  had  been  begotten  in  a  super-
natural way,  had  supernatural  powers  by  which  he  had
healed  lepers,  restored  sight  to  those  born  blind,  caused the
deaf  to  hear,  and  even  raised  the  dead — how  very  absurd
to  suppose  that  they  would  wind  up  the  story  of  such  a
character  by  stating  that  a  little  band  of  his  enemies  ex-
ecuted him  as  a  felon,  while  all  his  friends  and  disciples,
and  among  them  the  writers  themselves,  forsook  him  and
fled  in  the  trying  moment  ?

The  fa<5l  that  profane  history  does  not  agree  in  some  re-
spedls  with  these  writers  should  not  lead  us  to  regard  their
records  as  untrue.  Those  who  do  thus  conclude  should  assign
and  prove  some  motive  on  the  part  of  these  writers  for
making  false  statements.  What  motives  could  have  prompted
them?  Could  they  reasonably  have  hoped  thereby  for
fortune,  or  fame,  or  power,  or  any  earthly  advantage  ?  The
poverty  of  Jesus'  friends,  and  the  unpopularity  of  their
hero  himself  with  the  great  religionists  of  Judea,  contradidl
such  a  thought ;  while  the  fadls  that  he  died  as  a  malefadlor,
a  disturber  of  the  peace,  and  that  he  was  made  of  no  repu-
tation, held  forth  no  hope  of  enviable  fame  or  earthly  ad-
vantage to  those  who  should  attempt  to  re-establish  his
dodtrine.  On  the  contrary,  if  such  had  been  the  obje<5t  of
those  who  preached  Jesus,  would  they  not  -speedily  have
given  it  up  when  they  found  that  it  brought  disgrace,  per-
secution, imprisonment,  stripes  and  even  death?  Reason
plainly  teaches  that  men  who  sacrificed  home,  reputation,
honor  and  life ;  who  lived  not  for  present  gratification ;  but
whose  central  aim  was  to  elevate  their  fellow-men,  and  who
inculcated  morals  of  the  highest  type,  were  not  only  pos-
sessed of  a  motive,  but  further  that  their  motive  must  have
been  pure  and  their  objedl  grandly  sublime.  Reason  further
declares  that  the  testimony  of  such  men,  actuated  only  by
pure  and  good  motives,  is  worthy  of  ten  times  the  weight


A  Divine  Revelation.


41


and  consideration  of  ordinary  writers.  Nor  were  these  men
fanatics :  they  were  men  of  sound  and  reasonable  mind,
and  furnished  in  every  case  a  reason  for  their  faith  and
hope ;  and  they  were  perseveringly  faithful  to  those  reason-
able convidlions.

And  what  we  have  here  noticed  is  likewise  applicable  to
the  various  writers  of  the  Old  Testament.  They  were,  in
the  main,  men  notable  for  their  fidelity  to  the  Lord ;  and
this  history  as  impartially  records  and  reproves  their  weak-
nesses and  shortcomings  as  it  commends  their  virtues  and
faithfulness.  This  must  astonish  those  who  presume  the
Bible  to  be  a  manufa6lured  history,  designed  to  awe  men
into  reverence  of  a  religious  system.  There  is  a  straight-
forwardness about  the  Bible  that  stamps  it  as  truth.  Knaves,
desirous  of  representing  a  man  as  great,  and  especially  if
desirous  of  presenting  some  of  his  writings  as  inspired  of
God,  would  undoubtedly  paint  such  a  one's  charadler
blameless  and  noble  to  the  last  degree.  The  fadt  that  such
a  course  has  not  been  pursued  in  the  Bible  is  reasonable
evidence  that  it  was  not  fraudulently  gotten  up  to  deceive.

Having,  then,  reason  to  expeSl  a  revelation  of  God's
will  and  plan,  and  having  found  that  the  Bible,  which
claims  to  be  that  revelation,  was  written  by  men  whose
motives  we  see  no  reason  to  impugn,  but  which,  on  the
contrary,  we  see  reason  to  approve,  let  us  examine  the  char-
after  of  the  writings  claimed  as  inspired,  to  see  whether
their  teachings  correspond  with  the  charadler  we  have  rea-
sonably imputed  to  God,  and  whether  they  bear  internal
evidence  of  their  truthfulness.

The  first  five  books  of  the  New  Testament  and  several
of  the  Old  Testament  are  narratives  or  histories  of  fadts
known  to  the  writers  and  vouched  for  by  their  charadters.
It  is  manifest  to  all  that  it  did  not  require  a  special  revela-
tion simply  to  tell  the  truth  with  reference  to  matters  with


42


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


which  they  were  intimately  and  fully  acquainted.  Yet,
since  God  desired  to  make  a  revelation  to  men,  the  fafl  that
these  histories  of  passing  events  have  a  bearing  on  that  rev-
elation would  be  a  sufficient  ground  to  make  the  inference  a
reasonable  one,  that  God  would  supervise,  and  so  arrange,
that  the  honest  writer  whom  he  seledled  for  the  work  should
be  brought  in  contact  with  the  needful  fafts.  The  cred-
ibility of  these  historic  portions  of  the  Bible  rests  almost
entirely  upon  the  chara6lers  and  motives  of  their  writers.
Good  men  will  not  utter  falsehoods.  A  pure  fountain  will
not  give  forth  bitter  waters.  And  the  united  testimony  of
these  writings  silences  any  suspicion  that  their  authors  would
say  or  do  evil,  that  good  might  follow.

It  in  no  way  invalidates  the  truthfulness  of  certain  books
of  the  Bible,  such  as  Kings,  Chronicles,  Judges,  etc.,  when
we  say  that  they  are  simply  truthful  and  carefully  kept  his-
tories of  prominent  events  and  persons,  of  their  times.  When
it  is  remembered  that  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  contain  his-
tory, as  well  as  the  law  and  the  prophecies,  and  that  their
histories,  genealogies,  etc.,  were  the  more  explicit  in  de-
tailing circumstances  because  of  the  expeftancy  that  the
promised  Messiah  would  come  in  a  particular  line  from
Abraham,  we  see  a  reason  for  the  recording  of  certain
facSts  of  history  considered  indelicate  in  the  light  of  this
twentieth  century.  For  instance,  a  clear  record  of  the
origin  of  the  nations  of  the  Moabites  and  of  the  Ammon-
ites, and  of  their  relationship  to  Abraham  and  the  Israel-
ites, was  probably  the  necessity  in  the  historian's  mind  for
a  full  history  of  their  nativity.  (Gen.  19:36-38.)  Like-
wise, a  very  detailed  account  of  Judah's  children  is  given,
of  whom  came  David,  the  king,  through  whom  the  gen-
ealogy of  Mary,  Jesus'  mother,  as  well  as  that  of  Joseph,
her  husband  (Luke  3:23,  31,  33,  34;  Matt.  1:2-16),  is
traced  back  to  Abraham.    Doubtless  the  necessity  of  thor-


A  Divine  Revelation.


43


oughly  establishing  the  pedigree  was  the  more  important,
since  of  this  tribe  (Gen.  49  :  10)  was  to  come  the  ruKng
King  of  Israel,  as  well  as  the  promised  Messiah,  and  hence
the  minutiae  of  detail  not  given  in  other  instances. — Gen.  38.

There  may  be  similar  or  different  reasons  for  other  his-
toric fa6ts  recorded  in  the  Bible,  of  which  by  and  by  we
may  see  the  utility,  which,  were  it  not  a  history,  but  simply
a  treatise  on  morals,  might  without  detriment  be  omitted ;
though  no  one  can  reasonably  say  that  the  Bible  anywhere
countenances  impurity.  It  is  well,  furthermore,  to  remem-
ber that  the  same  fa(5ls  may  be  more  or  less  delicately  stated
in  any  language ;  and  that  while  the  translators  of  the  Bible
were,  rightly,  too  conscientious  to  omit  any  of  the  record,
yet  they  lived  in  a  day  less  particular  in  the  choice  of  re-
fined expressions  than  ours ;  and  the  same  may  be  surmised
of  the  early  Bible  times  and  habits  of  expression.  Cer-
tainly the  most  fastidious  can  find  no  obje6lion  on  this
score  to  any  expression  of  the  New  Testament.

THE  BOOKS  OF  MOSES  AND  THE  LAWS  THEREIN
PROMULGATED.

The  first  five  books  of  the  Bible  are  known  as  the  Five
Books  of  Moses,  though  they  nowhere  mention  his  name
as  their  author.  That  they  were  written  by  Moses,  or  under
his  supervision,  is  a  reasonable  inference ;  the  account  of
his  death  and  burial  being  properly  added  by  his  secretary.
The  omission  of  the  positive  statement  that  these  books
were  written  by  Moses  is  no  proof  against  the  thought ;
for  had  another  written  them  to  deceive  and  commit  a  fraud,
he  would  surely  have  claimed  that  they  were  written  by  the
great  leader  and  statesman  of  Israel,  in  order  to  make  good
his  imposition.  (See  Deut.  31  :  9-27.)  Of  one  thing  we
are  certain,  Moses  did  lead  out  of  Egypt  the  Hebrew  na-
tion.  He  did  organize  them  as  a  nation  under  the  laws  set


44


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


forth  in  these  books ;  and  the  Hebrew  nation,  by  common
consent,  for  over  three  thousand  years,  has  claimed  these
books  as  a  gift  to  them  from  Moses,  and  has  held  them  so
sacred  that  a  jot  or  tittle  must  not  be  altered — thus  giving
assurance  of  the  purity  of  the  text.

These  writings  of  Moses  contain  the  only  credible  his-
tory extant,  of  the  epoch  which  it  traverses.  Chinese  his-
tory affedts  to  begin  at  creation,  telling  how  God  went  out
on  the  water  in  a  skiff,  and,  taking  in  his  hand  a  lump  of
earth,  cast  it  into  the  water.  That  lump  of  earth,  it  claims,
became  this  world,  etc.  But  the  entire  story  is  so  devoid
of  reason  that  the  merest  child  of  intelligence  would  not
be  deceived  by  it.  On  the  contrary,  the  account  given  in
Genesis  starts  with  the  reasonable  assumption  that  a  God,
a  Creator,  an  intelligent  First  Cause,  already  existed.  It
treats  not  of  God's  having  a  beginning,  but  of  his  work
and  of  its  beginning  and  its  systematic  orderly  progress —
"  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth."
Then  stepping  over  the  origin  of  the  earth  without  detail  or
explanation,  the  narrative  of  the  six  days  [epochs]  of  prepar-
ing it  for  man  proceeds.  That  account  is  substantially  cor-
roborated by  the  accumulating  light  of  science  for  four
thousand  years ;  hence  it  is  far  more  reasonable  to  accept
the  claim  that  its  author,  Moses,  was  divinely  inspired,  than
to  assume  that  the  intelligence  of  one  man  was  superior  to
the  combined  intelligence  and  research  of  the  rest  of  the
race  in  three  thousand  years  since,  aided  by  modern  im-
plements and  millions  of  money.

Look  next  at  the  system  of  laws  laid  down  in  these  writ-
ings. They  certainly  were  without  an  equal,  either  in  their
day  or  since,  until  this  twentieth  century;  and  the  laws  of
this  century  are  based  upon  the  principles  laid  down  in  the
Mosaic  Law,  and  framed  in  the  main  by  men  who  acknowl-
edged the  Mosaic  Law  as  of  divine  origin.


A  Divine  Revelation.

The  Decalogue  is  a  brief  synopsis  of  the  whole  law.
Those  Ten  Commandments  enjoin  a  code  of  worship  and
morals  that  must  strike  every  student  as  remarkable ;  and  if
never  before  known,  and  now  found  among  the  ruins  and
relics  of  Greece,  or  Rome,  or  Babylon  (nations  which  have
risen  and  fallen  again,  long  since  those  laws  were  given),
they  would  be  regarded  as  marvelous  if  not  supernatural.
But  familiarity  with  them  and  their  claims  has  begotten
measurable  indifference,  so  that  their  real  greatness  is  un-
noticed except  by  the  few.  True,  those  commandments  do
not  teach  of  Christ ;  but  they  were  given,  not  to  Christians,
but  to  Hebrews ;  not  to  teach  faith  in  a  ransom,  but  to
convince  men  of  their  sinful  state,  and  need  of  a  ransom.
And  the  substance  of  those  commandments  was  grandly
epitomized  by  the  illustrious  founder  of  Christianity,  in  the
words:  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and
with  all  thy  strength ;"  and  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor
as  thyself" — Mark  12  :  30,  31.

The  government  instituted  by  Moses  differed  from  all
others,  ancient  and  modern,  in  that  it  claimed  to  be  that
of  the  Creator  himself,  and  the  people  were  held  account-
able to  him ;  their  laws  and  institutions,  civil  and  religious,
claimed  to  emanate  from  God,  and,  as  we  shall  presently
see,  were  in  perfedl  harmony  with  what  reason  teaches  us  to
be  God's  charadler.  The  Tabernacle,  in  the  centre  of  the
camp,  had  in  its  "Most  Holy"  apartment  a  manifestation
of  Jehovah's  presence  as  their  King,  whence  by  supernatu-
ral  means  they  received  instru<ftion  for  the  proper  adminis-
tration of  their  affairs  as  a  nation.  An  order  of  priests  was
established,  which  had  complete  charge  of  the  Tabernacle,
and  through  them  alone  access  and  communion  with  Jeho-
vah was  permitted.  The  first  thought  of  some  in  this  con-
nedtion  would  perhaps  be :  "Ah!  there  we  have  the  obje^


46


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


of  their  organization  :  with  them,  as  with  other  nations,  the
priests  ruled  the  people,  imposing  upon  their  credulity  and
exciting  their  fears  for  their  own  honor  and  profit."  But
hold,  friend  ;  let  us  not  too  hastily  assume  anything.  Where
there  is  such  good  opportunity  for  testing  this  matter  by  the
fatSts,  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  jump  to  conclusions
without  the  facSts.  The  unanswerable  evidences  are  con-
trary to  such  suppositions.  The  rights  and  the  privileges
of  the  priests  were  limited  ;  they  were  given  no  civil  power
whatever,  and  wholly  lacked  opportunity  for  using  their
office  to  impose  upon  the  rights  or  consciences  of  the  peo-
ple ;  and  this  arrangement  was  made  by  Moses,  a  member
of  the  priestly  line.

As  God's  representative  in  bringing  Israel  out  of  Egyp-
tian bondage,  the  force  of  circumstances  had  centrahzed
the  government  in  his  hand,  and  made  the  meek  Moses  an
autocrat  in  power  and  authority,  though  from  the  meekness
of  his  disposition  he  was  in  fa6l  the  overworked  servant  of
the  people,  whose  very  life  was  being  exhausted  by  the  on-
erous cares  of  his  position.  At  this  jun6lure  a  civil  govern-
ment was  established,  which  was  virtually  a  democracy.  Let
us  not  be  misunderstood :  Regarded  as  unbelievers  would
esteem  it,  Israel's  government  was  a  democracy,  but  re-
garded in  the  light  of  its  own  claims,  it  was  a  theocracy,
/.  €.,  a  divine  government;  for  the  laws  given  by  God,
through  Moses,  permitted  of  no  amendments :  they  must
neither  add  to  nor  take  from  their  code  of  laws.  Thus  seen,
Israel's  government  was  different  from  any  other  civil  gov-
ernment, either  before  or  since.  "The  Lord  said  unto
Moses,  gather  unto  me  seventy  men  of  the  elders  of  Israel,
whom  thou  knowest  to  be  elders  of  the  people  and  officers
over  them ;  and  bring  them  unto  the  Tabernacle  of  the  con-
gregation, that  they  may  stand  there  with  thee.  And  I  will
come  down  and  talk  with  thee  there,  and  I  will  take  of  the


A  Divine  Revelation.


47


spirit  which  is  upon  thee  and  will  put  it  upon  them,  and
they  shall  bear  the  burden  of  the  people  with  thee,  that
thou  bear  it  not  alone."  (Num.  n  :  i6,  17.  See  also  verses
24  to  30  for  an  example  of  true  and  guileless  statesmanship
and  meekness.)  Moses,  rehearsing  this  matter,  says:  "  So  I
took  the  chief  of  your  tribes,  wise  men,  and  known  [of  in-
fluence], and  made  them  heads  over  you :  captains  over
thousands,  and  captains  over  hundreds,  and  captains  over
fifties,  and  captains  over  tens,  and  officers  among  your
tribes." — Deut.  i  :  15  ;  Exod.  18  :  13-26.

Thus  it  appears  that  this  distinguished  lawgiver,  so  far
from  seeking  to  perpetuate  or  increase  his  own  power  by
placing  the  government  of  the  people  under  the  control  of
his  diredt  relatives,  of  the  priestly  tribe,  to  use  their  relig-
ious authority  to  fetter  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the  people,
on  the  contrary  introduced  to  the  people  a  form  of  govern-
ment calculated  to  cultivate  the  spirit  of  liberty.  The  his-
tories of  other  nations  and  rulers  show  no  parallel  to  this.
In  every  case  the  ruler  has  sought  his  own  aggrandizement
and  greater  power.  Even  in  instances  where  such  have
aided  in  establishing  republics,  it  has  appeared  from  subse-
quent events  that  they  did  it  through  policy,  to  obtain  favor
vith  the  people,  and  to  perpetuate  their  own  power.  Cir-
cumstanced as  Moses  was,  any  ambilious  man,  governed  by
policy  and  attempting  to  perpetuate  a  fraud  upon  the  people,
would  have  worked  for  greater  centralization  of  power  in
himself  and  his  family ;  especially  as  this  would  have  seemed
an  easy  task  from  the  religious  authority  being  already  in
that  tribe,  and  from  the  claim  of  this  nation  to  be  governed
by  God,  from  the  Tabernacle.  Nor  is  it  supposable  that  a
man  capable  of  forming  such  laws,  and  of  ruling  such  a
people,  would  be  so  dull  of  comprehension  as  not  to  see
what  the  tendency  of  his  course  would  be.  So  completely
was  the  government  of  the  people  put  into  their  own  hands,


48


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


that  though  it  was  stipulated  that  the  weightier  cases  which
those  governors  could  not  decide  were  to  be  brought  unto
Moses,  yet  they  themselves  were  the  judges  as  to  what
cases  went  before  Moses  :  "The  cause  which  is  too  hard  for
you,  bring  it  unto  me,  and  I  will  hear  it." — Deut.  1:17.

Thus  seen,  Israel  was  a  republic  whose  officers  adled  imder
a  divine  commission.  And  to  the  confusion  of  those  who
ignorantly  claim  that  the  Bible  sandlions  an  established
empire  rule  over  the  people,  instead  of  "  a  government  of  the
people  by  the  people,"  be  it  noted  that  this  republican  form
of  civil  government  continued  for  over  four  hundred  years.
And  it  was  then  changed  for  that  of  a  kingdom  at  the  re-
quest of  "  The  Elders,"  without  the  Lord's  approval,  who
said  to  Samuel,  then  adling  as  a  sort  of  informal  president,
**  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  people  in  all  that  they
shall  say  umto  thee,  for  they  have  not  reje(5led  thee,  but
they  have  rejedled  Me,  that  I  should  not  reign  over  them. ' '
At  God's  instance  Samuel  explained  to  the  people  how  their
rights  and  liberties  would  be  disregarded,  and  how  they
would  become  servants  by  such  a  change ;  yet  they  had  be-
come infatuated  with  the  popular  idea,  illustrated  all  around
them  in  other  nations,  (i  Sam.  8  :  6-22.)  In  consider-
ering  this  account  of  their  desire  for  a  king,  who  is  not
impressed  with  the  thought  that  Moses  could  have  firmly
established  himself  at  the  head  of  a  great  empire  without
difficulty?

While  Israel  as  a  whole  constituted  one  nation,  yet  the
tribal  division  was  ever  recognized  after  Jacob's  death.  Each
family,  or  tribe,  by  common  consent,  eledted  or  recognized
certain  members  as  its  representatives,  or  chiefs.  This
custom  was  continued  even  through  their  long  slavery  in
Egypt.  These  were  called  chiefs  or  elders,  and  it  was  to
these  that  Moses  delivered  the  honor  and  power  of  civU
government ;  whereas,  had  he  desired  to  centrali«e  power


A  Divine  Revelation.


49


in  himself  and  his  own  family,  these  would  have  been  the
last  men  to  honor  with  power  and  office.

The  instru(5lions  given  those  appointed  to  civil  rulership
as  from  God  are  a  model  of  simplicity  and  purity.  Moses
declares  to  the  people,  in  the  hearing  of  these  judges:  "  I
charged  your  judges  at  that  time,  saying.  Hear  the  causes
between  your  brethren,  and  judge  righteously  between  every
man  and  his  brother,  and  the  stranger  [foreigner]  that  is
with  him.  Ye  shall  not  respe6l  persons  in  judgment ;  but
ye  shall  hear  the  small  as  well  as  the  great ;  ye  shall  not  be
afraid  of  the  face  of  man,  for  the  judgment  is  God's ;  and
the  cause  that  is  too  hard  for  you,  bring  it  unto  me,  and  I
will  hear  it."  (Deut.  i  :  i6,  17.)  Such  hard  cases  were,
after  Moses'  death,  brought  directly  to  the  Lord  through
the  High  Priest,  the  answer  being  Yes  or  No,  by  the  Urim
and  Thummim.

In  view  of  these  fafls,  what  shall  we  say  of  the  theory
which  suggests  that  these  books  were  written  by  knavish
priests  to  secure  to  themselves  influence  and  power  over  the
people  ?  Would  such  men  for  such  a  purpose  forge  records
destru6live  to  the  very  aims  they  sought  to  advance — rec-
ords which  prove  conclusively  that  the  great  Chief  of  Israel,
and  one  of  their  own  tribe,  at  the  instance  of  God,  cut  off
the  priesthood  from  civil  power  by  placing  that  power  in
the  hands  of  the  people  ?  Does  any  one  consider  such  a
conclusion  reasonable  ?

Again,  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  laws  of  the  most
advanced  civilization,  in  this  twentieth  century,  do  not
more  carefully  provide  that  rich  and  poor  shall  stand  on  a
common  level  in  accountability  before  the  civil  law.  Ab-
solutely no  distindlion  was  made  by  Moses'  laws.  And  as
for  the  protedtion  of  the  people  from  the  dangers  incident
to  some  becoming  very  poor  and  others  excessively  wealthy
and  powerful,  no  other  national  law  has  ever  been  enadted

4-A


5°


The  Flan  of  the  Ages.


which  so  carefully  guarded  this  point.  Moses'  law  provided
for  a  restitution  every  fiftieth  year — their  Jubilee  year.  This
law,  by  preventing  the  absolute  alienation  of  property,
thereby  prevented  its  accumulation  in  the  hands  of  a  few.
(Lev.  25  :  9,  13-23,  27-30.)  In  fa6l,  they  M'ere  taught  to
consider  themselves  brethren,  and  to  a6t  accordingly ;  to
assist  each  other  without  compensation,  and  to  take  no
usury  of  one  another. — See  Exod.  22  :  25  ;  Lev.  25  ;  36,
37  ;  Num.  26  :  52-56.

All  the  laws  were  made  public,  thus  preventing  designing
men  from  successfully  tampering  with  the  rights  of  the
people.  The  laws  were  exposed  in  such  a  manner  that  any
who  chose  might  copy  them  ;  and,  in  order  that  the  poor-
est and  most  unlearned  might  not  be  ignorant  of  them,  it
was  made  the  duty  of  the  priests  to  read  them  to  the  people
at  their  septennial  festivals.  (Deut.  31  :  10-13.)  Is  it  reason-
able to  suppose  that  such  laws  and  arrangements  were  de-
signed by  bad  men,  or  by  men  scheming  to  defraud  the
people  of  their  liberties  and  happiness  ?  Such  an  assump-
tion would  be  unreasonable.

In  its  regard  for  the  rights  and  interests  of  foreigners,
and  of  enemies,  the  Mosaic  law  was  thirty-two  centuries
ahead  of  its  times — if  indeed  the  laws  of  the  most  civilized
of  to-day  equal  it  in  fairness  and  benevolence.    We  read :

"  Ye  shall  have  one  manner  of  law  as  well  for  the  stran-
ger [foreigner]  as  for  one  of  your  own  country;  for  I  am
the  Lord  your  God." — Exod.  12  :  49;  Lev.  24:  22.

"  And  if  a  stranger  sojourn  with  thee  in  your  land,  ye
shall  not  vex  him ;  but  the  stranger  that  dwelleth  with  you
shall  be  unto  you  as  one  born  among  you,  and  thou  shalt
love  him  as  thyself ;  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of
Egypt."— Lev.  19  :  33,  34-

"  If  thou  meet  thine  enemy's  ox  or  his  ass  going  astray,
thou  shalt  surely  bring  it  back  to  him  again.    If  thou  see


A  Divine  Revelation.


the  ass  of  him  that  hateth  thee  lying  under  his  burden,
wouldst  thou  cease  to  leave  thy  business  and  help  him?
Thou  shalt  surely  leave  it,  to  join  with  [assist]  hira." —
Exod.  23  :  4,  5,  margin.

Even  the  dumb  animals  were  not  forgotten.  Cruelty  to
these  as  well  as  to  human  beings  was  prohibited  strictly.
An  ox  must  not  be  muzzled  while  threshing  the  grain ;  for
the  good  reason  that  any  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  food.
Even  the  ox  and  the  ass  must  not  plow  together,  because
so  unequal  in  strength  and  tread :  it  would  be  cruelty.
Their  rest  was  also  provided  for. — Deut.  25  :  4;  22  :  10;
Exod.  23  :  12.

The  priesthood  may  be  claimed  by  some  to  have  been  a
selfish  institution,  because  the  tribe  of  Levites  was  supported
by  the  annual  tenth,  or  tithe,  of  the  individual  produce  of
their  brethren  of  the  other  tribes.  This  fa6l,  stated  thils,
is  an  unfair  presentation  too  common  to  skeptics,  who,
possibly  ignorantly,  thereby  misrepresent  one  of  the  most
remarkable  evidences  of  God's  part  in  the  organization  of
that  system,  and  that  it  was  not  the  work  of  a  selfish  and
scheming  priesthood.  Indeed,  it  is  not  infrequently  mis-
represented by  a  modern  priesthood,  which  urges  a  similar
system  now,  using  that  as  a  precedent,  without  mentioning
the  condition  of  things  upon  which  it  was  founded,  or  its
method  of  payment.

It  was,  in  fa6l,  founded  upon  the  stridlest  equity.  When
Israel  came  into  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  the
Levites  certainly  had  as  much  right  to  a  share  of  the  land
as  the  other  tribes  ;  yet,  by  God's  express  command,  they
got  none  of  it,  except  certain  cities  or  villages  for  residence,
scattered  among  the  various  tribes,  whom  they  were  to  serve
in  religious  things.  Nine  times  is  this  prohibition  given,
before  the  division  of  the  land.  Instead  of  the  land,  some
equivalent  should  surely  be  provided  them,  and  the  tithe


52


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


was  therefore  this  reasonable  and  just  provision.  Nor  is
this  all :  the  tithe,  though,  as  we  have  seen,  a  just  debt,  was
not  enforced  as  a  tax,  but  was  to  be  paid  as  a  voluntary-
contribution.  And  no  threat  bound  them  to  make  those
contributions :  all  depended  upon  their  conscientiousness.
The  only  exhortations  to  the  people  on  the  subje(5l  are  as
follows : —

"  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  forsake  not  the  Levite
as  long  as  thou  livest  upon  the  earth."  (Deut.  12  :  19.)
"And  the  Levite  that  is  within  thy  gates,  thou  shalt  not
forsake  him  ;  for  he  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance  with  thee  "
[in  the  land]. — Deut.  14  :  27.

Is  it,  we  ask,  reasonable  to  suppose  that  this  order  of
things  would  have  been  thus  arranged  by  selfish  and  ambi-
tious priests? — an  arrangement  to  disinherit  themselves  and
to  make  them  dependent  for  support  upon  their  brethren  ?
Does  not  reason  teach  us  to  the  contrary  ?

In  harmony  with  this,  and  equally  inexplicable  on  any
other  grounds  than  those  claimed — that  God  is  the  author
of  those  laws — is  the  fa6l  that  no  special  provision  was  made
for  honoring  the  priesthood.  In  nothing  would  impostors  be
more  careful  than  to  provide  reverence  and  respe6l  for
themselves,  and  severest  penalties  and  curses  upon  those
who  misused  them.  But  nothing  of  the  kind  appears  :  no
special  honor,  or  reverence,  or  immunity  from  violence  or
insult,  is  provided.  The  common  law,  which  made  no  dis-
tin6tion  between  classes,  and  was  no  respe6ler  of  persons,
was  their  only  proteflion.  This  is  the  more  remarkable
because  the  treatment  of  servants,  and  strangers,  and  the
aged,  was  the  subje6l  of  special  legislation.  For  instance:
Thou  shalt  not  vex  nor  oppress  a  stranger,  or  widow,  or
fatherless  child;  for  if  they  cry  at  all  unto  me  [to  God]  I
will  surely  hear  their  cry  ;  and  my  wrath  shall  wax  hot,  and
I  will  kill  you  with  the  sword,  and  your  wives  shall  be  wid-


A  Divine  Revelation.


53


ows  and  your  children  fatherless.  (Exod.  22  :  21-24;  23:
9;  Lev.  19  :  33,  34.)  "Thou  shalt  not  oppress  an  hired
iervant  that  is  poor  and  needy,  whether  he  be  of  thy  breth-
L^-en,  or  of  strangers  that  are  in  thy  land,  within  thy  gates.
At  his  day  thou  shalt  give  him  his  hire,  neither  shall  the  sun
go  down  upon  it,  for  he  is  poor,  and  setteth  his  heart  upon  it ;
test  he  cry  against  thee  unto  the  Lord  and  it  be  sin  unto
thee."  (Lev.  19:13;  Deut.  24 :  14,  15  ;  Exod.  21 :  26,  27.)
"  Thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary  head  and  honor  the
face  of  the  old  man. "(Lev.  19  :  32.  See  also  Lev.  19  :  14.)
All  this,  yet  nothing  special  for  Priests,  or  Levites,  or  their
tithes.

The  sanitary  arrangements  of  the  law,  so  needful  to  a
poor  and  long-oppressed  people,  together  with  the  arrange-
ments and  limitations  respecting  clean  and  unclean  animals
which  might  or  might  not  be  eaten,  are  remarkable,  and
would,  with  other  features,  be  of  interest  if  space  permitted
their  examination,  as  showing  that  law  to  have  been  abreast
with,  if  not  in  advance  of,  the  latest  conclusions  of  medical
science  on  the  subjeft.  The  law  of  Moses  had  also  a  typ-
ical character,  which  we  must  leave  for  future  considera-
tion ;  but  even  our  hasty  glance  has  furnished  overwhelming
evidence  that  this  law,  which  constitutes  the  very  frame-
work of  the  entire  system  of  revealed  religion,  which  the
remainder  of  the  Bible  elaborates,  is  truly  a  marvelous  dis-
play of  wisdom  and  justice,  especially  when  its  date  is  taken
into  consideration.

In  the  light  of  reason,  all  must  admit  that  it  bears  no
evidence  of  being  the  work  of  wicked,  designing  men,  but
that  it  corresponds  exadlly  with  what  nature  teaches  to  be
the  character  of  God.  It  gives  evidence  of  his  Wisdom,
Justice  and  Love.  And  further,  the  evidently  pious  and
noble  lawgiver,  Moses,  denies  that  the  laws  were  his  own,
and  attributes  them  to  God.    (Exod.  24  :  12  ;  Deut.  9  :  ^


54


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


II ;  Exod.  26  :  30 ;  Lev.  i  :  i.)  In  view  of  his  general
charadler,  and  his  commands  to  the  people  not  to  bear  false
witness,  and  to  avoid  hypocrisy  and  lying,  is  it  reasonable
to  suppose  that  such  a  man  bore  false  witness  and  palmed
off  his  own  views  and  laws  for  those  of  God  ?  It  should
be  remembered  also  that  we  are  examining  the  present
copies  of  the  Bible,  and  that  therefore  the  integrity  for
which  it  is  so  marked  applies  equally  to  the  successors  of
Moses ;  for  though  bad  men  were  among  those  successors,
who  did  seek  their  own  and  not  the  people's  good,  it  is
evident  that  they  did  not  tamper  with  the  Sacred  Writings,
which  are  pure  to  this  day.

THE  PROPHETS  OF  THE  BIBLE.
Glance  now  at  the  general  chara6ter  of  the  prophets  of
the  Bible  and  their  testimonies.  A  rather  remarkable  fadl
is  that  the  prophets,  with  few  exceptions,  were  not  of  the
priestly  class ;  and  that  in  their  day  their  prophecies  were
generally  repugnant  to  the  degenerating  and  time-serving
priesthood,  as  well  as  to  the  idolatrously  inclined  people.
The  burden  of  their  messages  from  God  to  the  people  was
generally  reproof  for  sin,  coupled  with  warnings  of  coming
punishments,  intertwined  with  which  we  find  occasional
promises  of  future  blessings,  after  they  should  be  cleansed
from  sin  and  should  return  to  favor  with  the  Lord.  Their
experiences,  for  the  most  part,  were  far  from  enviable :  they
were  generally  reviled,  many  of  them  being  imprisoned
and  put  to  violent  deaths.  See  i  Kings  18  :  4,  10,  17,  18;
19  :  loj  Jer.  38  :  6  ;  Heb.  11  :  32-38.  In  some  instances
it  was  years  after  their  death  before  their  true  charaflcr  as
God's  prophets  was  recognized.  But  we  speak  thus  of  the
prophetic  writers  whose  utterances  claim  to  be  the  diredl
inspiration  of  Jehovah.  It  is  well  in  this  connection  that
we  should  remember  that  in  the  giving  of  the  law  to  Israel
there  was  no  priestly  intervention :  it  was  given  by  God


A  Divine  Revelation.


55


to  the  people  by  the  hand  of  Moses.  (Exod.  19  :  17-25  ;
Deut.  5  :  1-5.)  And,  furthermore,  it  was  made  the  duty
of  every  man  seeing  a  violation  of  the  law  to  reprove  the
sinner.  (Lev.  19  :  17.)  Thus  all  had  the  authority  to  teach
and  reprove ;  but  since,  as  in  our  own  day,  the  majority
were  absorbed  in  the  cares  of  business,  and  became  indiffer-
ent and  irreligious,  the  few  comparatively  fulfilled  this  re-
quirement by  reproving  sin  and  exhorting  to  godliness ;  and
these  preachers  are  termed  "prophets"  in  both  the  Old
and  New  Testaments.  The  term  prophet,  as  generally  used,
signifies  public  expounder,  and  the  public  teachers  of  idola-
try were  also  so  called ;  for  instance,  "  the  prophets  of
Baal,"  etc.  See  i  Cor.  14  :  1-6 ;  2  Pet.  2:1;  Matt.  7:15;
14 :  5  ;  Neh.  6:7;!  Kings  18  :  40 ;  Titus  1:12.

Prophesying,  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  teaching,  afterward
became  popular  with  a  certain  class,  and  degenerated  into
Phariseeism — teaching,  instead  of  God's  commandments,
the  traditions  of  the  ancients,  thereby  opposing  the  truth  and
becoming  false  prophets,  or  false  teachers. — Matt.  15  :  2-9.

Out  of  the  large  class  called  prophets,  Jehovah  at  various
times  made  choice  of  some  whom  he  specially  commissioned
to  deliver  messages,  relating  sometimes  to  things  then  at
hand,  at  other  times  to  future  events.  It  is  to  the  writings
of  this  class,  who  spoke  and  wrote  as  they  were  moved  by
the  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  are  now  giving  attention.  They
might  with  propriety  be  designated

DIVINELY  COMMISSIONED  PROPHETS  OR  SEERS.

When  it  is  remembered  that  these  prophets  were  mainly
laymen,  drawing  no  support  from  the  tithes  of  the  priestly
tribe,  and  when,  added  to  this,  is  the  fadl  that  they  were
frequently  not  only  the  reprovers  of  kings  and  judges,  but
also  of  priests  (though  they  reproved  not  the  office,  but  the
personal  sins  of  the  men  who  filled  it),  it  becomes  evident


56


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


that  we  could  not  reasonably  decide  that  these  prophets  were
parties  to  any  league  of  priests,  or  others,  to  fabricate  false-
hood in  the  name  of  God.  Reason  in  the  light  of  fafls
contradidts  such  a  suspicion.

If,  then,  we  find  no  reason  to  impeach  the  motives  of  the
various  writers  of  the  Bible,  but  find  that  the  spirit  of  its
various  parts  is  righteousness  and  truth,  let  us  next  proceed
to  inquire  whether  there  exists  any  link,  or  bond  of  union,
between  the  records  of  Moses,  those  of  the  other  prophets,
and  those  of  the  New  Testament  writers.  If  we  shall  find  one
common  line  of  thought  interwoven  throughout  the  Law  and
the  Prophets  and  the  New  Testament  writings,  which  cover
a  period  of  fifteen  hundred  years,  this,  taken  in  connedlion
with  the  character  of  the  writers,  will  be  a  good  reason  for
admitting  their  claim — that  they  are  divinely  inspired —
particularly  if  the  theme  common  to  all  of  them  is  a  grand
and  noble  one,  comporting  well  with  what  san6lified  com-
mon sense  teaches  regarding  the  charadler  and  attributes
of  God.

This  we  do  find  :  One  plan,  spirit,  aim  and  purpose  per-
vades the  entire  book.  Its  opening  pages  record  the  cre^
ation  and  fall  of  man  ;  its  closing  pages  tell  of  man's  recov°
ery  from  that  fall ;  and  its  intervening  pages  show  the  suc-
cessive steps  of  the  plan  of  God  for  the  accomplishment  of
this  purpose.  The  harmony,  yet  contrast,  of  the  first  three
and  the  last  three  chapters  of  the  Bible  is  striking.  The
one  describes  the  first  creation,  the  other  the  renewed  or
restored  creation,  with  sin  and  its  penal-curse  removed;
the  one  shows  Satan  and  evil  entering  the  world  to  deceive
and  destroy,  the  other  shows  his  work  undone,  the  destroyed
ones  restored,  evil  extinguished  and  Satan  destroyed ;  the
one  shows  the  dominion  lost  by  Adam,  the  other  shows  il^
restored  and  forever  established  by  Christ,  and  God's  wilH
done  in  earth  as  in  heaven ;  the  one  shows  sin  the  producing


A  Divine  Revelation.


57


cause  of  degradation,  shame  and  death,  the  other  shows  the
reward  of  righteousness  to  be  glory,  honor  and  life.

Though  written  by  many  pens,  at  various  times,  under
diiTerent  circumstances,  the  Bible  is  not  merely  a  coUeftion
of  moral  precepts,  wise  maxims  and  words  of  comfort.  It
is  more :  it  is  a  reasonable,  philosophical  and  harmonious
statement  of  the  causes  of  present  evil  in  the  world,  its  only
remedy  and  the  final  results  as  seen  by  divine  wisdom,  which
saw  the  end  of  the  plan  from  before  its  beginning,  marking
as  well  the  pathway  of  God's  people,  and  upholding  and
strengthening  them  with  exceeding  great  and  precious
promises  to  be  realized  in  due  time.

The  teaching  of  Genesis,  that  man  was  tried  in  a  state  of
original  perfecftion  in  one  representative,  that  he  failed,  and
that  the  present  imperfedlion,  sickness  and  death  are  the
results,  but  that  God  has  not  forsaken  him,  and  will  ulti-
mately recover  him  through  a  redeemer,  born  of  a  woman
(Gen.  3  :  15),  is  kept  up  and  elaborated  all  the  way  through.
The  necessity  of  the  death  of  a  redeemer  as  a  sacrifice  for  sins,
and  of  his  righteousness  as  a  covering  for  our  sin,  is  pointed
out  in  the  clothing  of  skins  for  Adam  and  Eve  ;  in  the  accept-
ance of  Abel's  offerings  ;  in  Isaac  on  the  altar  ;  in  the  death  of
the  various  sacrifices  by  which  the  patriarchs  had  access  to
God,  and  of  those  instituted  under  the  law  and  perpetuated
throughout  the  Jewish  age.  The  prophets,  though  credited
with  understanding  but  slightly  the  significance  of  some  of
their  utterances  (i  Pet.  i  :  12),  mention  the  laying  of  the
sins  upon  a  person  instead  of  a  dumb  animal,  and  in  pro-
phetic vision  they  see  him  who  is  to  redeem  and  to  deliver  the
race  led  "  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,"  that  "the  chas-
tisement of  our  peace  was  upon  him,"  and  that  "by  his
stripes  we  are  healed."  They  pi6lured  him  as  "despised
and  rejedted  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with
grief,"  and  declared  that  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


iniquity  of  us  all."  (Isa.  53  :  3-6.)  They  told  where  this
deliverer  would  be  born  (Micah  5  :  2),  and  when  he  should
die,  assuring  us  that  it  would  be  "  not  for  himself."  (Dan.
9  :  26.)  They  mention  various  peculiarities  concerning  him
— that  he  would  be  "righteous,"  and  free  from  "deceit,"
"  violence,"  or  any  just  cause  of  death  (Isa.  53  :  8,  9,  11)  ;
that  he  would  be  betrayed  for  thirty  pieces  of  silver  (Zech.
II  :  12);  that  he  would  be  numbered  among  transgressors  in
his  death  (Isa.  53  :  12) ;  that  not  a  bone  of  him  should  be
broken  (Psa.  34:  20;  John  19:  36)  ;  and  that  though  he
should  die  and  be  buried,  his  flesh  would  not  corrupt,  neither
would  he  remain  in  the  grave. — Psa.  16  :  10 ;  Adls  2  :  31.

The  New  Testament  writers  clearly  and  forcibly,  yet
simply,  record  the  fulfilment  of  all  these  prediftions  in  Je-
sus of  Nazareth,  and  by  logical  reasonings  show  that  such
a  ransom  price  as  he  gave  was  needful,  as  already  predicted
in  the  Law  and  the  Prophets,  before  the  sins  of  the  world
could  be  blotted  out.  (Isa.  i  :  18.)  They  trace  the  entire
plan  in  a  most  logical  and  forcible  manner,  appealing  neither
to  the  prejudices  nor  to  the  passions  of  their  hearers,  but
to  their  enlightened  reason  alone,  furnishing  some  of  the
most  remarkably  close  and  cogent  reasoning  to  be  found
anywhere  on  any  subjedt.  See  Rom.  5  :  17-19,  and  onward
to  the  1 2th  chapter.

Moses,  in  the  Law,  pointed  not  alone  to  a  sacrifice,  but
also  to  a  blotting  out  of  sins  and  a  blessing  of  the  people
under  this  great  deliverer,  whose  power  and  authority  he
declares  shall  vastly  exceed  his  own,  though  it  should  be
"like  unto"  it.  (Deut  18  :  15,  19.)  The  promised  deliv-
erer is  to  bless  not  only  Israel,  but  through  Israel  "  all  the
families  of  the  earth."  (Gen.  12  :  3  ;  18  :  18;  22  :  18  ;  26  :  4.)
And  notwithstanding  the  prejudices  of  the  Jewish  people
to  the  contrary,  the  prophets  continue  the  same  strain,  de-
claring that  Messiah  shall  be  also  "  for  a  light  to  lighten  the


A  Divine  Revelation.


59


Gentiles"  (Isa.  49:6;  Luke  2:32);  that  the  Gentiles
should  come  to  hira  "from  the  ends  of  the  earth"  ( Jer.
16:  19);  that  his  name  ' '  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles ' '
(Mai.  I  :  11) ;  and  that  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  re-
vealed and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together." — Isa.  40:5.
See  also  Isa.  42  :  1-7.

The  New  Testament  writers  claim  a  divine  anointing
which  enabled  them  to  realize  the  fulfilment  of  the  proph-
ecies concerning  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  They,  though  preju-
diced as  Jews  to  think  of  every  blessing  as  limited  to  their
own  people  (Adls  1 1  :  1-18),  were  enabled  to  see  that  while
their  nation  would  be  blessed,  all  the  families  of  the  earth
should  be  blessed  also,  with  and  through  them.  They  saw
also  that,  before  the  blessing  of  either  Israel  or  the  world,
a  seledlion  would  be  made  of  a  "little  flock"  from  both
Jews  and  Gentiles,  who,  being  tried,  would  be  found  worthy
to  be  made  joint-heirs  of  the  glory  and  honor  of  the  Great
Deliverer,  and  sharers  with  him  of  the  honor  of  blessing
Israel  and  all  the  nations.— Rom.  8:17.

These  writers  point  out  the  harmony  of  this  view  with
what  is  written  in  the  Law  and  the  Prophets ;  and  the  grand-
eur and  breadth  of  the  plan  they  present  more  than  meets
the  most  exalted  conception  of  what  it  purports  to  be —
"  Good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which  shall  be  unto  all  people. ' '

The  thought  of  Messiah  as  a  ruler  of  not  only  Israel,  but
also  of  the  world,  suggested  in  the  books  of  Moses,  is  the
theme  of  all  the  prophets.  The  thought  of  the  kingdom
was  uppermost  also  in  the  teaching  of  the  apostles ;  and
Jesus  taught  that  we  should  pray,  "Thy  Kingdom  come,"
and  promised  those  a  share  in  it  who  would  first  suffer  for
the  truth,  and  thus  prove  themselves  worthy.

This  hope  of  the  coming  glorious  kingdom  gave  all  the
faithful  ones  courage  to  endure  persecution  and  to  sufter
reproach,  deprivation  and  loss,  even  unto  death.    And  in


6o


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


the  grand  allegorical  prophecy  which  closes  the  New  Tes-
tament, the  worthy  "  Lamb  that  was  slain  "  (Rev.  5  :  12),
the  worthy  ' '  overcomers ' '  whom  he  will  make  kings  and
priests  in  his  kingdom,  and  the  trials  and  obstacles  which
they  must  overcome  to  be  worthy  to  share  that  kingdom,
are  all  faithfully  portrayed.  Then  are  introduced  symbolic
representations  of  the  blessings  to  accrue  to  the  world  under
that  Millennial  reign,  when  Satan  shall  be  bound  and  Adam-
ic  death  and  sorrow  wiped  out,  and  when  all  the  nations  of
earth  shall  walk  in  the  light  of  the  heavenly  kingdom —
the  new  Jerusalem.

The  Bible,  from  first  to  last,  holds  out  a  doctrine  found
nowhere  else,  and  in  opposition  to  the  theories  of  all  the
heathen  religions — that  a  future  life  for  the  dead  will  come
through  a  resurrection  of  the  dead.  All  the  inspired
writers  expressed  their  confidence  in  a  redeemer,  and  one
declares  that  "  in  the  morning,"  when  God  shall  call  them
from  the  tomb,  and  they  shall  come  forth,  the  wicked  shall
no  longer  hold  the  rulership  of  earth  ;  for  "The upright  shall
have  dominion  over  them,  in  the  morning."  (Psa.  49  :  14.)
The  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  taught  by  the  prophets ;
and  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  base  all  their  hopes
of  future  life  and  blessing  upon  it.  Paul  expresses  it  thus :
"  If  there  be  no  resurredion  of  the  dead,  then  is  Christ
not  risen ;  and  if  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching
vain  and  your  faith  is  also  vain  ;  .  .  .  then  they  which  are
fallen  asleep  in  Christ  are  perished.  But  now  is  Christ  ris-
en from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that
slept ;  ...  for  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ
shall  all  be  made  alive." — i  Cor.  15  :  13-22.

Like  a  watch,  whose  many  wheels  might  at  first  seem  su-
perfluous, but  whose  slowest  moving  wheels  are  essential,
so  the  Bible,  composed  of  many  parts,  and  prepared  by  many
pens,  is  one  complete  and  harmonious  whole.  Not  a  single


A  Divine  Revelation.


6i


part  is  superfluous,  and  though  some  parts  take  a  more  active
and  prominent  place  than  others,  all  are  useful  and  necessary.
It  is  becoming  popular  among  the  so-called  "  advanced
thinkers"  and  "great  theologians"  of  the  present  day  to
treat  lightly,  or  to  ignore  if  they  do  not  deny,  many  of  the
"miracles"  of  the  Old  Testament,  calling  them  "old
wives'  fables."  Of  these  are  the  accounts  of  Jonah  and  the
great  fish,  Noah  and  the  ark,  Eve  and  the  serpent,  the  stand-
ing still  of  the  sun  at  the  command  of  Joshua,  and  Ba-
laam's speaking  ass.  Seemingly  these  wise  men  overlook  the
fa6t  that  the  Bible  is  so  interwoven  and  united  in  its  various
parts  that  to  tear  from  it  these  miracles,  or  to  discredit
them,  is  to  destroy  or  discredit  the  whole.  For  if  the  orig-
inal accounts  are  false,  those  who  repeated  them  were  either
falsifiers  or  dupes,  and  in  either  case  it  would  be  impossible
for  us  to  accept  their  testimony  as  divinely  inspired.  To
eliminate  from  the  Bible  the  miracles  mentioned  would  in-
validate the  testimony  of  its  principal  writers,  besides  that
of  our  Lord  Jesus.  The  story  of  the  fall  is  attested  by
Paul  (Rom.  5  :  17) ;  also  Eve's  beguilement  by  the  serpent
(2  Cor.  11:33  I  Tim.  2  :  14).  See  also  our  Lord's  refer-
ence to  the  latter  in  Rev.  12:9  and  20  :  2.  The  standing
of  the  sun  at  the  overthrow  of  the  Amorites,  as  an  evidence
of  the  Lord's  power,  was  evidently  typical  of  the  power  to
be  displayed  in  the  future,  in  "the  day  of  the  Lord,"  at
the  hand  of  him  whom  Joshua  tjTJified.  This  is  attested
by  three  prophets.  (Isa.  28  :  21  ;  Habak.  2  :  1-3,  13,  14  and
3  :  2-11  ;  Zech.  14  :  i,  6,  7.)  The  account  of  the  speaking
ass  is  confirmed  by  Jude  (verse  11),  and  by  Peter  (2  Pet.
2  :  16).  And  the  great  teacher,  Jesus,  confirms  the  narra-
tives of  Jonah  and  the  great  fish  and  of  Noah  and  the
flood.  (Matt.  12  :  40;  24  :  38,  39 ;  Luke  17  :  26.  See  also
I  Pet.  3  :  20.)  Really  these  are  no  greater  miracles
than  those  performed  by  Jesus  and  the  apostles,  such  as  the


(5a  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

turning  of  water  into  wine,  the  healing  of  diseases,  etc.;
and  as  a  miracle,  the  awakening  of  the  dead  is  most  won-
derful of  all.

These  miracles,  not  common  to  our  experience,  find  par-
allels about  us  every  day,  which,  being  more  common,  are
passed  by  unnoticed.  The  reprodudlion  of  living  organisms,
either  animal  or  vegetable,  is  beyond  our  comprehension,  as
well  as  beyond  our  power — hence  miraculous.  We  can  see
the  exercise  of  life  principle,  but  can  neither  understand
nor  produce  it.  We  plant  two  seeds  side  by  side ;  the  con-
ditions, air,  water  and  soil,  are  alike  ;  they  grow,  we  cannot
tell  how,  nor  can  the  wisest  philosopher  explain  this  mir-
acle. These  seeds  develop  organisms  of  opposite  tenden-
cies ;  one  creeps,  the  other  stands  ere6l ;  form,  flower,  col-
oring, everything  differs,  though  the  conditions  were  the
same.  Such  miracles  grow  common  to  us,  and  we  cease  to
remember  them  as  such  as  we  leave  the  wonderment  of
childhood  ;  yet  they  manifest  a  power  as  much  beyond  our
own,  and  beyond  our  limited  intelligence,  as  the  few  mir-
acles recorded  in  the  Bible  for  special  purposes,  and  as  in-
tended illustrations  of  omnipotence,  and  of  the  ability  of
the  great  Creator  to  overcome  every  obstacle  and  to  accom-
plish all  his  will,  even  to  our  promised  resurrection  from  the
dead,  the  extermination  of  evil,  and  the  ultimate  reign  of
everlasting  righteousness.

Here  we  rest  the  case.  Every  step  has  been  tested  by
reason.  We  have  found  that  there  is  a  God,  a  supreme,
intelligent  Creator,  in  whom  wisdom,  justice,  love  and  power
exist  in  perfeft  harmony.  We  have  found  it  reasonable  to
expert  a  revelation  of  his  plans  to  his  creatures  capable  of
appreciating  and  having  an  interest  in  them.  We  have
found  the  Bible,  claiming  to  be  that  revelation,  worthy  of
consideration.  We  have  examined  its  writers,  and  their
possible  objedts,  in  the  light  of  what  they  taught ;  we  have


A  Divine  Revelation.


63


been  astonished  ;  and  our  reason  has  told  us  that  such  wis-
dom, combined  with  such  purity  of  motive,  was  not  the  cun-
ning device  of  crafty  men  for  selfish  ends.  Reason  has  urged
that  it  IS  far  more  probable  that  such  righteous  and  benev-
olent sentiments  and  laws  must  be  of  God  and  not  of  men,
and  has  insisted  that  they  could  not  be  the  work  of  knavish
priests.  We  have  seen  the  harmony  of  testimony  concern-
ing Jesus,  his  ransom-sacrifice,  and  the  resurrection  and
blessing  of  all  as  the  outcome,  in  his  glorious  kingdom  to
come ;  and  reason  has  told  us  that  a  scheme  so  grand  and
comprehensive,  beyond  all  we  could  otherwise  have  reason
to  expecSl,  yet  built  upon  such  reasonable  dedudlions,  must
be  the  plan  of  God  for  which  we  seek.  It  cannot  be  the  mere
device  of  men,  for  even  when  revealed,  it  is  almost  too
grand  to  be  believed  by  men.

When  Columbus  discovered  the  Orinoco  river,  some  one
said  he  had  found  an  island.  He  replied :  "No  such  river
as  that  flows  from  an  island.  That  mighty  torrent  must  drain
the  waters  of  a  continent. ' '  So  the  depth  and  power  and
wisdom  and  scope  of  the  Bible's  testimony  convince  us
that  not  man,  but  the  Almighty  God,  is  the  author  of  its
plans  and  revelations.  We  have  taken  but  a  hasty  glance
at  the  surface  claims  of  the  Scriptures  to  be  of  divine  origin,
and  have  found  them  reasonable.  Succeeding  chapters  will
unfold  the  various  parts  of  the  plan  of  God,  and  will,  we
trust,  give  ample  evidence  to  every  candid  mind  that  the
Bible  is  a  divinely  inspired  revelation,  and  that  the  length
and  breadth  and  height  and  depth  of  the  plan  it  unfolds
gloriously  refleft  the  divine  charafter,  hitherto  but  dimly
comprehended,  but  now  more  clearly  seen  in  the  light  of
the  dawning  Millennial  Day.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages,


TRUTH  MOST  PRECIOUS.

GREAT  truths  are  dearly  bought.   The  common  truth.
Such  as  men  give  and  take  from  day  to  day,
Comes  in  the  common  walk  of  easy  life,
Blown  by  the  careless  wind  across  our  way.

Great  truths  are  dearly  won ;  not  found  by  chancy

Nor  wafted  on  the  breath  of  summer  dream;
But  grasped  in  the  great  struggle  of  the  soul,
Hard  buffeting  with  adverse  wind  and  stream.

Sometimes,  'mid  conflidl,  turmoil,  fear  and  grief,
When  the  strong  hand  of  God,  put  forth  in  might,

Ploughs  up  the  subsoil  of  the  stagnant  heart,
It  brings  some  buried  truth-seeds  to  the  light.

Not  in  the  general  mart,  'mid  com  and  wine ;

Not  in  the  merchandise  of  gold  and  gems ;
Not  in  the  world's  gay  hall  of  midnight  mirth,

Nor  'mid  the  blaze  of  regal  diadems ;

Not  in  the  general  clash  of  human  creeds,

Nor  in  the  merchandise  'twixt  church  and  world,

Is  truth's  fair  treasure  found,  'mongst  tares  and  weeds;
Nor  her  fair  banner  in  their  midst  unfurled.

Truth  springs  like  harvest  from  the  well-ploughed  fields.
Rewarding  patient  toil,  and  faith  and  zeal.

To  those  thus  seeking  her,  she  ever  yields
Her  richest  treasures  for  their  lasting  weal.


STUDY  IV.


THE  EPOCHS  AND  DISPENSATIONS  MARKED  IN  THB

DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  DIVINE  PLAN.


God's  Plan  Depinitb  and  Systematic. — Three  Great  Epochs  of  th«
World's  History. — Their  Distinctive  Features. — "The  Earth  Agideth
Forever." — The  World  to  Come,  the  New  Heavens  and  Earth. — Subdn
visions  op  These  Great  Epochs, — The  Important  Features  of  God's  Plam
thus  Brought  to  View.— Order  Recognized  Discloses  Harmony.—
Rightly  Dividing  the  Word  of  Truth.


S  some  ignorantly  misjudge  the  skill  and  wisdom  of


a  great  architect  and  builder  by  his  unfinished  work,
so  also  many  in  their  ignorance  now  misjudge  God  by  his
unfinished  work ;  but  by  and  by,  when  the  rough  scaffold-
ing of  evil,  which  has  been  permitted  for  man's  discipline,
and  which  shall  finally  be  overruled  for  his  good,  has  been
removed,  and  the  rubbish  cleared  away,  God's  finished
work  will  universally  declare  his  infinite  wisdom  and  pow-
er ;  and  his  plans  will  be  seen  to  be  in  harmony  with  his
glorious  character.

Since  God  tells  us  that  he  has  a  definitely  fixed  purpose,
and  that  all  his  purposes  shall  be  accomplished,  it  behooves
ns,  as  his  children,  to  inquire  diligently  what  those  plans
are,  that  we  may  be  found  in  harmony  with  them.  Notice
how  emphatically  Jehovah  affirms  the  fixedness  of  his  pur-
pose: "Jehovah  of  hosts  hath  sworn,  saying.  Surely  as
I  have  thought,  so  shall  it  come  to  pass ;  and  as  I  have  pur-
posed, so  shall  it  be."  "The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  pur-
posed, and  who  shall  disannul  it?"  "I  am  God,  and
there  is  none  else;  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  like
me.  .  .  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will  do  all  my  pleat-


6S


66


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


lire.  .  .  Yea,  I  have  spoken  it,  I  will  also  bring  it  to  passj
I  have  purposed  it,  I  will  also  do  it."  (Isa.  14 :  24-27 ;  46 :
9 — II.)  Therefore,  however  hap-hazard  or  mysterious  God's
dealings  with  men  may  appear,  those  who  believe  this  tes-
timony of  his  Word  must  acknowledge  that  his  original
and  unalterable  plan  has  been,  and  still  is,  progressing  sys-
tematically to  completion.

While  the  mass  of  mankind,  groping  in  the  darkness  of
ignorance,  must  await  the  a6lual  developments  of  God's
plan,  before  they  can  realize  the  glorious  chara6ler  of  the
Divine  Architeft,  it  is  the  privilege  of  the  child  of  God
to  see  by  faith  and  the  light  of  his  lamp  the  foretold  glories
of  the  future,  and  thereby  to  appreciate  the  otherwise
mysterious  dealings  of  the  past  and  the  present.  There-
fore, as  interested  sons  of  God,  and  heirs  of  a  promised
inheritance,  we  apply  to  our  Father's  Word,  that  we  may
understand  his  purposes  from  the  plans  and  specifications
therein  given.  There  we  learn  that  the  plan  of  God,  with
reference  to  man,  spans  three  great  periods  of  time,  be-
ginning with  man's  creation  and  reaching  into  the  illimit-
able future.  Peter  and  Paul  designate  these  periods  "three
worlds,"  which  we  represent  in  the  following  diagram.


GREAT  EPOCHS  CALLED  "WORLDS.'


WORLD
TO  COMS.


These  three  great  epochs  represent  three  distinct  man>
ifestations  of  divine  providence.  The  first,  from  creation
io  the  flood,  was  under  the  ministration  of  angels,  and  if


Epochs  and  Dispensations.


67


called  by  Peter  "the  world  that  was." — 2  Pet.  3:  6.

The  second  great  epoch,  from  the  flood  to  the  establish-
ment of  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  under  the  limited  con-
trol of  Satan,  "  the  prince  of  this  world,"  and  is  therefore
called  "  THIS  PRESENT  EVIL  WORLD." — Gal.  1:4;  2  Pet.  3:  7.

The  third  is  to  be  a  "  world  without  end  "  (Isa.  45  ;i7)
ander  divine  administration,  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  is
called  "THE  WORLD  TO  COME — whcreiu  dwelleth  righteous-
ness."— Heb.  2:552  Pet.  3:13.

The  first  of  these  periods,  or  "  worlds,"  under  the  min-
istration of  angels,  was  a  failure ;  the  second,  under  the
rule  of  Satan,  the  usurper,  has  been  indeed  an  "evil
world;"  but  the  third  will  be  an  era  of  righteousness  and
of  blessing  to  all  the  families  of  the  earth.

The  last  two  of  these  "worlds"  are  most  particularly
mentioned,  and  the  statements  relative  to  them  are  in
strong  contrast.  The  present,  or  second  period,  is  called
"'the  present  evil  world,"  not  because  there  is  nothing
good  in  it,  but  because  in  it  evil  is  permitted  to  predomi-
jQate.  "Now  we  call  the  proud  happy;  yea,  they  that
work  wickedness  are  set  up ;  yea,  they  that  tempt  God  are
even  delivered."  (Mai.  3  :  15.)  The  third  world  or  epoch
is  mentioned  as  "the  world  to  come — wherein  dwelleth
r/f/z/d'w/j-^zd'jj,"  not  because  there  will  be  no  evil  in  it,  but
because  evil  will  not  predominate.  The  blotting  out  of  evil
will  be  gradual,  requiring  all  of  the  first  thousand  years.
Evil  will  not  rule  then  ;  it  will  not  prosper ;  it  will  no
longer  be  the  wicked  that  will  flourish  ;  but  "  the  righteous
shall  flourish"  (Psa.  72  :  7),  the  "obedient  shall  eat  the
good  of  the  land  "  (Isa.  k  :  19),  and  "  the  evil  doer  shall  be
cut  off." — Psa.  37  :  9.

Thus  seen,  the  next  dispensation  is  to  be  so  dissimilar  as
to  be  the  very  reverse  of  the  present  one  in  almost  every
particular.    Our  Lord's  words  show  why  there  is  to  be  a


6i


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


difference  between  the  present  and  the  future  dispensations.
It  is  because  he  will  be  the  prince  or  ruler  of  the  world
to  come,  that  in  it  righteousness  and  truth  will  prosper;
while,  because  Satan  is  the  prince  (ruler)  of  the  present
evil  world,  evil  prospers  and  the  wicked  flourish.  It  is  be-
cause, as  Jesus  said,  the  prince  of  this  world  "  hath  noth-
ing in  me" — and  consequently  no  interest  in  his  followers
except  to  oppose,  tempt,  annoy  and  buffet  them  (John
14:  30;  2  Cor.  12  :  7) — that  in  this  present  evil  world  or
epoch,  whosoever  will  live  godly  shall  suffer  persecution,
while  the  wicked  flourish  like  a  green  bay  tree. — 2  Tim.
3:  12;  Psa.  37:  35-

Jesus  said,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,"  and  un-
til the  era  or  "  world  to  come  "  does  come,  Christ's  king-
dom will  not  control  the  earth.  And  for  this  we  are  taught
to  hope  and  pray,  "  Thy  kingdom  come>  thy  will  be  done
on  earth."  Satan  is  the  "ruler  of  the  darkness  of  this
world,"  and  therefore  "darkness  covers  the  earth  and  gross
darkness  the  people."  He  now  rules  and  works  in  the
hearts  of  the  children  of  disobedience. — Eph.  2  :  2  ;  6  :  12.

There  must  be  some  very  important  part  of  the  great
Architect's  plan  for  man's  salvation  not  yet  fully  developed
— else  the  new  prince  and  the  new  dispensation  would  have
been  long  ago  introduced.  Why  it  was  postponed  for  an
appointed  time,  and  also  the  manner  of  the  change  from
the  present  dominion  of  evil  under  Satan  to  that  of  right-
eousness under  Christ,  are  points  of  interest  which  will
be  more  fully  shown  hereafter.  Suffice  it  now  to  say,  that
the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  now  subject  to  Satan,  are  at
the  proper  time  to  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and
of  his  Christ.  (Rev.  11  :  15.)  The  context  shows  that  the
♦■ransfer  will  be  accomplished  by  a  general  time  of  trouble.
In  reference  to  it  Jesus  said,  "No  man  can  enter  into  a
itrong  man's  house  and  spoil  his  goods,  except  he  will


Epochs  and  Dispensations.


flTRtbind  the  strong  man,  and  then  he  will  spoil  his  house."
(Mark  3  :  22-27.)  Thus  we  are  taught  that  Satan  must  first
be  bound,  restrained  and  deposed,  before  Christ's  reign  of
righteousness  and  peace  can  be  established.  This  binding
of  Satan  is  accordingly  shown  to  be  the  first  work  of  the
new  dispensation. — Rev.  20  :  2.

It  should  be  remembered  that  this  earth  is  the  basis  of
all  these  "worlds"  and  dispensations,  and  that  though
ages  pass  and  dispensations  change,  still  the  earth  con-
tinues— "The  earth abideth  forever."  (Eccl.  i  :  4.)  Car-
rying out  the  same  figure,  Peter  calls  each  of  these  periods
a  separate  heavens  and  earth.  Here  the  word  heavens  sym-
bolizes the  higher  or  spiritual  controlling  powers,  and
earth  symbolizes  human  government  and  social  arrange-
ments. Thus  the  first  heavens  and  earth,  or  the  order
and  arrangement  of  things  then  existing,  having  served
their  purpose,  ended  at  the  flood.  But  the  physical  heav-
ens (sky  and  atmosphere),  and  the  physical  earth,  did
not  pass  away:  they  remained.  So  likewise  the  present
world  (heavens  and  earth)  will  pass  away  with  a  great  noise,
fire  and  melting — confusion,  trouble  and  dissolution.  The
strong  man  (Satan),  being  bound,  will  struggle  to  retain
his  power.  The  present  order  or  arrangement  of  govern-
ment and  society,  not  that  of  the  physical  sky  and  earth,
will  pass  away.  The  present  heavens  (powers  of  spiritual
control)  must  give  place  to  the  "  new  heavens  " — Christ's
spiritual  control.  The  present  earth  (human  society  as
now  organized  under  Satan's  control)  must  (symbolically)
melt  and  be  dissolved,  in  the  beginning  of  the  "■  Day  of
the  Lord,"  which  "shall  burn  as  an  oven."  (Mai.  4  :  i.)
It  will  be  succeeded  by  "a  new  earth,"  <?.,  society  reor-
ganized in  harmony  with  earth's  new  Prince — Christ.
Righteousness,  peace  and  love  will  rule  among  men  when
present  arrangements  have  given  place  to  the  new  and  bet*


70


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ter  kingdom,  the  basis  of  which  will  be  the  strictest  justice.

Paul  was  given  a  glimpse  of  the  next  dispensation,  or,  as
he  calls  it,  "  the  world  to  come."  He  says  he  was  "  caught
away"  (physically  or  mentally,  or  both,  he  could  not  tell,
things  were  so  real  to  his  view)  down  the  stream  of  time  to
the  new  condition  of  things,  the  "  new  heaven,"  hence  the
"  third  heaven."  He  thus  saw  things  as  they  will  be  un-
der the  spiritual  control  of  Christ,  things  which  he  might
not^  disclose.  (2  Cor.  12  :  2-4.)  Doubtless  these  were  the
same  things  which  John  afterward  saw,  and  was  permitted
to  express  to  the  Church  in  synnbols,  which  may  only  be
understood  as  they  become  due.  John,  in  the  revelation
given  to  him  by  our  Lord  on  the  Isle  of  Patmos,  was  in
vision  carried  down  through  this  Christian  Age  and  its
changing  scenes  of  church  and  state,  to  the  end  of  the
present  evil  world,  or  epoch,  and  there  in  prophetic  visions
he  saw  Satan  bound,  Christ  reigning,  and  the  new  heaven
and  the  new  earth  established;  for  the  former  heaven  and
earth  were  passed  away. — Rev.  21:1.

AGES  OR  DISPENSATIONS.


We  now  notice  the  ages  into  which  these  great  epochs  are
subdivided,  as  illustrated  in  the  diagram  below.


The  first  of  these  great  epochs  ("  worlds  ")  was  not  sub-
divided :  God's  method  of  dealing  with  men  did  not  vary
during  all  that  time — from  Adam's  fall  to  the  flood.  God
had  given  man  his  law,  written  in  his  very  nature;  but  after
he  had  sinned  he  left  him  measurably  to  his  own  course,
which  was  downward,  "  evil,  and  that  continually,"  that


Epochs  and  Dispensations.


tLhus  man  might  realize  his  folly,  and  that  the  v/isdom  of
God  in  commanding  absolute  obedience  might  be  made
manifest.  That  dispensation  ended  with  a  flood,  which
took  away  all  but  faithful  Noah  and  his  family.  Thus  the
first  dispensation  not  only  manifested  the  disastrous  effe6ls
of  sin,  but  showed  that  the  tendency  of  sin  is  downward
to  greater  degradation  and  misery,  and  proves  the  necessity
of  Jehovah's  interposition,  if  the  recovery  of  "that  which-
was  lost" — man's  first  estate — is  ever  to  be  accomplished.

The  second  epoch,  or  "world  that  now  is,"  includes
Shree  ages,  each  a  step  in  the  plan  of  God  for  the  overthrow
of  evil.  Each  step  is  higher  than  that  preceding  it,  and
carries  the  plan  forward  and  nearer  to  completion.

The  third  great  epoch — "the  world  to  come" — future
from  the  second  advent  of  Christ,  comprises  the  Millennial
Age,  or  "  times  of  restitution  ;"  and  following  it  are  other
"•ages  to  come,"  the  particulars  of  which  are  not  revealed.
Present  revelations  treat  of  man's  recovery  from  sin,  and
BOt  of  the  eternity  of  glory  to  follow.

The  first  age  in  the  "world  that  now  is"  we  call  the
Patriarchal  Age,  or  dispensation,  because  during  that
period  God's  dealings  and  favors  were  with  a  few  individuals
only,  the  remainder  of  mankind  being  almost  ignored.
Such  favored  ones  were  the  patriarchs  Noah,  Abraham,
Isaac  and  Jacob.  Each  of  these  in  turn  seems  to  have  been
God's  favored  one.  At  the  death  of  Jacob,  that  age  or  or-
der  of  dealing  ended.  At  Jacob's  death,  his  descendants
were  first  called  "  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel,"  and  were
together  recognized  of  God  as  his  "  peculiar  people ;"  and
through  typical  sacrifices  they  were  typically  "a  holy  na-
tion,"  separated  from  other  nations  for  a  particular  pur-
pose, and  therefore  to  enjoy  certain  special  favors.  The
time  allotted  to  this  feature  of  the  divine  plan,  beginning
here  and  ending  at  the  death  of  Christ,  we  designate  the


7«


Tyie  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Jewish  Age,  or  the  Law  dispensation.  During  that  agl
God  specially  blessed  that  nation.  He  gave  them  his  law ;
lie  made  a  special  covenant  with  them ;  he  gave  them  the
Tabernacle,  whose  shekinah  glory  in  the  Most  Holy  repre-
sented  Jehovah's  presence  with  them  as  their  Leader  and
King.  To  them  he  sent  the  prophets,  and  finally  his  Son.
Jesus  performed  his  miracles  and  taught  in  their  midst,  and
would  neither  go  to  others  himself,  nor  permit  his  disciples
to  go  to  the  surrounding  nations.  He  sent  them  out,  say-
ing, "  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and  into  any
city  of  the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not ;  but  go  rather  to  the
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel."  (Matt.  lo  :  5,  6.)  And
again  he  said,  "  I  am  not  sent  but  unto  the  lost  sheep  of
the  house  of  Israel."  (Matt.  15  :  24.)  That  this  national
favor  ended  with  their  rejection  and  crucifixion  of  Jesus
is  shown  by  Jesus'  words,  when,  five  days  before  his  cruci-
fixion, he  declared,  "  Your  house  is  left  unto  you  deso-
late."—Matt.  23  :  38.

There,  at  Jesus'  death,  a  new  dge  began — the  Christian
Age  or  Gospel  Dispensation,  wherein  should  be  her-
alded good  tidings  of  justification,  not  to  the  Jew  only,
but  to  all  nations  ;  for  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  grace  of  God,
tasted  death  for  every  man.  During  this  Gospel  age  also
there  is  a  class  called  to  special  favor,  to  whom  special
promises  are  made ;  namely,  those  who  by  faith  accept
Christ  Jesus  as  their  Redeemer  and  Lord,  following  in  his
footsteps.  The  gospel  proclamation  has  gone  hither  and
thither  through  the  earth  for  nearly  nineteen  hundred  years,
so  that  it  can  now  be  said  that  it  has  been  preached  more
or  less  in  every  nation.  It  has  not  converted  nations — it
was  not  designed  to  do  so  in  this  age ;  but  it  has  selected
here  and  there  some,  in  all  a  "little  flock,"  as  Jesus
had  foretold  (Luke  12  :  32),  to  whom  it  is  the  Father's
good  pleasure  to  give  the  Kingdom  in  an  age  to  follow  this.


Epoclis  and  Dispensations.


73


With  this  age  the  "present  evil  world"  ends;  and
mark  well  that  while  God  has  been  thus  permitting  the
predominance  and  reign  of  evil,  to  the  seeming  detriment
of  his  cause,  nevertheless  his  deep  designs  have  been
steadily  progressing  according  to  a  fixed  and  definite  plan',
and  in  the  exadt  order  of  the  seasons  which  he  has  ap-
pointed. In  the  end  of  this  age,  and  the  dawn  of  its
successor,  the  Millennial  age,  Satan  is  to  be  bound  and  his
power  overthrown,  preparatory  to  the  establishment  of
Christ's  kingdom  and  the  beginning  of  "the  world  to
come,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."

Millennium,  signifying  a  thousand  years,  is  by  common
consent  used  as  the  name  for  the  period  mentioned  in  Rev.
20:4 — the  thousand  years  of  Christ's  reign,  the  first  age
in  the  "world  to  come."  During  the  Millennial  age,
there  will  be  a  restitution  of  all  things  lost  by  the  fall  of
Adam  (^A<5ls  3 : 19-21),  and  before  its  close  all  tears  shall
have  been  wiped  away.  Beyond  its  boundary,  in  the  ages
of  blessedness  to  follow,  there  shall  be  no  more  death,
neither  sorrow  nor  crying;  neither  shall  there  beany  more
pain.  The  former  things  will  have  passed  away.  (Rev.
21 :4.)  God's  revelations  particularize  no  further,  and
there  we  stop.

We  have  here  only  glanced  at  the  mere  outhne  of  this
plan  of  the  ages.  The  more  we  examine  it,  the  more  we  will
find  in  it  perfect  harmony,  beauty  and  order.  Each  age
has  its  part  to  accomplish,  necessary  to  the  complete  de-
velopment of  God's  plan  as  a  whole.  The  plan  is  a  pro-
gressive one,  gradually  unfolding  from  age  to  age,  upward
and  onward  to  the  grand  consummation  of  the  original  de-
sign  of  the  Divine  Architect,  "who  worketh  all  things  after
the  counsel  of  his  own  will."  (Eph.  i  :ii.)  Not  one  of
these  great  periods  is  an  hour  too  long  or  too  short  for  the
accomplishment  of  its  obje(St.    God  is  a  wise  economist  of


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


both  time  and  means,  though  his  resources  are  infinite;
and  no  power,  however  malicious,  for  a  moment  retards  or
thwarts  his  purposes.  All  things,  evil  as  well  as  good,  un-
der divine  supervision  and  overruling,  are  workhig  together
for  the  accomplishment  of  his  will.

To  an  uninstructed  and  undisciplined  mind,  which  can
see  only  a  little  of  the  intricate  machinery  of  God's  plan,
it  appears  like  anarchy,  confusion  and  failure,  just  as  the
whole,  or  even  a  part,  of  an  intricate  machine  would  appear
to  a  child.  To  its  immature  and  untutored  mind  it  is  in-
comprehensible, and  the  opposite  motions  of  its  wheels
and  belts  are  but  confusion.  But  maturity  and  investiga-
tion will  show  that  the  seeming  confusion  is  beautiful  har-
mony, working  good  results.  The  machine,  however,  was
as  truly  a  success  before  the  child  understood  its  operation
as  after.  So,  while  God's  plan  is,  and  has  been  forages,  in
successful  operation,  man  has  been  receiving  the  nec-
essary discipline,  not  only  to  enable  him  to  understand
its  intricate  workings,  but  also  to  experience  its  blessed  re-
sults.

As  we  pursue  our  study  of  the  divine  plan,  it  is  essential
that  we  keep  in  memory  these  ages  and  their  respective  pe-
culiarities and  objedts ;  for  in  -no  one  of  them  can  the  plan
be  seen,  but  in  all  of  them,  even  as  a  link  is  not  a  chain,
but  several  links  united  form  a  chain.  We  obtain  correct
ideas  of  the  whole  plan  by  noting  the  distinctive  features
of  each  part,  and  thus  we  are  enabled  to  divide  rightly
the  Word  of  truth.

A  statement  of  the  Word  which  belongs  to  one  epoch,  or
dispensation,  should  not  be  applied  to  another,  as  things
stated  of  one  age  are  not  always  true  of  another.  For  in-
stance, it  would  be  an  untruth  to  say  of  the  present  time
that  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  fills  the  whole  earth,  or
that  there  is  no  need  to  say  to  your  neighbor.  Know  the


Epochs  and  Dispensations.


Lord.  (Isa.  11:9;  Jer.  31  :  34.)  This  is  not  true  in  this
age,  and  it  cannot  be  true  until  the  Lord,  having  come
again,  has  established  his  kingdom;  for  throughout  this
age  there  have  been  many  seducing  deceptions,  and  we  are
told  that  even  in  the  very  end  of  the  age — "  In  the  last  day  $
.  .  .  evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  de-
ceiving and  being  deceived.''  (2  Tim.  3  :  1,13.)  It  will  be
as  the  result  of  Messiah's  reign  during  the  Millennial  age
that  knowledge  and  righteousness  shall  cover  the  earth  as
the  waters  cover  the  sea.

A  similar  mistake,  and  a  very  common  one,  is  to  suppose
that  God's  kingdom  is  now  established  and  ruling  over  the
earth,  and  that  his  will  is  now  done  among  the  nations.
This  is  manifestly  far  from  the  truth,  for  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  are  supported  and  enriched  through  oppression,
injustice  and  deceit,  to  as  great  an  extent  as  the  increasing
intelligence  of  the  people  will  permit.  Satan,  the  present
"prince  of  this  world,"  must  yet  be  displaced,  and  these
kingdoms,  now  under  his  control,  must  become  the  king-
doms of  our  Lord  and  of  his  Anointed,  when  he  shall  take
unto  himself  his  great  power,  and  reign.

By  the  light  now  due  to  the  household  of  faith,  we  di^
cern  that  system  and  order  which  mark  the  stately  step=
pings  of  our  God  through  the  ages  past,  and  we  are  forcibly
reminded  of  the  beautiful  lines  of  Cowper,  inspired  by  a
living  faith,  which  trusted  where  it  could  not  trace  the  AJU
mighty  Jehovah: —

**  God  moves  in  a  mysterious  way,
His  wonders  to  perform  :
He  plants  his  footsteps  in  the  sea,
And  rides  upon  the  storm.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


"  Deep  in  unfathomable  mines
Of  never-failing  skill,
He  treasures  up  his  bright  designs,
And  works  his  sovereign  will.

*Ye  fearful  saints,  fresh  courage  take;
The  clouds  ye  so  much  dread
Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break
In  blessings  on  your  head.

**  Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense,
But  trust  him  for  his  grace.
JBehind  a  frowning  providence
He  hides  a  smiling  face.

*«  His  pui-poses  will  ripen  fast,
Unfolding  every  hour.
The  bud  may  have  a  bitter  taste.
But  sweet  will  be  the  flower.

*•  Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to  err.
And  scan  his  work  in  vain.
God  is  his  own  interpreter,
And  he  will  make  it  plain."

 *

**I  know  not  the  way  that's  before  me,
The  joys  or  the  griefs  it  may  bring ;
What  clouds  are  o'erhanging  the  future,

What  flowers  by  the  wayside  may  spring.
But  there's  One  who  will  journey  beside  me.

Nor  in  weal  nor  in  woe  will  forsake ;
And  this  is  my  solace  and  comfort,
'  He  knoweth  the  way  that  I  take.'  "


STUDY  V.


•THE  MYSTERY  HID  FROM  AGES  AND  FROM  GENERA-

TIONS,  BUT  NOW  MADE  MANIFEST  TO
HIS  SAINTS."— COL,  l  :  26.

Thb  Glimmering  Light  of  the  First  Promise. — The  Promise  to  Abraham.—
Hope  Dkpbrrbd.— The  Mystery  Begins  to  Unravel  at  Pentecost.— What
THE  Mystery  Is  —Why  So  Long  Kept  a  Mystery.— Still  a  Mystery  to
THE  World  — In  Dub  Time  to  be  Made  Manifest  to  All.— When  the  Mys-
tery Will  be  Finished.

WHILE  mankind  was  under  the  discipline  of  evil,  and
unable  to  understand  its  necessity,  God  repeatedly  ex-
pressed his  purpose  to  restore  and  bless  them  through  a
coming  deliverer.  But  who  that  deliverer  should  be  was
a  mystery  for  four  thousand  years,  and  it  only  began  to  be
clearly  revealed  after  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  in  the  be-
ginning  of  the  Christian  or  Gospel  age.

Looking  back  to  the  time  when  life  and  Edenic  happiness
were  forfeited  by  our  first  parents,  we  see  them  under  the
just  penalty  of  sin  filled  with  sorrow,  and  without  a  ray  of
hope,  except  that  drawn  from  the  obscure  statement  that
the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.
Though  in  the  light  of  subsequent  developments  this  is
full  of  significance  to  us,  to  them  it  was  but  a  faint  and
glimmering  light.  Nearly  tAvo  thousand  years  rolled  by
with  no  evidence  of  a  fulfilment.

About  two  thousand  years  after,  God  called  Abraham,
and  promised  that  his  seed  should  bless  all  the  families  of
the  earth.  This  looked  as  though  God  still  held  to  his
previously  expressed  purpose,  and  was  now  about  to  fulfil
U.  Time  sped  on  ;  the  promised  land  of  Canaan  was  not
77


^8


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


yet  in  his  possession ;  they  had  yet  no  offspring,  and  Abra-
ham and  Sarah  were  growing  old.  Abraham  reasoned  that
he  must  help  God  to  fulfil  his  promise ;  so  Ishmael  was  born.
E;ut  his  assistance  was  not  needed,  for  in  due  time  Isaac,  the
child  of  hope  and  promise,  was  born.  Then  it  seemed  that
the  promised  ruler  and  blesser  of  nations  had  come.  But
no:  years  rolled  by,  and  seemingly  God's  promise  had
failed ;  for  Isaac  died,  and  his  heir,  Jacob,  also.  But
the  faith  of  a  few  still  held  firmly  to  the  promise,  and
was  sustained  by  God;  for  "the  covenant  which  he  made
with  Abraham"  was  assured  by  God's  "oath  unto  Isaac,
and  confirmed  to  Jacob  .  .  .  and  to  Israel  fof  an  everlasting
covenant." — i  Chron.  i6:  i6,  17.

When  at  the  time  of  Jacob's  death  his  descendants  were
first  called  the  Twelve  Tribes  of  Israel,  and  recognized  of
God  as  a  "chosen  nation"  (Gen.  49  :  28;  Deut.  26  :  5),  the
expectation  that  this  nation  as  a  v/hole,  as  the  promised
seed  of  Abraham,  should  possess  Canaan,  and  rule  and
bless  the  world,  seemed  to  be  on  the  eve  of  realization ;
for  already,  under  the  favor  of  Egypt,  they  were  becoming
a  strong  nation.  But  hope  was  ahnost  blasted  and  the  prom-
ise almost  forgotten  when  the  Egyptians,  having  gained
control  of  them,  held  them  as  slaves  for  a  long  period.

Truly  God's  promises  were  shrouded  in  mystery,  and
Ihis  ways  seemed  past  finding  out.  However,  in  due  time
came  Moses,  a  great  deliverer,  by  whose  hand  God  led
them  out  of  bondage,  working  mighty  miracles  on  their
behalf.  Before  entering  Canaan  this  great  deliverer  died ;
but  as  the  Lord's  mouthpiece  he  declared,  "A  prophet
shall  the  Lord  your  God  raise  up  unto  you  of  your  brethren,
like  unto  me."  (Deut.  18  :  15  ;  Ads  3  :  22.)  This  gave  a
further  insight  into  God's  plan,  showing  that  not  only
■would  their  nation,  as  a  whole,  be  associated  in  some  way
with  the  future  work  of  ruling  and  blessing,  but  that  one  to


The  Hidden  Mystery.


79


be  selected  from  among  them  would  lead  to  victory  and  to
the  fulfilment  of  the  promise.  Then  Joshua,  whose  name
signifies  deliverer,  or  savior,  became  their  leader,  and  under
him  they  won  great  victories,  and  adtually  entered  the
land  promised  in  the  covenant.  Surely  then  it  seemed  that
the  true  leader  had  come,  and  that  the  promise  was  about
to  have  complete  fulfilment.

But  Joshua  died,  and  they  made  no  headway  as  a  nation
until  David,  and  then  Solomon,  were  given  them  as  kings.
There  they  reached  the  very  zenith  of  their  glory;  but  soon,
instead  of  seeing  the  promise  accomplished,  they  were  shorn
of  their  power,  and  became  tributary  to  other  nations.  Some
held  fast  the  promise  of  God,  however,  and  still  looked  for
the  great  deliverer  of  whom  Moses,  Joshua,  David  and
Solomon  were  only  types.

About  the  time  when  Jesus  was  born,  all  men  were  in
expectation  of  the  Messiah,  the  coming  king  of  Israel  and,
through  Israel,  of  the  world.  But  Israel's  hope  of  the  glory
and  honor  of  their  coming  king,  inspired  as  it  was  by  the
types  and  prophecies  of  his  greatness  and  power,  caused
them  to  overlook  another  set  of  types  and  prophecies,
which  pointed  to  a  work  of  suffering  and  death,  as  a  ran-
som for  sinners,  necessary  before  the  blessing  could  come.
This  was  prefigured  in  the  Passover  before  they  were  deliv-
ered from  Egypt,  in  the  slaying  of  the  animals  at  the  giving
of  the  law  covenant  (Heb.  9  :  11-20;  10  :  8-18),  and  in  the
Atonement  sacrifices  performed  year  by  year  continually  by
the  priesthood.  They  overlooked,  too,  the  statement  of
the  prophets,  "who  testified  beforehand  the  sufferings  of
Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow.'"  (i  Peter  i :  11.)
Hence,  when  Jesus  came  as  a  sacrifice,  they  did  not  recog-
nize him :  they  knew  not  the  time  of  their  visitation.  (Luke
19 :  44.)  Even  his  immediate  followers  were  sorely  perplexed
when  Jesus  died;  and  sadly  they  said,  "We  trusted  it  had


So


Tlie  Plan  of  ihe  Ages.


been  he  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel."  (Luke  24:  21.)
Apparently,  their  confidence  in  him  had  been  misplaced.
They  failed  to  see  that  the  death  of  their  leader  was  a
surety  for  the  New  Covenant  under  which  the  blessings
were  to  come,  a  partial  fulfilment  of  the  covenant  of  promise.
However,  when  they  found  that  he  had  risen  from  the
tomb,  their  withered  hopes  again  began  to  revive  (i  Peter
I  :  3),  and  when  he  was  about  to  leave  them,  they  asked
concerning  their  long-cherished  and  oft-deferred  hope,
saying,  "Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the
kingdom  to  Israel?"  That  their  hopes  were  in  the  main
correct,  though  they  might  not  know  the  time  when  they
would  be  fulfilled,  is  evident  from  our  Lord's  reply :  "It  is
not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  seasons  which  the  Father
hath  put  in  his  own  power." — A6ls  i  :  6,  7.

What  turn  has  God's  plan  now  taken?  must  have  been
the  query  of  his  disciples  when  Jesus  had  ascended ;  for  we
must  remember  that  our  Lord's  teachings  concerning  the
Kingdom  were  principally  in  parables  and  dark  sayings.
He  had  said  to  them,  "I  have  yet  many  things  to  say
unto  you,  but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now;  howbeit,  when
he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all
truth."  "He  shall  teach  you  all  things,  and  bring  all
things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto
you."  (John  16:  12,  13;  14:  26.)  So  they  could  not  un-
derstand before  the  Pentecostal  blessing  came.

Even  then,  it  was  some  time  before  they  got  a  clear,
full  understanding  of  the  work  being  done,  and  its  relation
to  the  original  covenant.  (Adts  11:9;  2  :  2,  12,  14.)
However,  it  would  seem  that  even  before  they  fully  and
clearly  understood,  they  were  used  as  the  mouthpieces  of
God,  and  their  inspired  words  were  probably  clearer  and
deeper  expressions  of  truth  than  they  themselves  fully
comprehended.   For  instance,  read  James'  discourse  ia


The  Hidden  Mystery.


8z


which  he  says:  "Simeon  hath  declared  botv  God  at  the
first  did  visit  the  Gentiles  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for
his  name  [a  bride].  And  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the
prophets,  as  it  is  wTitten,  'After  this  [after  this  people  from
the  Gentiles  has  been  taken  out]  I  will  return,  and  will
build  again  the  tabernacle  of  David  [the  earthly  dominion]
which  is  fallen  down,  and  I  will  build  again  the  ruins  there-
of, and  I  will  set  it  up.  '  " — Adts  15  :  14-16.

James  began  to  read  in  God's  providence,  in  the  sending
of  the  Gospel  through  Peter  to  the  first  Gentile  convert  and
through  Paul  to  Gentiles  in  general,  that  during  this  age
believing  Jews  and  Gentiles  were  to  be  alike  favored.  He
then  looked  up  the  prophecies  and  found  it  so  written;
and  that  after  the  work  of  this  Gospel  age  is  completed,
then  the  promises  to  fleshly  Israel  will  be  fulfilled.  Gradually
the  great  mystery,  so  long  hidden,  began  to  be  understood
by  a  few — the  saints,  the  special  "friends"  of  God.

Paul  declares  (Col.  i :  27)  that  this  mystery  which  hath
been  hid  from  ages  and  from  generations,  now  made  man-
ifest to  his  saints,  is

"CHRIST  IN  VOU,  THE  HOPE  OF  GLORY."

This  is  the  great  mystery  of  God  which  has  been  hidden
from  all  previous  ages,  and  is  still  hidden  from  all  except
a  special  class — the  saints,  or  consecrated  believers.  But
what  is  meant  by  "Christ  in  you?"  We  have  learned  that
Jesus  was  anointed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Adts  10:  38),  and
thus  we  recognize  him  to  be  the  Christ — the  anointed — for
the  word  Christ  signifies  anointed.  And  the  Apostle  John
says  that  the  anointing  which  we  (consecrated  believers)
have  received  abideth  in  us.  (i  John  2  :  27.)  Thus  the
saints  of  this  Gospel  age  are  an  anointed  company — anoint-
ed to  be  kings  and  priests  unto  God  (2  Cor.  1:21;  Peter

6


82


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


2  :  9)j  and  together  with  Jesus,  their  chief  and  Lord,  they
constitute  Jehovah's  Anointed — the  Christ.

In  harmony  with  this  teaching  of  John,  that  we  also  are
anointed,  Paul  assures  us  that  this  mystery  which  has  been
kept  secret  in  ages  past,  but  which  is  now  made  known  to
the  saints,  is  that  the  Christ  (the  Anointed)  is  "not
one  member,  but  many,"  just  as  the  human  body  is  one,
and  has  many  members;  but  as  all  the  members  of  the  body,
being  many,  are  one  body,  so  also  is  the  Anointed — the
Christ,  (i  Cor.  12:1 2-28.)  Jesus  is  anointed  to  be  the  Head
or  Lord  over  the  Church,  which  is  his  body  (or  his  bride,
as  expressed  in  another  figure — Eph.  5  :  25-30),  and  united-
ly they  constitute  the  promised  "Seed" — the  Great  Deliver-
er :  "If  ye  be  Christ's  then  are  ye  Abraham's  seed,  and  heirs
according  to  the  promise." — Gal.  3  :  29.

The  Apostle  carefully  guards  the  Church  against  any
presumptive  claims,  saying  of  Jesus  that  "God  hath  put  all
things  under  his  feet,  and  gave  him  to  be  the  head  overall
things  to  the  Church,  which  is  his  body,"  "that  in  all  things
hemight  haxQihe  pre-eminence."  (Eph.  i  :  22  ;  Col.  i  :  18.)
Vet,  under  the  figure  of  the  human  body,  he  beautifully
and  forcibly  shows  our  intimate  relationship.  This  same
oneness  Jesus  also  taught,  saying,  "I  am  the  vine,  ye  are
the  branches." — John  15  :  5.

Our  oneness  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  members  of  the
Christ,  the  anointed  company,  is  well  illustrated  by  the
figure  of  the  pyramid.

The  top-stone  is  a  perfedl  pyramid  of  itself.  Other  stones
may  be  built  up  under  it,  and,  if  in  harmony  with  all  the
charadteristic  lines  of  the  top-stone,  the  whole  mass  will  be
a  perfedl  pyramid.  How  beautifully  this  illustrates  our  po-
sition as  members  of  "the  Seed" — "the  Christ."  Joined
to  and  perfectly  in  harmony  with  our  Head,  we,  as  living
stones,,  are  perfe6b ;  separated  from  him,  we  are  nothing.


The  Hidden  Mystery.


83


Jesus,  the  perfe6t  one,  has  been  highly  exalted,  and
fiow  we  present  ourselves  to  him  that  we  may  be  formed
and  shaped  according  to  his  example,  and  that  we  may  be
built  up  as  a  building  of  God.  In  an  ordinary  building  there
is  no  chief  corner-stone ;  but  in  our  building  there  is  one
chief  comer-stone,  the  "top-stone,"  as  it  is  written :  "Behold,
1  lay  in  Zion  a  chief  corner-stone,  elect,  precious" — "to
vhom  coming  as  unto  a  living  stone  .  .  .  ye  also  as  lively
[living]  stones  are  built  up  a  spiritual  house,  a  holy  priest-
hood, to  offer  up  ^sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus
Christ."  (i  Pet.  2:4-6.)  And  very  soon,  we  trust,  the
wnion  between  Jesus,  the  "Head,"  and  "the  Church,
vhich  is  his  body,"  will  be  complete.

And,  dearly  beloved,  many  blows  and  much  polishing
must  we  endure — much  transforming  must  we  undergo,  and
much  conforming  to  his  example,  under  the  direction  of
the  great  Master-builder ;  and  in  order  to  have  the  ability
and  ideality  of  the  builder  displayed  in  us,  we  will  need  to
see  that  we  have  no  cross-grained  will  of  our  own  to  oppose  or
thwart  the  accomplishment  of  His  will  in  us ;  we  must  be
very  childlike  and  humble — "clothed  with  humility;  for
God  resisteth  the  proud,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."


*  Sinaitic  MS.  omits  spirittuU  before  sacrifices.


84


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Let  us  humble  ourselves,  therefore,  under  the  mighty  hand
of  God,  that  he  may  exalt  us  in  due  time  (i  Peters  :  5,  6),
as  he  has  exalted  our  Head  and  Forerunner. — Phil.  2  :  8,  9.

This  is  indeed  a  wonderful  message,  and,  as  we  come  to  the
Word  of  God  to  inquire  concerning  our  great  high  calling,
we  find  the  prophets  all  eloquent  in  proclaiming  the  grace
[favor  or  blessing]  that  is  come  unto  us  (i  Peter  i  :  10);
while  types,  and  parables,  and  hitherto  dark  sayings,  now
become  luminous,  shedding  their  light  on  the  "narrow
way' '  in  which  the  anointed  [Christ]  company  is  called  to
run  for  the  prize  now  disclosed  to  view.  This  was  truly  a
mystery  never  before  thought  of — that  God  intends  to  raise
up  not  only  a  deliverer,  but  a  deliverer  composed  of
many  members.  This  is  the  "high  calling"  to  which  the  con-
secrated believers  of  the  Gospel  age  are  privileged  to  attain.
Jesus  did  not  attempt  to  unfold  it  to  the  disciples  while
natural  men,  but  waited  until  at  Pentecost  they  were
anointed — begotten  to  the  new  nature.  From  Paul's  ex-
planation we  know  that  none  but  "new  creatures"  can
now  appreciate  or  understand  this  high  calling.  He  says  :
"We  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  z. mystery,  even  the  hid-
den wisdom  [plan]  which  God  ordained  before  the  world
unto  our  glory ;  which  none  of  the  princes  [chief  ones]  of
this  world  knew  ;  ...  as  it  is  written,  '  Eye  hath  not  seen,
nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,
the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love
him ; '  but  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit."
— I  Cor.  2  :  6-14.

In  his  letter  to  the  Galatians,  Paul  opens  up  the  entire
mystery,  and  shows  how  the  Abrahamic  covenant  is  to  be
fulfilled.  He  shows  that  the  Law  given  to  Israel  did  not
interfere  with  the  original  covenant  (Gal.  3:  15-18),  and
that  the  seed  of  Abraham  which  is  to  bless  all  nations  is
Christ.  (Verse  16.)  Then,  carrying  out  the  idea  already


The  Hidden  Mystery.


85


alluded  to,  that  the  Christ  includes  all  anointed  of  the
Spirit,  he  says:  "For  as  many  of  you  as  have  been  bap-
tized into  Christ  have  put  on  Christ;  .  .  .  and  if  ye  be
Christ's  then  are  ye  [together  with  Jesus]  Abraham' s  seed,
and  heirs,  according  to  the  promise' '  made  to  Abraham.
(Verses  27,  29.)  Following  up  the  same  line  of  reasoning,
he  shows  (Gal.  4)  that  Abraham  was  a  type  of  Jehovah,
Sarah  a  type  of  the  covenant  or  promise,  and  Isaac  a  type
of  Christ  (head  and  body);  and  then  adds,  "We,  brethren,
as  Isaac  was,  are  the  children  of  promise."  (Verse  28.)
Thus  the  plan  of  God  was  hidden  in  types  until  the  Gospel
age  began  the  development  of  the  Christ.

There  has  existed  a  necessity  for  keeping  this  mystery
hidden,  else  it  would  not  have  been  so  kept.  It  was  nec-
essary, because  to  have  revealed  the  plan  in  full  to  man-
kind would  have  been  to  frustrate  it.  Had  men  known,  they
would  not  have  crucified  either  the  Lord  of  glory  or  the
Church  which  is  his  body,  (i  Cor.  2:8.)  Not  only  would
the  death  of  Christ,  as  the  price  of  man's  redemption,  have
been  interfered  with,  had  not  the  plan  been  kept  a  mystery
from  the  world,  but  the  trial  of  the  faith  of  the  Church,  as
sharers  in  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  would  thereby  have  been
prevented  also;  for  "The  world  knoweth  us  not  [as  his
joint -heirs]  because  [for  the  same  reason  that]  it  knew  him
not." — I  John  3:1.

Not  only  is  the  plan  of  God,  and  the  Christ  which  is  the
very  embodiment  of  that  plan,  a  great  mystery  to  the
world,  but  the  peculiar  course  in  which  this  little  flock  is
called  to  walk  marks  its  members  as  "peculiar  people."  It
was  a  mystery  to  the  world  that  a  person  of  so  much  ability  as
Jesus  of  Nazareth  should  spend  his  time  and  talent  as  he
did,  whereas,  if  he  had  turned  his  attention  to  politics,  law,
merchandise  or  popular  religion,  he  might  have  become
great  and  respected.    In  the  opinion  of  men  he  foolishly


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


w^asted  his  life,  and  they  said,  "He  hath  a  devil  and  is  road."
His  life  and  teachings  were  mysteries  to  them.  They  could
oot  understand  him.

The  apostles  and  their  companions  were  likewise  myste-
ries in  the  world,  in  leaving  their  business  prospects,  etc.,
to  preach  forgiveness  of  sins  through  the  death  of  the  de-
spised and  crucified  Jesus.  Paul  forsook  a  high  station  and
social  influence  to  labor  with  his  hands,  and  to  preach
Christ,  and  the  invisible  crown  for  all  believers  who  should
walk  in  his  footsteps.  This  was  so  mysterious  that  some
said,  "  Paul,  thou  art  beside  thyself:  much  learning  doth
make  thee  mad."  And  all  who  so  follow  in  the  Master's
footsteps  are,  like  Paul,  counted  fools  for  Christ's  sake.

But  God's  plan  will  not  always  be  shrouded  in  mystery:
the  dawn  of  the  Millennial  Day  brings  the  fuller  light  of
God  to  men,  and  "  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  fill  the
whole  earth."  The  Sun  of  Righteousness,  Avhich  shall
arise  with  healing  in  his  wings,  dispelling  the  darkness  of
ignorance,  is  the  Christ  in  Millennial  glory — not  the  Head
alone,  but  also  the  members  of  his  body  ;  for  it  is  written  :
If  we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  be  glorified  together.
"When  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  we
also  appear  with  him  in  glory and  "Then  shall  the
righteous  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their
Father. ' ' — Rom.  8  :  1 7 ;  2  Tim.  2  :  11,  12;  Col.  3:4;  Matt,
'3:43-

Now,  to  all  except  those  begotten  to  a  new  mind,  by
receiving  "the  mind  of  Christ,"  the  promises  which  we
believe,  and  the  hopes  which  we  cherish,  seem  visionary,
and  too  improbable  to  be  received  or  acted  upon.  In  the
age  to  come,  when  God  shall  "pour  out  his  spirit  upon  all
flesh,"  as  during  the  present  age  he  pours  it  upon  his  "ser-
vants and  handmaids,"  then  indeed  all  will  understand
and  appreciate  the  promises  now  being  grasped  by  the


The  Hidden  Mystery.


87


•*  little  flock  ;"  and  they  will  rejoice  in  the  obedience  and
exaltation  of  the  Church,  saying,  "Let  us  be  glad,  and
rejoice,  and  give  honor  to  God,  for  the  marriage  of  the
Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made  herself  ready."
(Rev.  19  : 7.)  They  will  rejoice  in  the  glorification  of  the
Church,  through  which  blessings  will  then  be  flowing  to
them ;  and  while  they  will  realize  that  the  "  exceeding
great  and  precious  promises"  inherited  by  the  Anointed
(head  and  body)  are  not  for  them,  but  are  fulfilled  upon  us,
they  will  be  blessed  by  the  lesson  illustrated  in  the  Church;
and  while  they  run  for  the  blessings  then  held  met  to  them,
they  will  profit  by  the  example  of  the  Church,  and  glorify
God  on  her  behalf.  But  this  knowledge  will  not  bring
covetousness ;  for  under  the  new  order  of  things  their  call-
ing to  perfeil  human  nature  will  fully  satisfy  tKem,  and  will
seem  more  desirable  to  them  than  a  change  of  nature.

Then  the  "  mystery"  will  have  ended;  for  the  world
will  have  come  to  see  that  it  was  the  spirit  of  God  in  Christ,
and  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  us — God  manifested  in  the
flesh — which  they  had  hitherto  misunderstood.  Then
they  will  see  that  we  were  not  mad,  nor  fools  ;  but  that  we
chose  the  better  part  when  we  ran  for  the  riches,  honors
and  crown,  unseen  by  them,  but  eternal.

In  point  of  time,  the  mystery  of  God  will  be  finished
during  the  period  of  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  [sym-
bolic] trumpet.  (Rev.  10:  7.)  This  applies  to  the
mystery  in  both  senses  in  which  it  is  used  :  the  mystery  or
secret  features  of  God's will  then  be  made  known  and
will  be  clearly  seen  ;  and  also  the  "mystery  of  God,"  the
Church,  the  embodiment  of  that  plan.  Both  will  then  be
finished.  The  secret,  hidden  plan  will  have  sought  out
the  full,  complete  number  of  the  members  of  the  body  of
Christ,  and  hence  it,  the  body  of  Christ,  will  be  finished.
The  plan  will  cease  to  be  a  mystery,  because  there  wiU


88


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


be  no  further  object  in  perpetuating  its  secrecy.  The
greatness  of  the  mystery,  so  long  kept  secret,  and  hidden  in
promises,  types  and  figures,  and  the  wonderful  grace  be-
stowed on  those  called  to  fellowship  in  this  mystery  (Eph.
3:  9),  suggest  to  us  that  the  work  to  follow  its  completion,
for  which  for  six  thousand  years  Jehovah  has  kept  man-
kind in  expectation  and  hope,  must  be  an  immense  work,
a  grand  work,  worthy  of  such  great  preparations.  What
may  we  not  expect  in  blessings  upon  the  world,  when  the
veil  of  mystery  is  withdrawn  and  the  showers  of  blessing
descend  !  It  is  this  for  which  the  whole  creation  groans
and  travails  in  pain  together  until  now,  waiting  for  the
completion  of  this  mystery — for  the  manifestation  of  the
Sons  of  God,  the  promised  "  Seed,"  in  whom  they  shaT'
all  be  blessed. — Rom.  8;  19,  21,  22.

A  LORD'S  DAY  OFFERING.

"I  offer  Thee  :
Every  heart's  throb,  they  are  Thine ;
Every  human  tie  of  mine  ;
Every  joy  and  every  pain;
Every  act  of  mind  or  brain —

My  blessed  God !
Every  hope  and  every  fear ;
Every  smile  and  every  tear;
Every  song  and  hymn,
'  Laudamus  Te.'

*'  Take  them  all,  my  blessed  Lord,
Bind  them  with  thy  secret  cord ;
Glorify  thyself  in  me.

Adored  One !
Multiply  them  by  thy  Word  ;
Strengthen,  bless,  increase,  my  Lord

Of  perfect  love !

Thou  First  and  Last  I"


STUDY  VI.


OUR  LORD'S  RETURN— ITS  OBJECT,  THE  RESTITU-
TION OF  ALL  THINGS.


Our  Lord's  Second  Advent  Personal  and  Pre-Millennial. — Its  Relation-
ship TO  THE  First  Advent.— The  Selection  of  the  Church  and  the  Con«

VERSION  of  the  WoRLD. — ELECTION  AND  FrEE  GrACE. —  PRISONERS  OF  HOPB.

Prophetic  Testimony  regarding  Restitution. — Our  Lord's  Return  Man-
ifestly THE  Hope  of  the  Church  and  the  World.


ND  He  shall  send  Jesus  Christ,  which  [who]  before  was


preached  unto  you ;  whom  the  heaven  must  retain
until  the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things,  which  God  hath
spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets  since  the
world  began." — A6ls  3:20,  21.

That  our  Lord  intended  his  disciples  to  understand  that
for  some  purpose,  in  some  manner,  and  at  some  time,  he
would  come  again,  is,  we  presume,  admitted  and  believed
by  all  famihar  with  the  Scriptures.  True,  Jesus  said,  "Lo,
I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  age"
(Matt.  28:20),  and  by  his  spirit  and  by  his  Word  he  has
been  with  the  Church  continually,  guiding,  directing,  com-
forting and  sustaining  his  saints,  and  cheering  them  in  the
midst  of  all  their  afflidions.  But  though  the  Church  has
been  blessedly  conscious  of  the  Lord's  knowledge  of  all
her  ways  and  of  his  constant  care  and  love,  yet  she  longs
for  his  promised  personal  return;  for,  when  he  said,  "If  I
go,  I  will  come  again"  (John  14:3),  he  certainly  referred
to  a  second  personal  coming.

Some  think  he  referred  to  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit
at  Pentecost ;  others,  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  etc.;
but  these  apparently  overlook  the  fadl  that  in  the  last  book


go


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


of  the  Bible,  written  some  sixty  years  after  Pentecost,  and
twenty-six  years  after  Jerusalem's  destrudtion,  he  that  was
dead  and  is  alive  speaks  of  the  event  as  yet  future,  saying :
"Behold,  I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  me."
And  the  inspired  John  replies,  "Even  so,  come.  Lord
Jesus." — Rev.  22:  12,  20.

Quite  a  number  think  that  when  sinners  are  converted
that  forms  a  part  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  that  so  he  will
continue  coming  until  all  the  world  is  converted.  Then,
say  they,  he  will  have  fully  come.

These  evidently  forget  the  testimony  of  the  Scriptures
on  the  subject,  which  declares  the  reverse  of  their  expe6ta-
tion  :  that  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  second  coming  the
world  will  be  far  from  converted  to  God  ;  that  "In  the  last
days  perilous  times  shall  come,  for  men  shall  be  lovers  of
pleasure  more  than  lovers  of  God"  (2  Tim.  3:  1-4);  that
"  Evil  men  and  seducers  shall  wax  worse  and  worse,  deceiv-
ing, and  being  deceived."  (Verse  13.)  They  forget  the
Master's  special  warning  to  his  little  flock:  "Take  heed
to  yourselves  lest  that  day  come  upon  you  unawares,  for  as
a  stiare  shall  it  come  on  all  them  [not  taking  heed]  that
dwell  on  the  face  of  the  whole  earth."  (Luke  21  :  34,  35.)
Again,  we  may  rest  assured  that  when  it  is  said,  "All  kin-
dreds of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him,"  when  they
see  him  coming  (Rev.  i  :  7),  no  reference  is  made  to  the
conversion  of  sinners.  Do  all  men  wail  because  of  the  con-
version of  sinners?  On  the  contrary,  if  this  passage  refers,
as  almost  all  admit,  to  Christ's  presence  on  earth,  it  teaches
that  all  on  earth  will  not  love  his  appearing,  as  they  cer-
tainly would  do  if  all  were  converted.

Some  expedl  an  adtual  coming  and  presence  of  the  Lord,
but  set  ihe  time  ot  the  event  a  long  way  off,  claiming  that
through  the  efforts  ot  the  Church  in  its  present  condition
the  world  must  be  converted,  and  thus  the  Millennial  age


Our  Lord' s  Return.


91


be  introduced.  They  claim  that  when  the  world  has  been
converted,  and  Satan  bound,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord
caused  to  fill  the  whole  earth,  and  when  the  nations  learn
war  no  more,  then  the  work  of  the  Church  in  her  present
condition  will  be  ended ;  and  that  when  she  has  accom-
plished this  great  and  difficult  task,  the  Lord  will  come  to
wind  up  earthly  affairs,  reward  believers  and  condemn  sinners.

Some  scriptures,  taken  disconnedledly,  seem  to  favor  this
view  ;  but  when  God's  Word  and  plan  are  viewed  as  a  whole,
these  will  all  be  found  to  favor  the  opposite  view,  viz.:  that
Christ  comes  before  the  conversion  of  the  world,  and  reigns
for  the  purpose  of  converting  the  world  ;  that  the  Church
is  now  being  tried,  and  that  the  reward  promised  the  over-
comers  is  that  after  being  glorified  they  shall  share  with  the
Lord  Jesus  in  that  reign,  which  is  God's  appointed  means
of  blessing  the  world  and  causing  the  knowledge  of  the
Lord  to  come  to  every  creature.  Such  are  the  Lord's  special
promises: — "To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit
with  me  in  my  throne."  (Rev.  3:  21.)  "And  they  lived
and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years." — Rev.  20:4.

There  are  two  texts  chiefly  relied  upon  by  those  who  claim
that  the  Lord  will  not  come  until  after  the  Millennium,  to
which  we  would  here  call  attention.  One  is,  "This  gospel
of  the  Kingdom  shall  be  preached  in  all  the  world  for  a  wit-
ness unto  all  nations ;  and  then  shall  the  end  come. ' '  (Matt.
24:  14.)  They  claim  this  as  having  reference  to  the  conver-
sion of  the  world  before  the  end  of  the  Gospel  age.  But
witnessing  to  the  world  does  not  imply  the  conversion  of
the  world.  The  text  says  nothing  about  how  the  testimony
will  be  received.  This  witness  has  already  been  given.  In
1 86 1  the  reports  of  the  Bible  Societies  showed  that  the
Gospel  had  been  published  in  every  language  of  earth,
though  not  all  of  earth's  millions  had  received  it.  No,
not  one  half  of  the  sixteen  hundred  millions  living  have


92


The  Flan  of  the  Ages.


ever  heard  the  name  of  Jesus.  Yet  the  condition  of  the
text  is  fulfilled :  the  gospel  has  been  preached  in  all  the
world  for  a  witness — to  every  nation.

The  Apostle  (Adls  15  :  14)  tells  that  the  main  object  ci  the
gospel  in  the  present  age  is  "  to  take  out  a  people ' '  for  Christ's
name — the  overcoming  Church,  which,  at  his  second  advent,
will  be  united  to  him  and  receive  his  name.  The  witness-
ing to  the  world  during  this  age  is  a  secondary  obje6l.

The  other  text  is,  "Sit  thou  on  my  right  hand,  until  I  make
thine  enemies  thy  footstool."  (Psa.iio:  i.)  The  vague,  in-
definite idea  regarding  this  text  seems  to  be  that  Christ  sits
on  a  material  throne  somewhere  in  the  heavens  until  the  work
of  subduing  all  things  is  accomplished  for  him  through  the
Church,  and  that  then  he  comes  to  reign.  This  is  a  mis-
conception. The  throne  of  God  referred  to  is  not  a  material
one,  but  refers  to  his  supreme  authority  and  rulership ;  and
the  Lord  Jesus  has  been  exalted  to  a  share  in  that  rulership.
Paul  declares,  "God  hath  highly  exalted  him  [Jesus]  and
given  him  a  name  above  every  name."  He  hath  given  him
authority  above  every  other,  next  to  the  Father.  If  Christ
sits  upon  a  material  throne  until  his  enemies  are  made  his
footstool  [all  subdued],  then  of  course  he  cannot  come  until
all  things  are  subdued.  But  if  "right  hand"  in  this  text
refers,  not  to  a  fixed  locality  and  bench,  but,  as  we  claim,
to  power,  authority,  rulership,  it  follows  that  the  text  under
consideration  would  in  no  wise  confli6l  with  the  other  scrip-
ture which  teaches  that  he  comes  to  "subdue  all  things
unto  himself"  (Phil.  3  :  21),  by  virtue  of  the  power  vested
in  him.  To  illustrate  :  Emperor  William  is  on  the  throne  of
Germany,  we  say,  yet  we  do  not  refer  to  the  royal  bench,
and  as  a  matter  of  fadl  he  seldom  occupies  it.  When  we
say  that  he  is  on  the  throne,  we  mean  that  he  rules  Germany.
Right  hand  signifies  the  chief  place,  position  of  excellence
■or  favor,  next  to  the  chief  ruler.    Thus  Prince  Bismarck


Our  Lord^s  Return.


93


was  exalted  or  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  by  the
German  Emperor ;  and  Joseph  was  at  the  right  hand  of
Pharaoh  in  the  kingdom  of  Egypt — not  literally,  but  after
the  customary  figiire  of  speech.  Jesus'  words  to  Caiaphas
agree  with  this  thought :  "  Hereafter  shall  ye  see  the  Son  of
Man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,  and  coming  in  the
clouds  of  heaven."  (Matt.  26  :  64.)  He  will  be  on  the  right
hand  when  coming,  and  will  remain  on  the  right  hand
during  the  Millennial  age,  and  forever.

A  further  examination  of  God's  revealed  plans  will  give
a  broader  view  of  the  object  of  both  the  first  and  second
advents ;  and  we  should  remember  that  both  events  stand
related  as  parts  of  one  plan.  The  specific  work  of  the  first
advent  was  to  redeem  men  ;  and  that  of  the  second  is  to
restore,  and  bless,  and  liberate  the  redeemed.  Having  given
his  life  a  ransom  for  all,  our  Savior  ascended  to  present  that
sacrifice  to  the  Father,  thus  making  reconciliation  for  man's
iniquity.  He  tarries  and  permits  "  the  prince  of  this  world  "
to  continue  the  rule  of  evil,  until  after  the  sele6lion  of  "  the
Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife,"  who,  to  be  accounted  worthy  of
such  honor,  must  overcome  the  influences  of  the  present
evil  world.  Then  the  work  of  giving  to  the  world  of  man-
kind the  great  blessings  secured  to  them  by  his  sacrifice  will
be  due  to  commence,  and  he  will  come  forth  to  bless  all
the  families  of  the  earth.

True,  the  restoring  and  blessing  could  have  commenced
at  once,  when  the  ransom  price  was  paid  by  the  Redeemer,
and  then  the  coming  of  Messiah  would  have  been  but  one
event,  the  reign  and  blessing  beginning  at  once,  as  the
apostles  at  first  expedled.  (A6ts  1:6.)  But  God  had  pro-
vided "some  better  thing  for  us" — the  Christian  Church
(Heb.  II :  40);  hence  it  is  in  our  interest  that  the  reign  of
Christ  is  separated  from  the  sufferings  of  the  Head  by  these
nineteen  centuries.


94


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


This  period  between  the  first  and  second  advents,  be-
tween the  ransom  for  all  and  the  blessing  of  all,  is  for  the
trial  and  selection  of  the  Church,  which  is  the  body  of
Christ ;  otherwise  there  would  have  been  only  the  one  ad-
vent, and  the  work  which  will  be  done  during  the  period  of
his  second  presence,  in  the  Millennium,  would  have  followed
the  resurredtion  of  Jesus.  Or,  instead  of  saying  that  the
work  of  the  second  advent  would  have  followed  at  once  the
work  of  the  first,  let  us  say  rather  that  had  Jehovah  not  pur-
posed the  selection  of  the  "little  flock,"  "the  body  of
Christ, ' '  the  first  advent  would  not  have  taken  place  when
it  did,  but  would  have  occurred  at  the  time  of  the  second
advent,  and  there  would  have  been  but  the  one.  For  God
has  evidently  designed  the  permission  of  evil  for  six  thou-
sand years,  as  well  as  that  the  cleansing  and  restitution  of  all
shall  be  accomplished  during  the  seventh  thousand.

Thus  seen,  the  coming  of  Jesus,  as  the  sacrifice  and  ran-
som for  sinners,  was  just  long  enough  in  advance  of  the
blessing  and  restoring  time  to  allow  for  the  selection  of  his
"little  flock"  of  "joint-heirs."  This  will  account  to  some
for  the  apparent  delay  on  God's  part  in  giving  the  blessings
promised,  and  provided  for,  in  the  ransom.  The  blessings
Avill  come  in  due  time,  as  at  first  planned,  though,  for  a
glorious  purpose,  the  price  was  provided  longer  beforehand
than  men  would  have  expected.

The  Apostle  informs  us  that  Jesus  has  been  absent  from
earth — in  the  heaven — during  all  the  intervening  time  from
his  ascension  to  the  beginning  of  the  times  of  restitution,
or  the  Millennial  age — "whom  the  heaven  must  retain  until
the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things,"  etc.  (A(5ts  3  :  21.)
Since  the  Scriptures  thus  teach  that  the  object  of  our  Lord's
second  advent  is  the  restitution  of  all  things,  and  that  at
the  time  of  his  appearing  the  nations  are  so  far  from  being
converted  as  to  be  angry  (Rev.  11  :  18)  and  in  opposition.


Our  Lord^s  Return.


95


it  must  be  admitted  either  that  the  Church  will  fail  to  ac-
complish her  mission,  and  that  the  plan  of  God  will  be  thus
far  frustrated,  or  else,  as  we  claim  and  have  shown,  that  the
conversion  of  the  world  in  the  present  age  was  not  expedled
of  the  Church,  but  that  her  mission  has  been  to  preach  the
Gospel  in  all  the  world  for  a  witness,  and  to  prepare  her-
self under  divine  direction  for  her  great  future  work.  God
has  not  yet  by  any  means  exhausted  his  power  for  the  world's
conversion.  Nay,  more  :  he  has  not  yet  even  attempted  the
world's  conversion.

This  may  seem  a  strange  statement  to  some,  but  let  such
refledl  that  if  God  has  attempted  such  a  work  he  has  sig-
nally failed ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  only  a  small  fradtion  of
earth's  billions  have  ever  intelligently  heard  of  the  only  name
whereby  they  must  be  saved.  We  have  only  forcibly  stated
the  views  and  teachings  of  some  of  the  leading  se6ls — Bap-
tists, Presbyterians  and  others — viz.,  that  God  is  eledting
or  selecting  out  of  the  world  a  "little  flock,"  a  Church.
They  believe  that  God  will  do  no  more  than  choose  this
Church,  while  we  find  the  Scriptures  teaching  a  further  step
in  the  divine  plan — a  restitution  for  the  world,  to  be  ac-
complished through  the  eledl  Church,  when  completed  and
glorified.  The  "little  flock,"  the  overcomers,  of  this  Gos-
pel age,  are  only  the  body  of  "The  Seed"  in  or  by  whom
all  the  families  of  the  earth  are  to  be  blessed.

Those  who  claim  that  Jehovah  has  been  trying  for  six
thousand  years  to  convert  the  world,  and  failing  all  the  time,
must  find  it  difficult  to  reconcile  such  views  with  the  Bible
assurance  that  all  God's  purposes  shall  be  accomplished,  and
that  his  Word  .shall  not  return  unto  him  void,  but  shall  pros-
per in  the  thing  whereto  it  luas  sent.  (Isa.  55  :  11.)  The  fadl
lhat  the  world  has  not  yet  been  converted,  and  that  the
knowledge  of  the  Lord  has  not  yet  filled  the  earth,  is  a
Droof  that  it  has  not  yet  been  sent  on  that  mission.


96


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


This  brings  us  to  the  two  lines  of  thought  which  have
divided  Christians  for  centuries,  namely,  Eledlion  and  Free
Grace.  That  both  of  these  do6trines,  notwithstanding  their
apparent  oppositeness,  have  Scriptural  support,  no  Bible
student  will  deny.  This  fa<5l  should  lead  us  at  once  to  sur-
mise that  in  some  way  both  must  be  true ;  but  in  no  way
can  they  be  reconciled  except  by  observing  heaven's  law,
order,  and  "rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth"  on  this
subje6t.  This  order,  as  represented  in  the  plan  of  the  ages,
if  observed,  will  clearly  show  us  that  while  an  ElecStion  has
been  in  progress  during  the  present  and  past  ages,  what  is
by  way  of  distinftion  designated  Free  Grace  is  God's
gracious  provision  for  the  world  in  general  during  the  Mil-
lennial age.  If  the  distindtive  features  of  the  epochs  and
dispensations  outlined  in  a  preceding  chapter  be  kept  in
mind,  and  all  the  passages  relating  to  Election  and  Free
Grace  be  examined  and  located,  it  will  be  found  that  all
those  which  treat  of  Ele<£tion  apply  to  the  present  and  past
ages,  while  those  which  teach  Free  Grace  are  fully  applica-
ble to  the  next  age.

However,  Eledlion,  as  taught  in  the  Bible,  is  not  the  arbi-
trary coercion,  or  fatalism,  usually  believed  and  taught  by
its  advocates,  but  a  seledlion  according  to  fitness  and  adapta-
bility to  the  end  God  has  in  view,  during  the  period  ap-
pointed for  that  purpose.

The  do6lrine  of  Free  Grace,  advocated  by  Arminians,
is  also  a  much  grander  display  of  God's  abounding  favor
than  its  most  earnest  advocates  have  ever  taught.  God's
grace  or  favor  in  Christ  is  ever  free,  in  the  sense  of  being
unmerited  ;  but  since  the  fall  of  man  into  sin,  to  the  present
time,  certain  of  God's  favors  have  been  restricted  to  spe-
cial individuals,  nations  and  classes,  while  in  the  next  age
all  the  world  will  be  invited  to  share  the  favors  then
offered,  on  the  conditions  then  made  known  to  all,  and


Our  Lord's  Return.


9t


whosoever  will  may  come  and  drink  at  life's  fountain
freely. — Rev.  22  :  17.

Glancing  backward,  we  notice  the  selection  or  election
of  Abraham  and  certain  of  his  offspring  as  the  channels
through  which  the  promised  Seed,  the  blesser  of  all  the
families  of  the  earth,  should  come.  (Gal.  3 :  29.)  We
note  also  the  selection  of  Israel  from  among  all  nations,
as  the  one  in  whom,  typically,  God  illustrated  how  the
great  work  for  the  world  should  be  accomplished — their
deliverance  from  Egypt,  their  Canaan,  their  covenants,
their  laws,  their  sacrifices  for  sins,  for  the  blotting  out  of
guilt  and  for  the  sprinkling  of  the  people,  and  their  priesthood
for  the  accomplishment  of  all  this,  being  a  miniature  and
typical  representation  of  the  real  priesthood  and  sacrifices
for  the  purifying  of  the  world  of  mankind.  God,  speaking
to  the  people,  said,  "  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the
families  of  the  earth."  (Amos  3:2.)  This  people  alone
was  recognized  until  Christ  came ;  yes,  and  afterwards,  for
his  ministry  was  confined  to  them,  and  he  would  not  permit
his  disciples  to  go  to  others — saying,  as  he  sent  them  out,
"  Go  not  into  the  way  of  the  Gentiles,  and  into  any  city  of
the  Samaritans  enter  ye  not."  Why  so.  Lord  ?  Because,
he  explains,  "  I  am  not  sent  but  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the
house  of  Israel."  (Matt.  10  :  5,  6 ;  15  :  24.)  All  his  time
was  devoted  to  them  until  his  death,  and  there  was  done
his  first  work  for  the  world,  the  first  display  of  his  free  and
all-abounding  grace,  which  in  "  due  time  "  shall  indeed  be
a  blessing  to  all.

This,  God's  grandest  gift,  was  not  limited  to  nation  or  class.
It  was  not  for  Israel  only,  but  for  all  the  world ;  for  Jesus  Christ,
by  the  grace  of  God,  tasted  death  for  every  man. — Heb.  2  :  9.

And  now  also,  in  the  Gospel  age,  a  certain  sort  of
election  obtains.  Some  parts  of  the  world  are  more  favored
7


0


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


with  the  gospel  (which  is  free  to  all  who  hear)  than  others.
Glance  at  a  map  of  the  world  and  see  how  small  is  the
portion  enlightened  or  blessed  in  any  appreci.  ble  degree  by
the  gospel  of  Christ.  Contrast  yourself,  with  your  privi-
leges and  knowledge,  with  the  millions  in  heathen  darkness
to-day,  who  never  heard  the  call,  and  who  consequently
were  not  called.  When  the  called-out  company  (called  to
be  sons  of  God,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord — who  have  made  their  calling  and  elec-
tion sure)  is  complete,  then  the  plan  of  God  for  the  world' s
salvation  will  be  only  beginning.

Not  until  it  is  selected,  developed,  and  exalted  to  power,
will  ike  Seed  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  "  The  God  of
peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  your  feet  shortly ^  (Rom.
i6:  20;  Gen.  3:  15.)  The  Gospel  age  makes  ready  the
chaste  virgin,  the  faithful  Church,  for  the  coming  Bride-
groom. And  in  the  end  of  the  age,  when  she  is  made
"ready"  (Rev.  19:  7),  the  Bridegroom  comes,  and  they
that  are  ready  go  in  with  him  to  the  marriage — the  second
Adam  and  the  second  Eve  become  one,  and  then  the  glo-
rious work  of  restitution  begins.  In  the  next  dispensation,
the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth,  the  Church  will  be  no
longer  the  espoused  virgin,  but  the  Bride ;  and  then  shall
"  The  Spirit  and  the  Bride  say,  Come  !  And  let  him  that
heareth  say,  Come  !  And  let  him  that  is  athirst  come.
And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely."
• — Rev.  22  :  17.

The  Gospel  age,  so  far  from  closing  the  Church's  mis-
sion, is  only  a  necessary  preparation  for  the  great  future
work.  For  this  promised  and  coming  blessing,  the  whole
creation  groaneth  and  travaileth  in  pain  together  until
now,  waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.
(Rom.  8:  22,  19.)  And  it  is  a  blessed  fadl  that  free  grace
in  fullest  measure,  not  merely  for  the  living  but  for  those


Our  Lord^s  Return.


99


who  have  died  as  well,  is  provided  in  our  Father's  plan  as
the  blessed  opportunity  of  the  coming  age.

Some  who  can  see  something  of  the  blessings  due  at  the
second  advent,  and  who  appreciate  in  some  measure  the
fadl  that  the  Lord  comes  to  bestow  the  grand  blessing  pur-
chased by  his  death,  fail  to  see  this  last  proposition,  viz.:
that  those  in  their  graves  have  as  much  interest  in  that
glorious  reign  of  Messiah  as  those  who  at  that  time  will  be
less  completely  under  the  bondage  of  corruption — death.
But  as  surely  as  Jesus  died  for  all,  they  all  must  have  the
blessings  and  opportunities  which  he  purchased  with  his
own  precious  blood.  Hence  we  should  expect  blessings  in
the  Millennial  age  upon  all  those  in  their  graves  as  well  as
upon  those  not  in  them ;  and  of  this  we  will  find  abundant
proof,  as  we  look  further  into  the  Lord's  testimony  on  the
subject.  It  is  because  of  God's  plan  for  their  release  that
those  in  the  tomb  are  called    prisoners  of  hope ^

It  is  estimated  that  about  one  hundred  and  forty-three
billions  of  human  beings  have  lived  on  the  earth  in  the  six
thousand  years  since  Adam's  creation.  Of  these,  the  very
broadest  estimate  that  could  be  made  with  reason  would  be
that  less  than  one  billion  were  saints  of  God.  This  broad
estimate  would  leave  the  immense  aggregate  of  one  hundred
and  forty-two  billions  (142,000,000,000)  who  went  down
into  death  without  faith  and  hope  in  the  only  name  given
under  heaven  or  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.
Indeed,  the  vast  majority  of  these  never  knew  or  heard
of  Jesus,  and  could  not  believe  in  him  of  whom  they  had
net  heard.

What,  we  ask,  has  become  of  this  vast  multitude,  of
which  figures  give  a  wholly  inadequate  idea?  What  is,
and  is  to  be,  their  condition  ?  Did  God  make  no  provision
for  these,  whose  condition  and  circumstances  he  must  have
foreseen  ?    Or  did  he,  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.


lOO


Tfie  Plan  of  the  A,^es.


make  a  wretched  and  merciless  provision  for  their  hopeless,
eternal  torment,  as  many  of  his  children  claim  ?  Or  has
he  yet  in  store  for  them,  in  the  heights  and  depths  and
lengths  and  breadths  of  his  plan,  an  opportunity  for  all  to
come  to  the  knowledge  of  that  only  name,  and,  by  becom-
ing obedient  to  the  conditions,  to  enjoy  everlasting  life?

To  these  questions,  which  every  thinking  Christian  asks
himself,  and  yearns  to  see  answered  truthfully,  and  in
harmony  with  the  character  of  Jehovah,  comes  a  variety  of
answers: —

Atheism  answers.  They  are  eternally  dead :  there  is  no
hereafter :  they  will  never  live  again.

Calvinism  answers.  They  were  not  elected  to  be  saved.
God  foreordained  and  predestined  them  to  be  lost — to  go
to  hell — and  they  are  there  now,  writhing  in  agony,  where
they  will  ever  remain,  without  hope.

Arminianism  answers.  We  believe  that  God  excuses
aiany  of  them  on  account  of  ignorance.  Those  who  did
the  best  they  knew  how  will  be  sure  of  being  a  part  of  the
"Church  of  the  First-born,"  even  though  they  never
heard  of  Jesus.

To  this  last  view  the  majority  of  Christians  of  all  de-
nominations assent  (notwithstanding  the  creeds  of  some  to
the  contrary),  from  a  feeling  that  any  other  view  would  be
irreconcilable  with  justice  on  God's  part.  But  do  the  Scrip-
cures  support  this  last  view  ?  Do  they  teach  that  ignorance
is  a  ground  of  salvation  ?  No ;  the  only  ground  of  salva-
tion mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  is  faith  in  Christ  as  our
Redeemer  and  Lord.  "By  grace  are  ye  saved,  through
faith."  (Eph.  2:8.)  Justification  by  faith  is  the  underlying
principle  of  the  whole  system  of  Christianity.  When  asked;
What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  the  apostles  answered.  Believe
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  *'  There  is  none  other  nam^-
under  heaven  given  among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved  * '


Our  Lord' s  Return.


loi


(Adls  4 :  12);  and  "Whosoever  shall  call  upon  the  name  of
llie  Lord  shall  be  saved." — Rom.  10 :  13.

But  Paul  reasons  that  a  man  must  hear  the  gospel  before
he  can  believe,  saying,  "How  then  shall  they  call  on  him
in  whom  they  have  not  believed  ?  and  how  shall  they  be-
lieve in  him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard  ?" — Rom.  10:14.

Some  claim  that  Paul  teaches  that  ignorance  will  save
men,  when  he  says  that  "The  Gentiles,  which  have  not  the
law,  are  a  law  unto  themselves."  (Rom.  2:14.)  They
gather  from  this  that  the  law  which  their  conscience  fur-
nishes is  sufficient  to  justify  them.  But  such  persons  mis-
understand Paul.  His  argument  is  that  the  whole  world
is  guilty  before  God  (Rom.  3  :  19);  that  the  Gentiles,  who
had  not  the  witten  law,  were  condemned,  not  justified,  by
the  light  of  conscience,  which,  whether  it  excused  them  or
accused  them,  proved  that  they  were  short  of  perfe£lion  and
unworthy  of  life,  even  as  the  Jews  who  had  the  written  law
were  condemned  by  it ;  "For  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge
of  sin."  (Rom.  3  :  20.)  The  law  given  to  the  Jew  revealed
his  weakness,  and  was  intended  to  show  him  that  he  was
unable  to  justify  himself  before  God;  for  "By  the  deeds
of  the  Law  there  shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  [God's]
sight."  The  written  law  condemned  the  Jews,  and  the
Gentiles  had  light  enough  of  conscience  to  condemn  them  ;
and  thus  every  mouth  is  stopped  from  claiming  the  right
of  life,  and  all  the  world  stands  guilty  before  God.

Remembering  the  statement  of  James  (2  :  10),  that  who-
soever shall  keep  the  whole  law,  except  to  offend  in  one
point,  is  guilty,  and  cannot  claim  any  blessing  promised  by
the  Law  Covenant,  we  realize  that  indeed  "there  is  none
righteous;  no,  not  one."  (Rom.  3:  10.)  And  thus  the
Scriptures  close  every  door  of  hope  save  one,  showing  that
not  one  of  the  condemned  is  able  to  secure  eternal  life  by
meritorious  works,  and  that  it  is  equally  useless  to  plead


I02


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ignorance  as  a  ground  of  salvation.  Ignorance  cannot  en-
title any  one  to  the  reward  of  faith  and  obedience.

Many  Christians,  unwilling  to  believe  that  so  many  mil-
lions of  ignorant  infants  and  heathen  will  be  eternally  lost
(which  they  have  been  taught  means  to  be  sent  to  a  place
of  eternal  and  hopeless  torment),  insist,  notwithstanding
these  Bible  statements,  that  God  will  not  condemn  the  igno-
rant. We  admire  their  liberality  of  heart  and  their  appre-
ciation of  God's  goodness,  but  urge  them  not  to  be  too
hasty  about  discarding  or  ignoring  Bible  statements.  God
has  a  blessing  for  all,  in  a  better  way  than  through  ignorance.

But  do  these  a6l  in  accordance  with  their  stated  belief?
No :  though  they  profess  to  believe  that  the  ignorant  will
be  saved  on  account  of  their  ignorance,  they  continue  to
send  missionaries  to  the  heathen  at  the  cost  of  thousands
of  valuable  lives  and  millions  of  money.  If  they  all,  or
even  half  of  them,  would  be  saved  through  ignorance,  it  is
doing  them  a  positive  injury  to  send  missionaries  to  teach
them  of  Christ ;  for  only  about  one  in  a  thousand  believes,
when  the  missionaries  do  go  to  them.  If  this  idea  be  cor-
redl,  it  would  be  much  better  to  let  them  remain  in  igno-
rance ;  for  then  a  much  larger  proportion  would  be  saved.
Continuing  the  same  line  of  argument,  might  we  not  reason
that  if  God  had  left  all  men  in  ignorance,  all  would  have
been  saved  ?  If  so,  the  coming  and  death  of  Jesus  were
useless,  the  preaching  and  suffering  of  apostles  and  saints
were  vain,  and  the  so  -called  gospel,  instead  of  being  good
news,  is  very  bad  news.  The  sending  of  missionaries  to  the
heathen  by  those  who  believe  the  Calvinistic  or  fatalistic
view  of  eleilion,  that  the  eternal  destiny  of  each  individual
was  unalterably  fixed  before  he  had  an  existence,  is  even
more  absurd  and  unreasonable.

But  the  Bible,  which  is  full  of  the  missionary  spirit,  does
uot  teach  that  there  are  several  ways  of  salvation — one  way


Our  Lord's  Return.


103


by  faith,  another  by  works,  and  another  by  ignorance
Neither  does  it  teach  the  God-dishonoring  doctrine  of  fatal-
ism. While  it  shows  every  other  door  of  hope  closed  against
the  race,  it  throws  wide  open  the  one,  only  door,  and  pro-
claims that  whosoever  will  may  enter  into  life  ;  and  it  shows
that  all  who  do  not  now  see  or  appreciate  the  blessed  priv-
ilege of  entering  shall  in  due  time  be  brought  to  a  full
knowledge  and  appreciation.  The  only  way,  by  which  any
and  all  of  the  condemned  race  may  come  to  God,  is  not
by  meritorious  works,  neither  by  ignorance,  but  by  faith  in
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of
the  world,  (i  Peter  i  :  19;  John  i  :  29.)  This  is  the  Gos-
pel, the  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  "which  shall  be  unto

ALL  PEOPLE."

Suppose  we  now  look  at  these  things  just  as  God  tells  us
of  them,  and  leave  the  clearing  of  his  charadler  to  himself.
Let  us  inquire,  What  has  become  of  the  one  hundred  and
forty-two  billions  ?

Whatever  may  have  become  of  them,  we  may  be  sure  they
are  not  now  in  a  condition  of  suffering  ;  because,  not  only
do  the  Scriptures  teach  that  full  and  complete  reward  is  not
given  to  the  Church  until  Christ  comes,  when  he  shall  re-
ward every  man  (Matt  16  :  27),  but  that  the  unjust  are  to
receive  their  punishment  then  also.  Whatever  may  be  their
present  condition,  it  cannot  be  their  full  reward ;  for  Peter
says,  "The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  reserve  the  unjust  unto
the  day  of  judgment  to  be  punished"  (2  Peter  2  :  9);  and
he  will  do  so.

But  the  thought  that  so  many  of  our  fellow  creatures
should  at  any  time  be  lost  from  lack  of  having  had  the
knowledge  which  is  necessary  to  salvation  would  be  sad
indeed  to  all  who  have  a  spark  of  love  or  pity.  Then,  too,
there  are  numerous  scriptures  which  it  seems  impossible
to  harmonize  with  all  this.    Let  us  see  :  In  the  light  of  the


I04


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


past  and  the  present  as  the  only  opportunities,  laying  aside
all  hope  through  a  restitution  in  the  coming  age,  how  shall
we  understand  the  statements,  "God  is  love,"  and  "God
so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that
whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish  ?"  (ijohn
4:8;  John  3:16.)  Would  it  not  seem  that  if  God  loved
the  world  so  much  he  might  have  made  provision,  not  only
that  believers  might  be  saved,  but  also  that  all  might  hear  in
order  to  believe  ?

Again,  when  we  read,  "That  was  the  true  light  that  light-
eth  every  man  that  cometh  into  the  world  "  (John  i :  9),
our  observation  says.  Not  so ;  every  man  has  not  been  en-
lightened ;  we  cannot  see  that  our  Lord  has  lighted  more
than  a  few  of  earth's  billions.  Even  in  this  comparatively
enlightened  day,  millions  of  heathen  give  no  evidence  of  such
enlightenment ;  neither  did  the  Sodomites,  nor  multitudes
of  others  in  past  ages.

We  read  that  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  grace  of  God,  tasted
death  ^^for  every  many  (Heb.  2:9.)  But  if  he  tasted
death  for  the  one  hundred  and  forty-three  billions,  and
from  any  cause  that  sacrifice  becomes  efficacious  to  only  one
billion,  was  not  the  redemption  comparatively  a  failure?
And  in  that  case,  is  not  the  Apostle's  statement  too  broad?
When  again  we  read,  "Behold,  I  bring  you  good  tidings  of
great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people"  (Luke  2  :  10),  and,
looking  about  us,  see  that  it  is  only  to  a  "little  flock"  that
it  has  been  good  tidings,  and  not  to  all  people,  we  would  be
compelled  to  wonder  whether  the  angels  had  not  overstated
the  goodness  and  breadth  of  their  message,  and  overrated
the  importance  of  the  work  to  be  accomplished  by  the  Mes-
siah whom  they  announced.

Another  statement  is,  "There  is  one  God,  and  one  Medi-
ator between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  who  gave
himself  a  ransom  for  all."  Ci  Tim.  2  :  5,  6.)  A  ransom  for


Our  Lord's  Return.


los


all?  Then  why  should  not  all  involved  have  some  ben-
efit from  Christ's  death?  Why  should  not  come  to  a
knowledge  of  the  truth,  that  they  may  believe?

Without  the  key,  how  dark,  how  inconsistent,  these  state-
ments appear ;  but  when  we  find  the  key  to  God's  plan,
these  texts  all  declare  with  one  voice,  "  God  is  love."  This
key  is  found  in  the  latter  part  of  the  text  last  quoted-
"Who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all,  to  be  testified  in
DUE  TIME. ' '  God  has  a  due  time  for  everything.  He  could
have  testified  it  to  these  in  their  past  life-time ;  but  since  he
did  not,  it  proves  that  their  due  time  must  be  future.  For
those  who  will  be  of  the  Church,  the  bride  of  Christ,  and
share  the  kingdom  honors,  the  present  is  the  "due  time"
to  hear  ;  and  whosoever  now  has  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear
and  heed,  and  he  will  be  blessed  accordingly.  Though  Jesus
paid  our  ransom  before  we  were  born,  it  was  not  our  "due
time"  to  hear  of  it  for  long  years  afterward,  and  only  the
appreciation  of  it  brought  responsibility ;  and  this,  only  to
the  extent  of  our  ability  and  appreciation.  The  same  prin-
ciple applies  to  all :  in  God's  due  time  it  will  be  testified  to
all,  and  all  will  then  have  opportunity  to  believe  and  to  be
blessed  by  it.

The  prevailing  opinion  is  that  death  ends  all  probation  ;
but  there  is  no  scripture  which  so  teaches ;  and  all  the  above,
and  many  more  scriptures,  would  be  meaningless,  or  worse,
if  death  ends  all  hope  for  the  ignorant  masses  of  the  world.
The  one  scripture  quoted  to  prove  this  generally  entertained
view  is,  "Where  the  tree  falleth,  there  it  shall  be."  (Eccl.
11:3.)  If  this  has  any  relation  to  man's  future,  it  indicates
that  whatever  his  condition  when  he  enters  the  tomb,  no
change  takes  place  until  he  is  awakened  out  of  it.  And  this
istheuniformteachingcf  all  scriptures  bearing  on  thesubjedl,
as  will  be  shown  in  succeeding  chapters.  Since  God  does  not
propose  to  save  men  on  account  of  ignorance,  but  "  will  have


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


all  men  to  come  unto  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  "  (i  Tira.
2:4);  and  since  the  masses  of  mankind  have  died  in  igno-
rance ;  and  since  "there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowl-
edge, nor  wisdom,  in  the  grave ' '  (Eccl.  9:10);  therefore  God
has  prepared  for  the  awakening  of  the  dead,  in  order  to  knowl-
edge, faith  and  salvation.  Hence  his  plan  is,  that  "as  all  in
Adam  die,  even  so  all  in  Christ  shall  be  made  alive,  but  each
one  in  his  own  order" — the  Gospel  Church,  the  Bride,  the
body  of  Christ,  first;  afterward,  during  the  Millennial  age,  all
who  shall  become  his  during  that  thousand  years  of  his  pres-
ence (mistranslated  coming),  the  Lord's  due  time  for  all  to
know  him,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest. — i  Cor.  15:22.

As  death  came  by  the  first  Adam,  so  life  comes  by  Christ,
the  second  Adam.  Everything  that  mankind  lost  through
being  in  the  first  Adam  is  to  be  restored  to  those  who  believe
into  the  second  Adam.  When  awakened,  with  the  advan-
tage of  experience  with  evil,  which  Adam  lacked,  those  who
thankfully  accept  the  redemption  as  God's  gift  may  con-
tinue to  live  everlastingly  on  the  original  condition  of  obedi-
ence. Perfedl  obedience  will  be  required,  and  perfect  abil-
ity to  obey  will  be  given,  under  the  righteous  reign  of  the
Prince  of  Peace.    Here  is  the  salvation  offered  to  the  world.

Let  us  now  consider  another  text  which  is  generally
ignored  except  by  Universalists  ;  for,  although  we  are  not
Universalists,  we  claim  the  right  to  use,  and  believe,  and
rejoice  in,  every  testimony  of  God's  Word.  It  reads,  "We
trust  in  the  living  God,  who  is  the  Savior  of  all  men,
ohdWy  oi  those  that  believe.'"  (i  Tim.  4:10.)  God  will  save
all  men,  but  will  not  specially  ("to  the  uttermost")  save
any  except  those  who  come  unto  him  through  Christ.
God's  arbitrary  salvation  of  all  men  is  not  such  as  will  con-
fli£l  with  their  freedom  of  will,  or  their  liberty  of  choice,
to  give  them  life  against  their  wills  :  "I  have  set  before  you,
this  day,  life  and  death  3  choose  life,  that  ye  may  live."


Our  Lorcfs  Return.


Simeon  contrasted  these  two  salvations,  saying,  "  Mine
eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation,  ...  a  light  to  lighten  the  na-
tions, and  the  glory  of  thy  people,  Israel  [ites  indeed]."  This
is  in  harmony  with  the  declaration  of  the  Apostle,  that  the
fadl  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Mediator,  gave  himself  a  ransom
for  all  is  to  be  testified  to  all  in  due  time.  This  is  that
which  shall  come  to  all  men,  regardless  of  faith  or  will  on
their  part.  This  good  tidings  of  a  Savior  shall  be  to  all
people  (Luke  2  :io,  11),  but  the  special  salvation  from  sin
and  death  will  come  only  to  his  people  (Matt,  i :  21) — those
who  believe  into  him — for  we  read  that  the  wrath  of  God
continues  to  abide  on  the  unbeliever. — John  3  136.

We  see,  then,  that  the  general  salvation,  which  will  come
to  every  individual,  consists  of  light  from  the  true  light,  and
an  opportunity  to  choose  life ;  and,  as  the  great  majority  of
the  race  is  in  the  tomb,  it  will  be  necessary  to  bring  them
forth  from  the  grave  in  order  to  testify  to  them  the  good
tidings  of  a  Savior ;  also  that  the  special  salvation  which
believers  now  enjoy  in  hope  (Rom.  8:24),  and  the  reality
of  which  will,  in  the  Millennial  age,  be  revealed,  also,  to
those  who  "  believe  in  that  day,"  is  a  full  release  from  the
thraldom  of  sin,  and  the  corruption  of  death,  into  the  glori-
ous liberty  of  children  of  God.  But  attainment  to  all  these
blessings  will  depend  upon  hearty  compliance  with  the
laws  of  Christ's  Kingdom — the  rapidity  of  the  attainment
to  perfedlion  indicating  the  degree  of  love  for  the  King
and  for  his  law  of  love.  If  any,  enlightened  by  the  Truth,
and  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the  love  of  God,  and  restored
(either  adlually  or  reckonedly)  to  human  perfe6lion,  become
"fearful,"  and  "  draw  back"  (Heb.  10:38,  39),  they,  with
the  unbelievers  (Rev.  21  :  8),  will  be  destroyed  from  among
the  people.  (AcSls  3 : 23.)    This  is  the  second  death.

Thus  we  see  that  all  these  hitherto  difficult  texts  are  ex-
plained by  the  statement — "  to  be  testified  in  due  time."


io8


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


In  due  time,  that  true  light  shall  lighten  every  man  that
has  come  into  the  world.  In  due  time,  it  shall  be  "  good
tidings  of  great  joy  to  all  people."  And  in  no  other  way
can  these  scriptures  be  used  without  wresting.  Paul  carries
out  this  line  of  argument  with  emphasis  in  Rom.  5:18,  19.
He  reasons  that,  as  all  men  were  condemned  to  death  be-
cause of  Adam's  transgression,  so,  also,  Christ's  righteous-
ness, and  obedience  even  unto  death,  have  become  a  ground
of  justification  ;  and  that,  as  all  lost  life  in  the  first  Adam,
so  all,  aside  from  personal  demerit,  may  receive  life  by  ac-
cepting the  second  Adam.

Peter  tells  us  that  this  restitution  is  spoken  of  by  the
mouth  of  all  the  holy  prophets.  (A6ls  3  :  19-21.)  They
do  all  teach  it.  Ezekiel  sa3's  of  the  valley  of  dry  bones,
"  These  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel."  And  God
says  to  Israel,  "  Behold,  O  my  people,  I  will  open  your
graves,  and  cause  you  to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  and
bring  you  into  the  land  of  Israel.  And  ye  shall  know  that
I  am  the  Lord,  when  I  .  .  .  shall  put  my  spirit  in  you,
and  I  shall  place  you  in  your  own  land  ;  then  shall  ye  know
that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  performed  it,  saith  the
Lord." — Ezek.  37:11-14.

To  this  Paul's  words  agree  (Rom.  11  .-25,  26) — "Blind-
ness in  part  is  happened  to  Israel  until  the  fulness  of  the
Gentiles  [the  ele<5l  company,  the  bride  of  Christ]  be  come
in  ;  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved,"  or  brought  back  from
their  cast-off  condition ;  for  "  God  hath  not  cast  away  his
people  which  he  foreknew."  (Verse  2.)  They  were  cast  off
from  his  favor  while  the  bride  of  Christ  was  being  sele<5led,
but  will  be  re-instated  when  that  work  is  accomplished.
(Verses  28-33.)  The  prophets  are  full  of  statements  of  how
God  will  jalant  them  again,  and  they  shall  be  no  more
plucked  up.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  .  .  .  I
will  set  mine  eyes  upon  them  for  good,  and  I  will  bring  them


Our  Lord^s  Return.


109


z%&va  to  this  land  ;  and  I  will  build  them  and  not  pull  them
clown,  and  I  will  plant  them  and  not  pluck  them  up.  And
I  will  give  them  an  heart  to  know  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord ;
and  they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God,  for
they  shall  return  unto  me  with  their  whole  heart."  (Jer.
24:5-7;  31:28;  32:40-42;  33:6-16.)  These  cannot
merely  refer  to  restorations  from  former  captivities  in  Baby-
lon, Syria,  etc. ,  for  they  have  since  been  plucked  up.

Furthermore,  the  Lord  says,  "In  those  days,  they  shall
say  no  more.  The  fathers  have  eaten  a  sour  grape,  and  the
children  s  teeth  are  set  on  edge,  but  every  one  [who  dies]
shall  die  for  his  own  iniquity."  (Jer.  31  :  29,  30.)  This  is
not  the  case  now.  Each  does  not  now  die  for  his  own  sin,
but  for  Adam's  sin — "In  Adam  all  die."  He  ate  the  sour
grape  of  sin,  and  our  fathers  continued  to  eat  them,  entail-
ing further  sickness  and  misery  upon  their  children,  thus
hastening  the  penalty,  death.  The  day  in  which  "every
man  [who  dies]  shall  die  for  his  own  sin,"  only,  is  the  Mil-
lennial or  Restitution  day.

Though  many  of  the  prophecies  and  promises  of  future
blessing  seem  to  apply  to  Israel  only,  it  must  be  remembered
that  they  were  a  typical  people,  and  hence  the  promises
made  to  them,  while  sometimes  having  a  special  application
to  themselves,  generally  have  also  a  wider  application  to  the
whole  world  of  mankind  which  that  nation  typified.  While
Israel  as  a  nation  was  typical  of  the  whole  world,  its  priest-
hood was  typical  of  the  eledl  "little  flock,"  the  head  and
body  of  Christ,  the  "Royal  Priesthood;"  and  the  sacri-
fices, cleansings  and  atonements  made  for  Israel  typified  the
"better  sacrifices,"  fuller  cleansings  and  real  atonement
*'  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  of  which  they  are  a  part.

And  not  only  so,  but  God  mentions  by  name  other  nations
and  promises  their  restoration.  As  a  forcible  illustration  we
mention  the  Sodomites.    Surely,  if  we  shall  find  the  resti-


no


The  Plan  of  the  Ages,


tution  of  the  Sodomites  clearly  taught,  we  may  feel  sat-
isfied of  the  truth  of  this  glorious  dodlrine  of  Restitution
lor  all  mankind,  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  holy  proph-
ets. And  why  should  not  the  Sodomites  have  an  opportu-
nity to  reach  perfe6tion  and  everlasting  life  as  well  as  Israel,
or  as  any  of  us  ?  True,  they  were  not  righteous,  but  neither
was  Israel,  nor  were  we  who  now  hear  the  gospel.  There  is
none  righteous;  no,  not  one,"  aside  from  the  imputed
righteousness  of  Christ,  who  died  for  all.  Our  Lord's  own
words  tell  us  that  although  God  rained  down  fire  from
heaven  and  destroyed  them  all  because  of  their  wickedness,
yet  the  Sodomites  were  not  so  great  sinners  in  his  sight  as
were  the  Jews,  who  had  more  knowledge.  (Gen.  19:  24;
Luke  17  :  29.)  Unto  the  Jews  of  Capernaum  he  said,  "  If  the
mighty  works  which  have  been  done  in  thee  had  been  done
in  Sodom,  it  would  have  remained  until  this  day." — Matt.
II  :  23.

Thus  our  Lord  teaches  that  the  Sodomites  did  not  havs
a  full  opportunity;  and  he  guarantees  them  such  oppor-
tunity when  he  adds  (verse  24),  "But  I  say  unto  you,  that
it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom,  in  the  day
of  judgment,  than  for  thee."  The  character  of  the  Day
of  Judgment  and  its  work  will  be  shown  in  succeeding
pages.  Here  we  merely  call  attention  to  the  fadl  that  it  wiil
be  a  tolerable  time  for  Capernaum,  and  yet  more  tolerable
for  Sodom ;  because,  though  neither  had  yet  had  full  knowl-
edge, nor  all  the  blessings  designed  to  come  through  the
*'Seed,"  yet  Capernaum  had  sinned  against  more  light.

And  if  Capernaum  and  all  Israel  are  to  be  remembered
and  blessed  under  the  "New  Covenant,"  sealed  by  the
blood  of  Jesus,  why  should  not  the  Sodomites  also  be  blessed
among  "all  the  families  of  the  earth?"  They  assuredly
will  be.  And  let  it  be  remembered  that  since  God  "  rained
down  fire  from  heaven  and  destroyed  them  all ' '  many  cen-


Our  Lord^s  Return.


iir


turies  before  Jesus'  day,  when  their  restoration  is  spoken  oL
it  implies  their  awakening,  their  coming  from  the  tomb.

Let  us  now  examine  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel  i6  :  4S-63.
Read  it  carefully.  God  here  speaks  of  Israel,  and  compares
her  with  her  neighbor,  Samaria,  and  also  with  the  Sodom-
ites, of  whom  he  says,  "I  took  them  away  as  I  saw  good.' '
Neither  Jesus  nor  the  Prophet  offers  any  explanation  of  the
seeming  inequality  of  God's  dealings  in  destroying  Sodom
and  permitting  others  more  guilty  than  Sodom  to  go  un-
punished. That  will  all  be  made  clear  when,  in  "  due  time,"
his  great  designs  are  made  manifest.  The  Prophet  simply
states  that  God  "saw  good"  to  do  so,  and  Jesus  adds  that
it  will  be  more  tolerable  for  them  in  the  day  of  judgment
than  for  others  more  guilty.  But  upon  the  supposition  that
death  ends  all  probation,  and  that  thereafter  none  may  have
opportunity  to  come  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  and  to  obey
it,  we  may  well  inquire.  Why  did  God  see  good  to  take
away  these  people  without  giving  them  a  chance  of  salvation
through  the  knowledge  of  the  only  name  whereby  they  can
be  saved  ?  The  answer  is,  because  it  was  not  yet  their  due
time.  In  "due  time"  they  will  be  awakened  from  death
and  brought  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  thus  blessed
together  with  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  by  the  promised
"Seed."    They  will  then  be  on  trial  for  everlasting  life.

With  this  thought,  and  with  no  other,  can  we  understand
the  dealings  of  the  God  of  love  with  those  Amalekites  and
other  nations  whom  he  not  only  permitted  but  commanded
Israel  to  destroy,  saying,  "Go,  smite  Amalek  and  utterly
destroy  all  that  they  have,  and  spare  them  not ;  but  slay
both  man  and  woman,  infant  and  suckling,  ox  and  sheep,
camel  and  ass."  (i  Sam.  15  :  3.)  This  apparently  reckless
destru(5lion  of  life  seems  irreconcilable  with  the  charafter
of  love  attributed  to  God,  and  with  the  teaching  of  Jesus.
"  Love  your  enemies,"  etc.,  until  we  come  to  recognize  the


XI2


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


systematic  order  of  God's  plan,  the  "  due  time"  for  the  ac-
comphshment  of  every  feature  of  it,  and  the  fa6l  that  every
member  of  the  human  race  has  a  place  in  it.

We  can  now  see  that  those  Amalekites,  Sodomites  and
others  were  set  forth  as  examples  of  God's  just  indignation,
and  of  his  determination  to  destroy  finally  and  utterly  evil-
doers: examples  which  will  be  of  service  not  only  to  others,
but  also  to  themselves,  when  their  day  of  judgment  or  trial
comes.  Those  people  might  just  as  well  die  in  that  way  as
from  disease  and  plague.  It  mattered  little  to  them,  as  they
were  merely  learning  to  know  evil,  that  when  on  trial,  in  due
time,  they  might  learn  righteousness,  and  be  able  to  dis-
criminate and  choose  the  good  and  have  life.

But  let  us  examine  the  prophecy  further.  After  comparing
Israel  with  Sodom  and  Samaria,  and  pronouncing  Israel  the
most  blameworthy  (Ezek.  i6 :  48-54),  the  Lord  says,  "  When
I  shall  bring  again  their  captivity,  the  captivity  of  Sodom
and  her  daughters,  and  the  captivity  of  Samaria  and  her
daughters,  then  will  I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  thy  cap-
tives in  the  midst  of  them."  The  captivity  referred  to  can
be  no  other  than  their  captivity  in  death ;  for  those  men-
tioned were  then  dead.  In  death  all  are  captives ;  and  Christ
comes  to  open  the  doors  of  the  grave,  and  to  set  at  liberty
the  captives.  (Isa.  61  :  i  ;  Zech.  9:  11.)  In  verse  55  this  is
called  a  "return  to  their  former  estate" — a  restitution.

Some,  who  are  willing  enough  to  accept  of  God's  mercy
through  Christ  in  the  forgiveness  of  their  own  trespasses  and
weaknesses  under  greater  light  and  knowledge,  cannot  con-
ceive of  the  same  favor  being  applicable  under  the  New
Covenant  to  others ;  though  they  seem  to  admit  the  Apos-
tle's statement  that  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  favor  of  God,  tasted
death  for  every  man.  Some  of  these  suggest  that  the  Lord
must,  in  this  prophecy,  be  speaking  ironically  to  the  Jews,
implying  that  he  would  just  as  willingly  bring  back  the  Sod-


Our  Lord's  Return.


"3


omites  as  them,  but  had  no  intention  of  restoring  either.
But  let  us  see  how  the  succeeding  verses  agree  with  this  idea.
The  Lord  says,  "Nevertheless,  I  will  remember  my  cov-
enant with  thee  in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  will  estab-
lish unto  thee  an  everlasting  covenant.  27ien,  thou  shall
remember  thy  ways  and  be  ashamed,  when  thou  shalt  receive
thy  sisters.  .  .  ,  And  I  will  establish  my  covenant  with
thee,  and  thou  shalt  know  that  I  am  the  Lord ;  that  thou
mayest  remember  and  be  confounded,  and  never  open  thy
mouth  any  more  because  of  thy  shame,  when  I  am  pacified
toward  thee  for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the  Lord
God."  When  a  promise  is  thus  signed  by  the  Great  Je-
hovah, all  who  have  set  to  their  seal  that  God  is  true  may
rejoice  in  its  certainty  with  confidence  ;  especially  those  who
realize  thft  these  New  Covenant  blessings  have  been  con-
finned  of  God  in  Christ,  whose  preciolis  blood  is  to
seal  the  cove'nant.

To  this  Paul  adds  his  testimony,  saying,  "And  so  all
Israel  [living  and  dfead]  shall  be  saved  [recovered  from  blind-
ness], as  it  is  written,  '  There  shall  come  out  of  Zion  the  De-
liverer, and  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob.  For
this  is  my  covenant  unto  them  when  I  shall  take  away  their
sins. "...  They  are  belqved  for  the  fathers'  sakes ;  because
the  gracious  gifts  and  callings  of  God  are  not  things  to  be
repented  of — Rom.ii  :  26-29.

We  need  not  wonder  that  Jews,  Sodomites,  Samaritan?,
artd  all  mankind,  will  be  ashajned  and  confounded  when  in
his  own  "due  time ' '  God  shows  forth  the  riches  of  his  favor.
Yea,  many  of  those  who  are  now  God's  children  will  be
confounded  and  amazed  when  they  see  ho'w  God  so  loved
THE  WORLD,  and  how  much  his  thoughts  and  plans  were
above  their  own.

Christian  people  generally  believe  that  God's  blessings  are
all  and  only  for  the  seledled  Church,  but  now  we  begin  to
S


14


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


see  that  God's  plan  is  wider  than  we  had  supposed,  and  that
though  he  has  given  the  Church  "exceeding  great  and  pre-
cious promises,"  he  has  also  made  bountiful  provision  for
the  world  which  he  so  loved  as  to  redeem.  The  Jews  made
a  very  similar  mistake  in  supposing  that  all  the  promises  of
God  were  to  and  for  them  alone;  but  when  the  "due  time"
came  and  the  Gentiles  were  favored,  the  remnant  of  Israel,
whose  hearts  were  large  enough  to  rejoice  in  this  wider  evi-
dence of  God's  grace,  shared  that  increased  favor,  while  the
rest  were  blinded  by  prejudice  and  human  tradition.  Let
those  of  the  Church  who  now  see  the  dawning  light  of  the
Millennial  age,  with  its  gracious  advantages  for  all  the  world,
take  heed  lest  they  be  found  in  opposition  to  the  advancing
light,  and  so  for  a  time  be  blinded  to  its  glory  and  blessings.

How  different  is  this  glorious  plan  of  God  for  the  selec-
tion of  a  few  now,  in  order  to  the  blessing  of  the  many  here-
after, from  the  distortions  of  these  truths,  as  represented  by
the  two  opposing  views — Calvinism  and  Arminianism.  The
former  both  denies  the  Bible  doctrine  of  Free  Grace  and
miserably  distorts  the  glorious  do6lrine  of  Ele6lion;  the
latter  denies  the  do6lrine  of  Eledtion  and  fails  to  compre-
hend the  blessed  fulness  of  God's  Free  Grace.

Calvinism  says  : — God  is  all-wise ;  he  knew  the  end  from
the  beginning ;  and  as  all  his  purposes  shall  be  accomplished,
"he  never  could  have  intended  to  save  any  but  a  few,  the
Church.  These  he  ele6ted  and  fore-ordained  to  be  eternally
saved  ;  all  others  were  equally  fore-ordained  and  elected  to
goto  eternal  torment;  for  "Known  unto  God  are  all  his
works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."

This  view  has  its  good  features.  It  recognizes  God's
omniscience.  This  would  be  our  ideal  of  a  great  God,  were
it  not  that  two  essential  qualities  of  greatness  ar^-  lacking,
namely,  love  and  justice,  neither  of  which  is  exemplified
in  bringing  into  the  world  one  hundred  and  forty-two  bil-


Our  Lord'' s  Return.


lions  of  creatures  doomed  to  eternal  torture  before  they  were
born,  and  mocked  with  protestations  of  his  love.  Since
God  is  love,  and  justice  is  the  foundation  of  his  throne,
such  cannot  be  his  character.

Arminianism  says : — Yes,  God  is  love ;  and  in  bringing
humanity  into  the  world  he  meant  them  no  harm — only
good.  But  Satan  succeeded  in  tempting  the  first  pair,  and
thus  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin.  And
ever  since,  God  has  been  doing  all  he  can  to  deliver  man
from  his  enemy,  even  to  the  giving  of  his  Son.  And  though
now,  six  thousand  years  after,  the  gospel  has  reached  only  a
very  small  proportion  of  mankind,  yet  we  do  hope  and  tnist
that  within  six  thousand  years  more,  through  the  energy  and
liberality  of  the  church,  God  will  so  far  have  remedied  the
evil  introduced  by  Satan  that  all  then  living  may  at  least
know  of  his  love,  and  have  an  opportunity  to  believe  and
be  saved.

While  this  view  presents  God  as  a  being  full  of  loving  and
benevolent  designs  for  his  creatures,  it  implies  that  he  lacks
ability  and  foreknowledge  adequate  to  the  accomplishment
of  his  benevolent  designs :  that  he  is  deficient  in  wisdom  and
power.  From  this  view  it  would  appear  that  while  God  was
engaged  in  arranging  and  devising  for  the  good  of  his  newly-
created  children,  Satan  slipped  in  and  by  one  master-stroke
upset  all  God's  plans  to  such  an  extent  that,  even  by  ex-
hausting all  his  power,  God  must  spend  twelve  thousand
years  to  re-instate  righteousness,  even  to  such  a  degree  that
the  remainder  of  the  race  who  still  live  will  have  an  oppor-
tunity to  choose  good  as  readily  as  evil.  But  the  one  hun-
dred and  forty-two  billions  of  the  past  six  thousand  years,
and  as  many  more  of  the  next,  are,  according  to  this  view,
lost  to  all  eternity,  in  spite  of  God's  love  for  them,  because
Satan  interfered  with  his  plans.  Thus  Satan  would  get  thou-
sands into  eternal  torment  to  one  that  God  saves  to  glory.


ii6


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


This  view  must  exalt  men's  ideas  of  the  wisdom  and  power
of  Satan,  and  lower  their  estimation  of  these  attributes  in
God,  of  whom  the  Psalmist  to  the  contrary  declares  that,
"  He  spake  and  it  was  done ;  he  commanded  and  it  stood
fast."  But  no:  God  was  not  surprised  nor  overtaken  by
the  adversary ;  neither  has  Satan  in  any  measure  thwarted
his  plans.  God  is,  and  always  has  been,  perfeft  master  of
the  situation,  and  in  the  end  it  will  be  seen  that  all  has  been
working  together  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes.

While  the  dodlrines  of  elei5lion  and  free  grace,  as  taught
by  Calvinism  and  Arminianism,  could  never  be  harmonized
with  each  other,  with  reason,  or  with  the  Bible,  yet  these
two  glorious  Bible  dodlrines  are  perfedlly  harmonious  and
beautiful,  seen  from  the  standpoint  of  the  plan  of  the  ages.

Seeing,  then,  that  so  many  of  the  great  and  glorious  fea-
tures of  God's  plan  for  human  salvation  from  sin  and  death
lie  in  the  future,  and  that  the  second  advent  of  our  Lord
Jesus  is  the  designed  first  step  in  the  accomplishment  of
those  long  promised  and  long  expedled  blessings,  shall  we
not  even  more  earnestly  long  for  the  time  of  his  second  ad-
vent than  the  less  informed  Jew  looked  and  longed  for  his
first  advent?  Seeing  that  the  time  of  evil,  injustice  and
death  is  to  be  brought  to  an  end  by  the  dominion  of  power
which  he  will  then  exercise,  and  that  righteousness,  truth  and
peace  are  to  be  universal,  who  should  not  rejoice  to  see  his
day  ?  And  who  that  is  now  suffering  with  Christ,  inspired
by  the  precious  promise  that  "if  we  suffer  with  him  we  shall
also  reign  with  him,"  will  not  lift  up  his  head  and  rejoice
at  any  evidence  of  the  approach  of  the  Master,  knowing
thereby  that  our  deliverance  and  our  glorification  with  him
draw  nigh  ?  Surely  all  in  sympathy  with  his  mission  of
blessing  and  his  spirit  of  love  will  hail  every  evidence  of  his
coming  as  the  approach  of  the  "great  joy  which  shall  be  to
all  people."


STUDY  VII.


THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO


Why  Evil  was  Permitted.— Right  and  Wrong  as  Principles. — The  Moral
Sense. — God  Permitted  Evil,  and  will  Overrule  it  for  Good. — God  not
THE  Author  of  Sin. — Adam's  Trial  not  a  Farce. — His  Temitation  Se-
vere.— He  Sinned  Wilfully. — The  Penalty  of  Sin  not  Unjust,  nor  Too
Severe. — The  Wisdom,  Love  and  Justice  Displayed  in  Condemning  All
IN  Adam. — God's  Law  Universal.


'  VIL  is  that  which  produces  unhappiness ;  any  thing  which


^  either  diredlly  or  remotely  causes  suffering  of  any  kind.
—  Webster.  This  subjecSt,  therefore,  not  only  inquires  re-
garding human  ailments,  sorrows,  pains,  weaknesses  and
death,  but  goes  back  of  all  these  to  consider  their  primary
cause — sin — and  its  remedy.  Since  sin  is  the  cause  of
evil,  its  removal  is  the  only  method  of  permanently  curing
the  malady.

No  difficulty,  perhaps,  more  frequently  presents  itself  to
the  inquiring  mind  than  the  questions,  Why  did  God  per-
mit the  present  reign  of  evil  ?  Why  did  he  permit  Satan
to  present  the  temptation  to  our  first  parents,  after  having
created  them  perfect  and  upright  ?  Or  why  did  he  allow
the  forbidden  tree  to  have  a  place  among  the  good?
Despite  all  attempts  to  turn  it  aside,  the  question  will  ob-
trude itself — Could  not  God  have  prevented  all  possibility
of  man's  fall?

The  difficulty  undoubtedly  arises  from  a  failure  to  com-
prehend the  plan  of  God.  God  could  have  prevented  the
entrance  of  sin,  but  the  fadl  that  he  did  not  should  be
sufficient  proof  to  us  that  its  present  permission  is  designed
ultimately  to  work  out  some  greater  good.  God's  plans,  seen


GOD'S  PLAN.


117


Ii8  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

in  their  completeness,  will  prove  the  wisdom  of  the  course
pursued.  Some  inquire,  Could  not  God,  with  whom  all
things  are  possible,  have  interfered  in  season  to  prevent  the
full  accomplishment  of  Satan's  design  ?  Doubtless  he  could ;
but  such  interference  would  have  prevented  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  own  purposes.  His  purpose  was  to  make  mani-
fest the  perfection,  majesty  and  righteous  authority  of  his
law,  and  to  prove  both  to  men  and  to  angels  the  evil  con-
sequences resulting  from  its  violation.  Besides,  in  their
very  nature,  some  things  are  impossible  even  with  God,  as
the  Scriptures  state.  It  is  "impossible  for  God  to  lie"
(Heb.  6  :  i8).  "  He  cannot  deny  himself"  (2  Tim.  2  :  13).
He  cannot  do  wrong,  and  therefore  he  could  not  choose  any
but  the  wisest  and  best  plan  for  introducing  his  creatures
into  life,  even  though  our  short-sighted  vision  might  for  a
time  fail  to  discern  the  hidden  springs  of  infinite  wisdom.

The  Scriptures  declare  that  all  things  were  created  for
the  Lord's  pleasure  (Rev.  4:  11) — without  doubt,  for  the
pleasure  of  dispensing  his  blessings,  and  of  exercising  the
attributes  of  his  glorious  being.  And  though,  in  the  work-
ing out  of  his  benevolent  designs,  he  permits  evil  and  evil
doers  for  a  time  to  play  an  adlive  part,  yet  it  is  not  for  evil's
sake,  nor  because  he  is  in  league  with  sin  ;  for  he  declares
that  he  is  "not  a  God  that  hath  pleasure  in  wickedness."
(Psa.  5:4.)  Though  opposed  to  evil  in  every  sense,  God
fermiis  (z.  e.,  does  not  hinder)  it  for  a  time,  because  his  wis-
dom sees  a  way  in  which  it  may  be  made  a  lasting  and  val-
uable lesson  to  his  creatures.

It  is  a  self-evident  truth  that  for  every  right  principis
there  is  a  corresponding  wrong  principle ;  as,  for  instance,
truth  and  falsity,  love  and  hatred,  justice  and  injustice.  We
distinguish  these  opposite  principles  as  right  and  wrong,  by
their  effedls  when  put  in  a6tion.  That  principle  the  result
of  which,  when  a(5live,  is  beneficial  and  produftive  of  ulti->


Permission  of  Evil.


119


mate  order,  harmony  and  happiness,  we  call  a  right  princi-
ple ;  and  the  opposite,  which  is  produ6live  of  discord,  un-
happiness  and  destru6lion,  we  call  a  wrong  principle.  The
results  of  these  principles  in  adlion  we  call  good  and  evil ;
and  the  intelligent  being,  capable  of  discerning  the  right
principle  from  the  wrong,  and  voluntarily  governed  by  the
one  or  the  other,  we  call  virtuous  or  sinful.

This  faculty  of  discerning  between  right  and  wrong  prin-
ciples is  called  the  moral  sense,  or  conscience.  It  is  by  this
moral  sense  which  God  has  given  to  man  that  we  are  able
to  judge  of  God  and  to  recognize  that  he  is  good.  It  is  to
this  moral  sense  that  God  always  appeals  to  prove  his  right-
eousness or  justice ;  and  by  the  same  moral  sense  Adam
could  discern  sin,  or  unrighteousness,  to  be  evil,  even  before
he  knew  all  its  consequences.  The  lower  orders  of  God's
creatures  are  not  endowed  with  this  moral  sense.  A  dog
has  some  intelligence,  but  not  to  this  degree,  though  he  may
learn  that  certain  a6tions  bring  the  approval  and  reward  of
his  master,  and  certain  others  his  disapproval.  He  might
steal  or  take  life,  but  would  not  be  termed  a  sinner ;  or  he
might  protedl  property  and  life,  but  would  not  be  called
virtuous — because  he  is  ignorant  of  the  moral  quality  of  his
adlions.

God  could  have  made  mankind  devoid  of  ability  to  dis-
cern between  right  and  wrong,  or  able  only  to  discern  and
to  do  right ;  but  to  have  made  him  so  would  have  been  to
make  merely  a  living  machine,  and  certainly  not  a  mental
image  of  his  Creator.  Or  he  might  have  made  man  perfedl
and  a  free  agent,  as  he  did,  and  have  guarded  him  from
Satan's  temptation.  In  that  case,  man's  experience  being
limited  to  good,  he  would  have  been  continually  liable  to
suggestions  of  evil  from  without,  or  to  ambitions  from  with-
in, which  would  have  made  the  everlasting  future  uncertain,
and  an  outbreak  of  disobedience  and  disorder  might  al-


C20


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


■ways  have  been  a  possibility ;  besides  which,  good  would
never  have  been  so  highly  appreciated  except  by  its  contrast
with  evil.

God  first  made  his  creatures  acquainted  with  good,  sur-
rounding them  with  it  in  Eden  ;  and  afterward,  as  a  penalty
for  disobedience,  he  gave  them  a  severe  knowledge  of
evil.  Expelled  from  Eden  and  deprived  of  fellowship  with
himself,  God  let  them  experience  sickness,  pain  and  death,
that  they  might  thus  forever  know  evil  and  the  inexpediency
and  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.

By  a  comparison  of  results  they  came  to  an  appreciation
and  proper  estimate  of  both  ;  "And  the  Lord  said.  Behold,
the  man  is  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil."
(Gen.  3  :  22.)  In  this  their  posterity  share,  except  that  they
first  obtain  their  knowledge  of  evil,  and  cannot  fully  realize
what  good  is  until  they  experience  it  in  the  Millennium,
as  a  result  of  their  redemption  by  him  who  will  then  be  their
Judge  and  King.

The  moral  sense,  or  judgment  of  right  and  wrong,  and
the  liberty  to  use  it,  which  Adam  possessed,  were  important
features  of  his  likeness  to  God.  The  law  of  right  and  wrong
was  written  in  his  natural  constitution.  It  was  a  part  of  his
nature,  just  as  it  is  a  part  of  the  divine  nature.  But  let  us
not  forget  that  this  image  or  likeness  of  God,  this  originally
law-inscribed  nature  of  man,  has  lost  much  of  its  clear  out-
line through  the  erasing,  degrading  influence  of  sin  ;  hence
it  is  not  now  what  it  was  in  the  first  man.  Ability  to  love
implies  ability  to  hate ;  hence  we  may  reason  that  the  Creator
could  not  make  man  in  his  own  likeness,  with  power  to  love
and  to  do  right,  without  the  corresponding  ability  to  hate
and  to  do  wrong.  This  liberty  of  choice,  termed  free  moral
agency,  or  free  will,  is  a  part  of  man's  original  endowment;
and  this,  together  with  the  full  measure  of  his  mental  and
moral  faculties,  constituted  him  an  image  of  his  Creator,


Permission  of  Evil.


To-da)',  after  six  thousand  years  of  degradation,  so  much  ol
the  original  likeness  has  been  erased  by  sin  that  we  are  not
free,  being  bound,  to  a  greater  or  less  extent,  by  sin  and  its
entailments,  so  that  sin  is  now  more  easy  and  therefore  more
agreeable  to  the  fallen  race  than  is  righteousness.

That  God  could  have  given  Adam  such  a  vivid  impres-
sion of  the  many  evil  results  of  sin  as  would  have  de-
terred him  from  it,  we  need  not  question,  but  we  believe
that  God  foresaw  that  an  actual  experience  of  the  evil  would
be  the  surest  and  most  lasting  lesson  to  serve  man  eternally ;
and  for  that  reason  God  did  not  prevent  but  permitted  man
to  take  his  choice,  and  to  feel  the  consequences  of  evil.
Had  opportunity  to  sin  never  been  permitted,  man  could  not
have  resisted  it,  consequently  there  would  have  been  neither
virtue  nor  merit  in  his  right-doing.  God  seeketh  such  to  wor-
ship him  as  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  He  desires  intelli-
gent and  willing  obedience,  rather  than  ignorant,  mechan-
ical service.  He  already  had  in  operation  inanimate  me-
chanical agencies  accomplishing  his  will,  but  his  design
was  to  make  a  nobler  thing,  an  intelligent  creature  in  his
own  likeness,  a  lord  for  earth,  whose  loyalty  and  righteous-
ness would  be  based  upon  an  appreciation  of  right  and
wrong,  of  good  and  evil.

The  principles  of  right  and  -wTong,  as  principles,  have
always  existed,  and  must  always  exist ;  and  all  perfedt,  intel-
ligent creatures  in  God's  likeness  must  be  free  to  choose
either,  though  the  right  principle  only  will  forever  continue
to  be  a<5live.  The  Scriptures  inform  us  that  when  the  ac-
tivity of  the  evil  principle  has  been  permitted  long  enough
to  accomplish  God's  purpose,  it  will  forever  cease  to  be
adlive,  and  that  all  who  continue  to  submit  to  its  control
shall  forever  cease  toexisf.  (i  Cor.  15  :  25,  26;  Heb.  2: 14.)
Right-doing  and  right-doers,  only,  shall  continue  forever.

But  the  question  recurs  in  another  form :  Could  not  mao


1^2


Tlie  Plan  of  the  Ages.


have  been  made  acquainted  with  evil  in  some  other  way
than  by  experience?  There  are  four  ways  of  knowing
things,  namely,  by  intuition,  by  observation,  by  experience,
and  by  information  received  through  sources  accepted  as
positively  truthful.  An  intuitive  knowledge  would  be  a  di-
rect apprehension,  without  the  process  of  reasoning,  or  the
necessity  for  proof.  Such  knowledge  belongs  only  to  the
divine  Jehovah,  the  eternal  fountain  of  all  wisdom  and  truth,
who,  of  necessity  and  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  is  supe-
rior to  all  his  creatures.  Therefore,  man's  knowledge  of
good  and  evil  could  not  be  intuitive.  Man's  knowledge
might  have  come  by  observation,  but  in  that  event  there
must  needs  have  been  some  exhibition  of  evil  and  its  results
for  man  to  observe.  This  would  imply  the  permission  of
evil  somewhere,  among  some  beings,  and  why  not  as  well
among  men,  and  upon  the  earth,  as  among  others  elsewhere  ?

Why  should  not  man  be  the  illustration,  and  get  his
knowledge  by  pradlical  experience  ?  It  is  so :  man  is  gain-
ing a  pra6lical  experience,  and  is  furnishing  an  illustration
to  others  as  well,  being  "made  a  spectacle  to  angels."

Adam  already  had  a  knowledge  of  evil  by  information,
but  that  was  insufficient  to  restrain  him  from  trying  the  ex-
periment. Adam  and  Eve  knew  God  as  their  Creator,  and
hence  as  the  one  who  had  the  right  to  control  and  diredl
them  ;  and  God  had  said  of  the  forbidden  tree,  "  In  the  day
thou  eatest  thereof,  dying  thou  shalt  die. ' '  They  had,  there-
fore, a  theoretical  knowledge  of  evil,  though  they  had  never
observed  or  experienced  its  effedls.  Consequently,  they  did
not  appreciate  their  Creator's  loving  authority  and  his  be-
neficent law,  nor  the  dangers  from  which  he  thereby  pro-
posed to  protect  them.  They  therefore  yielded  to  the
temptation  which  God  wisely  permitted,  the  ultimate  utility
of  which  his  wisdom  had  traced.

Few  appreciate  the  severity  of  the  temptation  under  whiciJ


Permission  of  Evil.


our  first  parents  fell,  nor  yet  the  justice  of  God  in  attach-
ing so  severe  a  penalty  to  what  seems  to  many  so  slight  an
offense;  but  a  little  refledion  will  make  all  plain.  Thf'
Scriptures  tell  the  simple  story  of  how  the  woman,  the
weaker  one,  was  deceived,  and  thus  became  a  transgressor.
Her  experience  and  acquaintance  with  God  were  even  morf
limited  than  Adam's,  for  he  was  created  first,  and  God  had
direclly  communicated  to  him  before  her  creation  the
knowledge  of  the  penalty  of  sin,  while  Eve  probably  received
her  information  from  Adam.  When  she  had  partaken  of
the  fruit,  she,  having  put  confidence  in  Satan's  deceptive
misrepresentation,  evidently  did  not  realize  the  extent  of
the  transgression,  though  probably  she  had  misgivings  and
slight  apprehensions  that  all  was  not  well.  But,  although
deceived,  Paul  says  she  was  a  transgressor, — though  not  so
culpable  as  if  she  had  transgressed  against  greater  light.

Adam,  we  are  told,  unlike  Eve,  was  not  deceived
(i  Tim.  2:  14),  hence  he  must  have  transgressed  with  a
fuller  realization  of  the  sin,  and  with  the  penalty  in
view,  knowing  certainly  that  he  must  die.  We  can
readily  see  what  was  the  temptation  which  impelled  hira
thus  recklessly  to  incur  the  pronounced  penalty.  Bearing
in  mind  that  they  were  perfedl  beings,  in  the  mental  and
moral  likeness  of  their  Maker,  the  godlike  element  of
love  was  displayed  with  marked  prominence  by  the  per-
fed  man  toward  his  beloved  companion,  the  perfetSl
woman.  Realizing  the  sin  and  fearing  Eve's  death,  and
thus  his  loss  (and  that  without  hope  of  recovery,  for
no  such  hope  had  been  given),  Adam,  in  despair,  reck- '
lessly  concluded  not  to  hve  without  her.  Deeming  his
own  life  unhappy  and  worthless  without  her  companion-
ship,  he  wilfully  shared  her  aft  of  disobedience  in  order
to  share  the  death-penalty  which  he  probably  supposed  rest-
ed on  her.  Both  were  "in  the  transgression,"  as  the  ApostI*


124


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


shows  (Rom.  5:14;  i  Tim.  2:14).  But  Adam  and  Eve  were
one  and  r'^t  "twain;"  hence  Eve  shared  the  sentence  which
her  condudt  helped  to  bring  upon  Adam. — Rom  .5:12,17-19.

God  not  only  foresaw  that,  having  given  man  freedom  of
choice,  he  would,  through  lack  of  full  appreciation  of  sin
and  its  results,  accept  it,  but  he  also  saw  that,  becoming  ac-
quainted with  it,  he  would  still  choose  it,  because  that  ac-
quaintance would  so  impair  his  moral  nature  that  evil  would
gradually  become  more  agreeable  and  more  desirable  to  hira
than  good.  Still,  God  designed  to  permit  evil,  because,
having  the  remedy  provided  for  man's  release  from  its  conse-
quences, he  saw  that  the  result  would  be  to  lead  him,  through
experience,  to  a  full  appreciation  of  "the  exceeding  sinful-
ness of  sin"  and  of  the  matchless  brilliancy  of  virtue  in  con-
trast with  it — thus  teaching  him  the  more  to  love  and  honor
his  Creator,  who  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  all  goodness,
and  forever  to  shun  that  which  brought  so  much  woe  and
misery.  So  the  final  result  will  be  greater  love  for  God,
and  greater  hatred  of  all  that  is  opposed  to  his  will,  and  con-
sequently the  firm  establishment  in  everlasting  righteousness
of  all  such  as  shall  profit  by  the  lessons  God  is  now  teach-
ing through  the  permission  of  sin  and  correlative  evils.  How-
ever, a  wide  distindlion  should  be  observed  between  the  in-
disputable fa(Sl  that  God  has  permitted  sin,  and  the  serious
error  of  some  which  charges  God  with  being  the  author  and
instigator  of  sin.  The  latter  view  is  both  blasphemous  and
contradidlory  to  the  fads  presented  in  the  Scriptures.
Those  who  fall  into  this  error  generally  do  so  in  an  attempt
to  find  another  plan  of  salvation  than  that  which  God  has
provided  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  as  our  ransom-
price.  If  they  succeed  in  convincing  themselves  and  others
that  God  is  responsible  for  all  sin  and  wickedness  and  crime,*

*  Two  texts  of  Scripture  (Isa.  45  :  7  and  Amos  3:  6)  are  used  tosus.
Saia  this  theory,  but  by  a  misinterpretation  of  the  word  evil  m  botli  texts


Permission  of  Evil.


and  that  man  as  an  innocent  tool  in  his  hands  was  forced
into  sin,  then  they  have  cleared  the  way  for  the  theory  that
not  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins,  nor  mercy  in  any  form,  was  need-
ed, but  simply  and  only  justice.  Thus,  too,  they  lay  a
foundation  for  another  part  of  their  false  theory,  viz.,  uni-
versalism,  claiming  that  as  God  caused  all  the  sin  and  wick-
edness and  crime  in  all,  he  will  also  cause  the  deliverance  of
all  mankind  from  sin  and  death.  And  reasoning  that  God
willed  and  caused  the  sin,  and  that  none  could  resist  him,
so  they  claim  that  when  he  shall  will  righteousness  all  will
likewise  be  powerless  to  resist  him.  But  in  all  such  reason-
ing, man's  noblest  quality,  liberty  of  will  or  choice,  the  most
striking  feature  of  his  likeness  to  his  Creator,  is  entirely  set
aside ;  and  man  is  theoretically  degraded  to  a  mere  machine

Sin  is  always  an  evil,  but  an  evil  is  not  always  a  sin.  An  earthquake,
a  conflagration,  a  flood  or  a  pestilence  would  be  a  calamity,  an  evil;
but  none  of  these  would  be  sins.  The  word  evil  in  the  texts  cited  sig-
nifies calamities.  The  same  Hebrew  word  is  translated  afflidlion  in
Psa.  34  :  19;  107  :  39;  Jer.  48  :  16;  Zech.  1  :  15.  It  is  translated
trouble  in  Psa.  27  :  5 ;  41 : 1 ;  88 :  3 ;  107  :  26 ;  Jer.  51:2;  Lam.  1 :  21.
It  is  translated  catamiiies,  adversity  and  distress  in  I  Sam.  10: 19;  Psa.
10:6;  94:13;  141:5;  Eccl.  7:14;  Neli.2:i7.  And  the  same  word
is  in  very  many  places  rendered  harm,  mischief,  sore,  hurt,  misery,
grief  and  sorrow.

In  Isa.  45  :  7  and  Amos.  3 : 6  the  Lord  would  remind  Israel  of  his
covenant  made  with  them  as  a  nation — that  if  they  would  obey  his  laws
he  would  bless  them  and  protect  them  from  the  calamities  common  to
the  world  in  general ;  but  that  if  they  would  forsake  him  he  would  bring
calamities  (evils)  upon  them  as  chastisements.  See  Deut.  28:1-14^
15-32;  Lev.  26:14-16;  Josh.  23:6-11,  i2-i6.

\\Tien  calamities  came  upon  them,  however,  they  were  inclined  to
consider  them  as  accidents  and  not  as  chastisements.  Hence  God
sent  them  word  through  the  prophets,  reminding  them  of  their  covenant
and  telling  them  that  their  calamities  were  from  him  and  by  his  wL'>  <"oc
their  corredtion.  It  is  absurd  to  use  these  texts  to  prove  God  the  author
of  sin,  for  they  do  not  at  all  refer  to  sin.


t26


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


which  adls  only  as  it  is  afled  upon.  If  this  were  the  case,
man,  instead  of  being  the  lord  of  earth,  would  be  inferior
rtven  to  insedts ;  for  they  undoubtedly  have  a  will  or  power
of  choice.  Even  the  little  ant  has  been  given  a  power  of
will  which  man,  though  by  his  greater  power  he  may  op-
pose and  thwart,  cannot  destroy.

True,  God  has  power  to  force  man  into  either  sin  or
righteousness,  but  his  Word  declares  that  he  has  no  such
Ipurpose.  He  could  not  consistently  force  man  into  sin  for
the  same  reason  that  "he  cannot  deny  himself,"  Such  a
course  v/ould  be  inconsistent  with  his  righteous  character,
and  therefore  an  impossibility.  And  he  seeks  the  worship
.and  love  of  only  such  as  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.
To  this  end  he  has  given  man  a  liberty  of  will  like  unto  his
own,  and  desires  him  to  choose  righteousness.  Permitting
man  to  choose  for  himself  led  to  his  fall  from  divine  fellow-
ship and  favor  and  blessings,  into  death.  By  his  experience
in  sin  and  death,  man  learns  practically  what  God  offered  to
teach  him  theoretically,  without  his  experiencing  sin  and  its
results.  God's  foreknowledge  of  what  man  would  do  is
not  used  against  him,  as  an  excuse  for  degrading  him  to  a
mere  machine-being :  on  the  contrary,  it  is  used  in  man's
favor  ;  for  God,  foreseeing  the  course  man  would  take  if  left
free  to  choose  for  himself,  did  not  hinder  him  from  tasting
sin  and  its  bitter  results  experimentally,  but  he  began  at
once  to  provide  a  means  for  his  recovery  from  his  first
transgression  by  providing  a  Redeemer,  a  great  Savior,  able
to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  would  return  unto  God
through  him.  To  this  end — that  man  might  have  a  free
will  and  yet  be  enabled  to  profit  by  his  first  failure  in  its
misuse,  in  disobedience  to  the  Lord's  will — God  has  pro-
vided not  only  a  ransom  for  all,  but  also  that  a  knowledge  of
the  opportunity  thus  offered  of  reconciliation  with  himself
shall  be  testified  to  all  in  due  time. — i  Tim.  2  :  3-6.


Permission  of  Evil.


127


The  severity  of  the  penalty  was  not  a  display  of  hatred
and  malice  on  God's  part,  but  the  necessary  and  inevitable,
final  result  of  evil,  which  God  thus  allowed  man  to  see  and
feel.  God  can  sustain  life  as  long  as  he  sees  fit,  even  against
the  destrudtive  power  of  adlual  evil;  but  it  would  be  as  im-
possible for  God  to  sustain  such  a  life  everlastingly,  as  it  is
for  God  to  lie.  That  is,  it  is  morally  impossible.  Such  a
life  could  only  become  more  and  more  a  source  of  unhap-
piness  to  itself  and  others;  therefore,  God  is  too  good  to
sustain  an  existence  so  useless  and  injurious  to  itself  and
others,  and,  his  sustaining  power  being  withdrawn,  destruc-
tion, the  natural  result  of  evil,  would  ensue.  Life  is  a  fa-
vor, a  gift  of  God,  and  it  will  be  continued  everlastingly
only  to  the  obedient.

No  injustice  has  been  done  to  Adam's  posterity  in  not
affording  them  each  an  individual  trial.  Jehovah  was  in
no  sense  bound  to  bring  us  into  existence;  and,  having
brought  us  into  being,  no  law  of  equity  or  justice  binds  him
to  perpetuate  our  being  everlastingly,  nor  even  to  grant  us
a  trial  under  promise  of  everlasting  life  if  obedient.  Mark
this  point  well.  The  present  life,  which  from  the  cradle
to  the  tomb  is  but  a  process  of  dying,  is,  notwithstanding
all  its  evils  and  disappointments,  a  boon,  a  favor,  even  if
there  were  no  hereafter.  The  large  majority  so  esteem  it,
the  exceptions  (suicides)  being  comparatively  few;  and  these
our  courts  of  justice  have  repeatedly  decided  to  be  mentally
unbalanced,  as  otherwise  they  would  not  thus  cut  them*
selves  off  from  present  blessings.  Besides,  the  condudl  oi
the  perfedt  man,  Adam,  shows  us  what  the  conduct  of  his
children  would  have  been  under  similar  circumstances.

Many  have  imbibed  the  erroneous  idea  that  God  placed
our  race  on  trial  for  life  with  the  alternative  oi  eternal  tor-
ture, whereas  nothing  of  the  kind  is  even  hinted  at  in  the
penalty.   The  favor  or  blessing  of  God  to  his  obedient  chilr


128


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


dren  is  life — continuous  life — free  from  pain,  sickness  and
every  other  element  of  decay  and  death.  Adam  was  given
this  blessing  in  the  full  measure,  but  was  warned  that  he
would  be  deprived  of  this  "gift"  if  he  failed  to  render
obedience  to  God — "In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof,
dying,  thou  shalt  die."  He  knew  nothing  of  a  life  in  tor-
ment, as  the  penalty  of  sin.  Life  everlasting  is  nowhere
promised  to  any  but  the  obedient.  Life  is  God's  gift,  and
death,  the  opjjosite  of  life,  is  the  penalty  he  prescribes.

Eternal  torture  is  nowhere  suggested  in  the  Old  Testament
Scriptures,  and  only  a  few  statements  in  the  New  Testament
can  be  so  ftiisconstrued  as. to  appear  to  teach  it;  and  these
are  found  eiiher  among  the  symbolisms  of  Revelation,  or
among  the  parables  'and  dark  sayings  oi  our  Lord,  which
were  not  understoodfby  the  people  who  heard  them  (Luke
8:4o),  and  whieh  seem  to  be  but  little  better  comprehended
to-day.*  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  (Rom.  6:23.)
*' The  soul  that  sinrffeth,  it  shall  die." — Ezek.  18:4.

Many  have  supposed  God  unjust  in  allowing  Adam's  con-
demnation to  be  shared  by  his  posterity,  instead  of  granting
each  one  a  trial  and  chance  for  everlasting  life  similar  to
that  which  Adam  enjoyed.  But  what  will  such  s^y  if  it
now  be  shown  that  the  world's  opportunity  and  trial  for
life  will  be  much  more  favorable  than  was* Adam's;  and  that,
too,  because  God  adopted  this  plan  of  permitting  Adam's
race  to  share  his  penalty  in  a  natural  way?  We  believe  this
to  be  the  case,  and  will  endeavor  to  make  it  plain.

God  assures  us  that  as  condemnation  passed  upon  all  in
Adam,  so  he  has  arranged  for  a  new  head,  father  or  life-giver
for  the  race,  into  whom  all  may  be  transferred  by  faith  and
obedience  and  that  as  all  iti  Adam  shared  the  curse  of  death,
so  all  in  Christ  will  share  the  blessing  of  restitution;  the
Church  being  an  exception.     (Rom.  5: 12,  18,  19.)  Thus

*  We  will  supply  for  ten  cents  a  pamphlet  explaining  every  passage
of  Scripture  in  which  the  word  "  heil  "  occurs.


Permission  of  Evil.


129


seen,  the  death  of  Jesus,  the  undefiled,  the  sinless  one,  was  a
complete  settlement  toward  God  of  the  sin  of  Adam.  As  one
man  had  sinned,  and  all  in  him  had  shared  his  curse,
his  penalty,  so  Jesus,  having  paid  the  penalty  of  that
one  sinner,  bought  not  only  Adam,  but  all  of  his  posterity,
— all  men — who  by  heredity  shared  his  weaknesses  and  sins
and  the  penalty  of  these, — death.  Our  Lord,  "the  vian
Christ  Jesus,"  himself  unblemished,  aSpproved,  and  with  a
perfedl  seed  or  race  in  him,  unborn,  likewise  untainted  with
sin,  gave  his  all  of  human  life  and  title  as  the  full  ransom-
price  for  Adam  and  the  race  or  seed  in  him  when  sentenced.

After  fully  purchasing  the  lives  of  Adam  and  his  race,
Christ  offers  to  adopt  as  his  seed,  his  children,  all  of  Adam's
race  wh©  will  accept  the  terms  of  his  New  Covenant  and
thus  by  faith  and  obedience  come  into  the  family  of  God
and  receive  everlasting  life.  Thus  the  Redeemer  will  "see
his  seed  [as  many  of  Adam's  seed  as  will  accept  adoption,
upon  his  conditions]  and  prolong  his  days  [resurredtion
to  a  higher  than  human  plane,  being  granted  him  by  the
Father  as  a  reward  for  his  obedience],"  and  all  in  the  most
unlikely  way  ; — by  the  sacrifice  of  life  and  posterity.  And
thus  it  is  written  :  "As  all  in  Adam  die,  even  so  all  in  Christ
shall  be  made  alive." — Correfled  translation,  i  Cor.  15:22.

The  injury  we  received  through  Adam's  fall  (we  suffered
uo  injustice)  is,  by  God's  favor,  to  be  more  than  offset  with
favor  through  Christ ;  and  all  will  sooner  or  later  (in  God's
"  due  time  ")  have  a  full  opportunity  to  be  restored  to  the
same  standing  that  Adam  enjoyed  before  he  sinned.  Those
who  do  not  receive  a  full  knowledge  and,  by  faith,  an  en-
joyment of  this  favor  of  God  in  the  present  time  (and  such
are  the  great  majority,  including  children  and  heathen)  will
assuredly  have  these  privileges  in  the  next  age,  or  "world
to  come,"  the  dispensation  or  age  to  follow  the  present.
To  this  end,  "  all  that  are  in  their  graves  .  .  .  shall  come
9-A


13°


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


forth."  As  each  one  (whether  in  this  age  or  the  next)  be-
comes fully  aware  of  the  ransom-price  given  by  our  Lord
Jesus,  and  of  his  subsequent  privileges,  he  is  considered  as
on  trial,  as  Adam  was;  and  obedience  brings  lasting  life,
and  disobedience  lasting  death — the  ' '  second  death. ' '  Per-
fe<5l  obedience,  however,  without  perfedl  ability  to  render
it,  is  not  required  of  any.  Under  the  Covenant  of  Grace
members  of  the  Church  during  the  Gospel  age,  have  had
the  righteousness  of  Christ  imputed  to  them  by  faith,  to
make  up  their  unavoidable  deficiencies  through  the
weaknesses  of  the  flesh.  Divine  Grace  will  also  operate
toward  "whosoever  will"  of  the  world  during  the  Millen-
nial age.  Not  until  physical  perfection  is  reached  (which
will  be  'Cm  privilege  of  all  before  the  close  of  the  Millennial
age)  will  absolute  moral  perfection  be  expected.  That
new  trial,  the  result  of  the  ransom  and  the  New  Cove-
nant, will  differ  from  the  trial  in  Eden,  in  that  in  it  the
acts  of  each  one  will  affect  only  his  own  future.

But  would  not  this  be  giving  some  of  the  race  a  second
chance  to  gain  everlasting  life?  We  answer — The  first
chance  for  everlasting  life  was  lost  for  himself  and  all  of  his
race,  "yet  in  his  loins,"  by  father  Adam's  disobedience.
Under  that  original  trial  "condemnation  passed  upon  all
men;"  and  God's  plan  was  that  through  Christ's  redemp-
tion-sacrifice Adam,  and  all  who  lost  life  in  his  failure,
should,  after  having  tasted  of  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin
and  felt  the  weight  of  sin's  penalty,  be  given  the  opportun-
ity to  turn  unto  God  through  faith  in  the  Redeemer.  If
any  one  chooses  to  call  this  a  "second  chance,"  let  him
do  so :  it  must  certainly  be  Adam's  second  chance,  and  in  a
sense  at  least  it  is  the  same  for  all  of  the  redeemed  race,  but
it  will  be  the  first  individual  opportunity  of  his  descendants,
who,  when  born,  were  already  under  condemnation  to  death.
Call  it  what  we  please,  the  facts  are  the  same;  viz..  All  were
sentenced  to  death  because  of  Adam's  disobedience,  and  all
will  enjoy  (in  the  Millennial  age)  a  full  opportunity  to  gain


Permission  of  Evil.


everlashng  life  under  the  fav  orable  terms  of  the  New  Covenant.
This,  as  the  angels  declared,  is  "Good  tidings  of  great  joy
which  shall  be  unto  all  people. ' '  And,  as  the  Apostle  declared,
this  grace  of  God — that  our  Lord  Jesus  "gave  himself  a
ransom  for  all,"- — must  be  "  testified  "  to  all  "in  due  time."
(Rom.  5:17-19;  I  Tim.  2:4-6.)  Men,  not  God,  have
limited  to  the  Gospel  age  this  chance  or  opportunity  of  at-
taining life.  God,  on  the  contrary,  tells  us  that  the  Gospel
age  is  merely  for  the  selection  of  the  Church,  the  royal
priesthood,  through  whom,  during  asucceeding  age,  all  others
shall  be  brought  to  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  truth  and
granted  full  opportunity  to  secure  everlasting  life  under  the
New  Covenant.

But  what  advantage  is  there  in  the  method  pursued?
Why  not  give  all  men  an  individual  chance  for  life  now,  at
once,  without  the  long  process  of  Adam's  trial  and  condem-
nation, the  share  by  his  offspring  in  his  condemnation,  the
redemption  of  all  by  Christ's  sacrifice,  and  the  new  offer  to
all  of  everlasting  life  upon  the  New  Covenant  conditions?
If  evil  must  be  permitted  because  of  man's  free  moral
agency,  why  is  its  extermination  accomplished  by  such  a
peculiar  and  circuitous  method  ?  Why  allow  so  much  misery
to  intervene,  and  to  come  upon  many  who  will  ultimately
receive  the  gift  of  life  as  obedient  children  of  God  ?

Ah !  that  is  the  point  on  which  interest  in  this  subje<5l
centers.  Had  God  ordered  differently  the  propagation  of  our
species,  so  that  children  would  not  partake  of  the  results  of
parental  sins — weaknesses,  mental,  moral  and  physical — and
had  the  Creator  so  arranged  that  all  should  have  a  favorable
Edenic  condition  for  their  testing,  and  that  transgressors
only  should  be  condemned  and  "cutoff,"  how  many  might
we  presume  would,  under  all  those  favorable  conditions,  be
found  worthy,  and  how  many  unworthy  of  life?

If  the  one  instance  of  Adam  be  taken  as  a  criterion  (and
he  certainly  was  in  every  resped  a  sample  of  perfect  man


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


hood),  the  conclusion  would  be  that  none  would  have  been
found  perfeflly  obedient  and  worthy ;  because  none  would
possess  that  clear  knowledge  of  and  experience  with  God,
which  would  develop  in  them  full  confidence  in  his  laws,
beyond  their  personal  judgment.  We  are  assured  that  it  was
Christ's  knowledge  of  the  Father  that  enabled  him  to  trust
and  obey  implicitly.  (Isa.  53:11.)  But  let  us  suppose  that
one-fourth  would  gain  life ;  or  even  more,  suppose  that  one-
half  were  found  worthy,  and  that  the  other  half  would  suffer
the  wages  of  sin, — death.  Then  what  ?  Let  us  suppose
the  other  half,  the  obedient,  had  neither  experienced  nor
witnessed  sin :  might  they  not  forever  feel  a  curiosity  to-
ward things  forbidden,  only  restrained  through  fear  of  God
and  of  the  penalty  ?  Their  service  could  not  be  so  hearty
as  though  they  knew  good  and  evil ;  and  hence  had  a  full
appreciation  of  the  benevolent  designs  of  the  Creator  in
making  the  laws  which  govern  his  own  course  as  well  as  the
course  of  his  creatures.

Then,  too,  consider  the  half  that  would  thus  go  into
death  as  the  result  of  their  own  wilful  sin.  They  would  be
lastingly  cut  off  from  life,  and  their  only  hope  would  be
that  God  would  in  love  remember  them  as  his  creatures,
the  work  of  his  hands,  and  provide  another  trial  for  them.
But  why  do  so?  The  only  reason  would  be  a  hope  that  if
they  were  re-awakened  and  tried  again,  some  of  them,  by
ireason  of  their  larger  experience,  might  then  choose  obedi-
ence and  live.

But  even  if  such  a  plan  were  as  good  in  its  results  as  the
one  God  has  adopted,  there  would  be  serious  objedlions  to  it.

How  much  more  like  the  wisdom  of  God  to  confine  sin
to  certain  limits,  as  his  plan  does.  How  much  better  even
our  finite  minds  can  discern  it  to  be,  to  have  but  one
perfedl  and  impartial  law,  which  declares  the  wages  of
wilful  sin  to  be  death — destrudlion — cutting  off  from  life.


Permission  of  Evil.


»33


God  thus  Ihnits  the  evil  which  he  permits,  by  providing  that
the  Millennia]  reign  of  Christ  shall  accomplish  the  full  ex-
tincStion  of  evil  and  also  of  wilful  evil-doers,  and  usher  in
an  eternity  of  righteousness,  based  upon  full  knowledge  and
perfect  free-will  obedience  by  perfedl  beings.

But  there  are  two  other  objedlions  to  the  plan  suggested,
of  trying  each  individual  separately  at  first.  One  Redeemer
was  quite  sufficient  in  the  plan  which  God  adopted,  because
only  one  had  sinned,  and  only  one  had  been  condemned.
(Others  shared  his  condemnation.)  But  if  the  first  trial  had
been  an  individual  trial,  and  if  one-half  of  the  race  had  sinned
and  been  individually  condemned,  it  would  have  required
the  sacrifice  of  a  redeemer  for  each  condemned  individual.
One  unforfeited  life  could  redeem  one  forfeited  life,  but  no
more.  The  one  perfect  man,  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus,"  who
redeems  the  fallen  Adam  (and  our  losses  through  him),
could  not  have  been  "a  ransom  [a  corresponding  price]  for
all"  under  any  other  circumstances  than  those  of  the  plan
which  God  chose.

If  we  should  suppose  the  total  number  of  human  beings
since  Adam  to  be  one  hundred  billions,  and  that  only  one-
half  of  these  had  sinned,  it  would  require  all  of  the  fifty
billions  of  obedient,  perfedl  men  to  die  in  order  to  give  a
ransom  [a  corresponding  price]  for  all  the  fifty  billions  of
transgressors ;  and  so  by  this  plan  also  death  would  pass  upon
all.  And  such  a  plan  would  involve  no  less  suffering  than
is  at  present  experienced.

The  other  objection  to  such  a  plan  is  that  it  would  seri-
ously disarrange  God's  plans  relative  to  the  seledion  and
exaltation  to  the  divine  nature  of  a  "little  flock,"  the  body
of  Christ,  a  company  of  which  Jesus  is  the  Head  and  Lord.
God  could  not  justly  command  the  fifty  billions  of  obedi-
ent sons  to  give  their  rights,  privileges  and  lives  as  ransoms
for  the  sinners;  for  under  his  own  law  their  obedience  would


'34


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


have  won  the  right  to  lasting  life.  Hence,  if  those  perfedl
men  were  asked  to  become  ransomers  of  the  fallen  ones,  it
would  be  God's  plan,  as  with  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  set  some  spe-
cial reward  before  them,  so  that  they,  for  the  joy  set  before
them,  might  endure  the  penalty  of  their  brethren.  And  if
the  same  reward  should  be  given  them  that  was  given  to  our
Lord  Jesus,  namely,  to  partake  of  a  new  nature,  the  divine,
and  to  be  highly  exalted  above  angels  and  principalities  and
powers,  and  every  name  that  is  named — next  to  Jehovah
(Eph.  1  :  20,  21),  then  there  would  be  an  immense  number
on  the  divine  plane,  which  the  wisdom  of  God  evidently
did  not  approve.  Furthermore,  these  fifty  billions,  under
such  circumstances,  would  all  be  on  an  equality,  and  none
among  them  chief  or  head,  while  the  plan  God  has  adopted
calls  for  but  one  Redeemer,  one  highly  exalted  to  the  divine
nature,  and  then  a  "little  flock"  of  those  whom  he  re-
deemed, and  who  "walk  in  his  footsteps"  of  suffering  and
self-denial,  to  share  his  name,  his  honor,  his  glory  and  his
nature,  even  as  the  wife  shares  with  the  husband.

Those  who  can  appreciate  this  feature  of  God's  plan,
which,  by  condemning  all  in  o7ie  representative,  opened  the
way  for  the  ransom  and  restitution  of  all  by  one  Redeemer,
will  find  in  it  the  solution  of  many  perplexities.  They  will
see  that  the  condemnation  of  all  in  one  was  the  reverse  of
an  injury :  it  was  a  great  favor  to  all  when  taken  in  connec-
tion with  God's  plan  for  providing  justification  for  all
through  another  one's  sacrifice.  Evil  will  be  forever  ex-
tinguished when  God's  purpose  in  permitting  it  shall  have
been  accomplished,  and  when  the  benefits  of  the  ransom  are
made  co-extensive  with  the  penalty  of  sin.  It  is  impossible,
however,  to  appreciate  rightly  this  feature  of  the  plan  of
God  without  a  full  recognition  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  the
nature  of  its  penalty — death,  the  importance  and  value  of
the  ransom  which  our  Lord  Jesus  gave,  and  the  positive  and


I'ermtssion  of  Evil.


135


complete  restoration  of  the  individual  to  favorable  condi-
tions, conditions  under  which  he  will  have  full  and  ample
trial,  before  being  adjudged  worthy  of  the  reward  (lasting
life),  or  of  the  penalty  (lasting  death).

In  view  of  the  great  plan  of  redemption,  and  the  conse-
quent "restitution  of  all  things,"  through  Christ,  we  can
see  that  blessings  result  through  the  permission  of  evil  which,
probably,  could  not  otherwise  have  been  so  fully  realized.

Not  only  are  men  benefited  to  all  eternity  by  the  experi-
ence gained,  and  angels  by  their  observation  of  man's  ex-
periences, but  all  are  further  advantaged  by  a  fuller  acquaint-
ance with  God's  character  as  manifested  in  his  plan.  When
his  plan  is  fully  accomplished,  all  will  be  able  to  read  clearly
his  wisdom,  justice,  love  and  power.  They  will  see  the
justice  which  could  not  violate  the  divine  decree,  nor  save
the  justly  condemned  race  without  a  full  cancellation  of  their
penalty  by  a  willing  redeemer.  They  will  see  the  love  which
provided  this  noble  sacrifice  and  which  highly  exalted  the
Redeemer  to  God's  own  right  hand,  giving  him  power  and
authority  thereby  to  restore  to  life  those  whom  he  had  pur-
chased with  his  precious  blood.  They  will  also  see  the
power  and  wisdom  which  were  able  to  work  out  a  glorious
destiny  for  his  creatures,  and  so  to  overrule  every  opposing
influence  as  to  make  them  either  the  willing  or  the  un-
willing agents  for  the  advancement  and  final  accomplish-
ment of  his  grand  designs.  Had  evil  not  been  permit-
ted and  thus  overruled  by  divine  providence,  we  can-
not see  how  these  results  could  have  been  attained.  The
permission  of  evil  for  a  time  among  men  thus  displays  a  far-
seeing  wisdom,  which  grasped  all  the  attendant  circum-
stances, devised  the  remedy,  and  marked  the  final  outcome
through  his  power  and  grace.

During  the  Gospel  dispensation  sin  and  its  attendant  evils
hpve  been  further  made  use  of  for  the  discipline  and  prepara^


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


tion  of  the  Church.  Had  sin  not  been  permitted,  the  sacrifice
of  our  Lord  Jesus  and  of  his  Church,  the  reward  of  which
is  the  divine  nature,  would  have  been  impossible.
!  It  seems  clear  that  substantially  the  same  law  of  God
which  is  now  over  mankind,  obedience  to  which  has  the  re-
ward of  life,  and  disobedience  the  penalty  of  death,  must
ultimately  govern  all  of  God's  intelligent  creatures ;  and
that  law,  as  our  Lord  defined  it,  is  briefly  comprehended  in
the  one  word.  Love.  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God
with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy
strength,  and  with  all  thy  mind ;  and  thy  neighbor  as  thy-
self." (Lukeio:27.)  Ultimately,  when  the  purposes  of  God
shall  have  been  accomplished,  the  glory  of  the  divine  char-
after  will  be  manifest  to  all  intelligent  creatures,  and  the
temporary  permission  of  evil  will  be  seen  by  all  to  have  been
a  wise  feature  in  the  divine  policy.  Now,  this  can  be  seen
only  by  the  eye  of  faith,  looking  onward  through  God's
Word  at  the  things  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  holy
prophets  since  the  world  began — the  restitution  of  all  things.

THE  DAY  IS  AT  HAND.


"  Poor,  fainting  pilgrim,  still  hold  on  thy  way — the  dawn  is  near !
True,  thou  art  weary  now ;  but  yon  bright  ray  becomes  more  clear.
Bear  up  a  little  longer;  wait  for  rest;
Yield  not  to  slumber,  though  with  toil  opppressed.

"The  night  of  life  is  mournful,  but  look  on — the  dawn  is  near!
Soon  will  earth's  shadowed  scenes  and  forms  be  gone  ;  yield  not  to  fear  I
The  mountain's  summit  will,  ere  long,  be  gained.
And  the  bright  world  of  joy  and  peace  attained.

"'Joyful  through  hope'  thy  motto  still  must  be — the  dawn  is  near  I
What  glories  will  that  dawn  unfold  to  thee  !  be  of  good  cheer  1
Gird  up  thy  loins ;  bind  sandals  on  thy  feet  :
The  way  is  dark  and  long;  the  end  is  sweet."


STUDY  vni.


THE  DAY  OF  JUDGMENT.


The  Gbnbral  View  of  thb  Day  of  Judgmbnt.— Is  it  ScuiFTimAL ?— Thb
Tbrms,  Judgmbnt  ajjd  Day,  Dbfined.— Several  Judgment  Days  Rbfbrked

TO  IN  THE  ScRIFTUKBS. — ThE  FlRST  JUDGMENT  DaY  AND  ITS  RESULTS. — AN-
OTHER Afpointed. — The  Judge. — The  Character  of  thb  Coming  Judg-
ment.— Similarity  and  Dissimilarity  of  the  First  and  Second  Judg-
ments.—The  World's  Present  Accountability.— Two  Intervening  Judg-
ments AND  Their  Objects. — Widely  Different  Estimates  of  the  Coming
Judgment.— How  Prophets  and  Apostles  Viewed  it.


OD  hath  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge


^  the  world  in  righteousness  by  that  man  whom  he  hath
ordained" — "Jesus  Christ,  the  righteous."  "For  the
Father  judgeth  no  man,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment
unto  the  Son." — A6is  17  :  31  ;  i  John  2:1;  John  5  :  22.

A  very  vague  and  indefinite  idea  prevails  in  regard  to  the
day  of  judgment.  The  view  generally  entertained  is  that
Christ  will  come  to  earth,  seated  upon  a  great  white  throne,
and  that  he  will  summon  saint  and  sinner  in  rank  and  file
before  him  to  be  judged,  amidst  great  convulsions  of  nature
— earthquakes,  opening  graves,  rending  rocks  and  falling
mountains ;  that  the  trembling  sinners  will  be  brought  from
the  depths  of  everlasting  woe  to  hear  their  sins  rehearsed,
only  to  be  again  returned  to  an  eternal  and  merciless  doom ;
and  that  the  saints  will  be  brought  from  heaven  to  witness  the
misery  and  despair  of  the  condemned,  to  hear  again  the  de-
cision in  their  own  cases,  and  to  return.  According  to  the
prevailing  theory,  all  receive  their  sentence  and  reward  at
death ;  and  this,  which  by  way  of  distindlion  is  commonly
called  the  general  judgment,  is  merely  a  repetition  of  that


137


138


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


first  judgment,  but  for  no  conceivable  purpose,  since  they
claim  that  a  decision  which  is  final  and  unalterable  is  ren-
dered at  death.

The  entire  time  supposed  to  be  assigned  to  this  stupen-
dous work  of  judging  billions  is  a  twenty-four  hour  day.  A
discourse  recently  delivered  to  a  Brooklyn  congregation
voiced  the  general  view  on  this  subjedt.  It  affedled  to  give
a  detailed  account  of  the  work  of  the  Day  of  Judgment,
representing  it  as  completed  within  the  limits  of  a  single
literal  day.

This  is  a  very  crude  conception,  and  is  entirely  out  of
harmony  with  the  inspired  Word.  It  is  drawn  from  a  too
literal  interpretation  of  our  Lord's  parable  of  the  Sheep  and
the  Goats.  (Matt.  25  :  31-46.)  It  illustrates  the  absurdity  of
attempting  to  force  a  literal  interpretation  upon  figurative
language.  A  parable  is  never  an  exadt  statement,  but  merely
an  illustration  of  a  truth  by  something  which  is  in  many
respe<5ls  like  it.  If  this  parable  were  a  literal  statement  of
the  manner  in  which  the  judgment  will  be  conducted,  it
would  apply  to  literal  sheep  and  goats,  just  as  it  reads,  and
not  to  mankind  at  all.  Let  us  now  look  at  a  more  scrip-
tural as  well  as  a  more  reasonable  view  of  the  work  and  the
result  of  the  great  Judgment  Day  which  God  hath  appointed,
with  which  reasonable  and  scriptural  conclusions  all  para-
bles and  figures  should  and  do  agree.

The  term  judgment  signifies  more  than  simply  the  render-
ing of  a  verdidt.  It  includes  the  idea  of  a  trial,  as  well  as
a  decision  based  upon  that  trial.  And  this  is  true  not  only
of  the  English  word  judgment,  but  also  of  the  Greek  word
which  it  translates.

The  term  day,  both  in  the  Scriptures  and  in  common
usage,  though  most  frequently  used  to  represent  a  period
of  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours,  really  signifies  any  definite
or  special  period  of  time.    Thus,  for  instance,  we  speak  of


Day  of  Judgment.


139


Noah's  day,  Luther's  day,  Washington's  day ;  and  thus  in
the  Bible  the  entire  time  of  creation  is  called  a  day,  where
we  read  of  "the  day  that  Jehovah  God  made  the  earth  and
the  heavens  "  (Gen.  2  :  4) — a  long,  definite  period.  Then
we  read  of  "the  day  of  temptation  in  the  wilderness" —
forty  years  (Heb.  3  :  8,  9);  "the  day  of  salvation"  (2  Cor.
6:  2);  also  the  "day  of  vengeance,"  "day  of  wrath"  and
"day  of  trouble" — terms  applied  to  a  period  of  forty  years
in  the  close  of  the  Jewish  age,  and  to  a  similar  period  of
trouble  in  the  end  of  the  Gospel  age.  Then  again  we  read
of  the  "day  of  Christ,"  the  "day  of  judgment,"  and
"his  day" — terms  applicable  to  the  Millennial  age,  in
which  Messiah  will  reign  over,  rule  and  judge  the  world  in
righteousness,  granting  trial  as  well  as  rendering  sentence.
And  of  that  period  it  is  written :  He  shall  judge  the  world
in  righteousness,  and  in  his  day  shall  show  who  is  that
blessed  and  only  potentate,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of
lords.  (Adls  17  :  31  ;  i  Tim.  6  :  15.)  Why  any  should  sup-
pose this  day  of  judgment  to  be  of  but  twelve  or  twenty-
four  hours,  while  recognizing  the  wider  meaning  of  the  word
day  in  other  similar  cases,  is  beyond  comprehension,  except
upon  the  supposition  that  they  have  been  influenced  by
tradition,  without  proper  evidence  or  investigation.

Those  who  will  carefully  consult  a  complete  concordance
of  the  Bible  with  reference  to  the  Day  of  Judgment,  and
note  the  kind  and  amount  of  work  to  be  accomplished
within  that  period,  will  soon  see  the  absurdity  of  the  com-
mon view,  and  the  necessity  for  giving  to  the  term  day  its
wider  significance.

While  the  Scriptures  speak  of  a  great  judgment  or  trial
day  yet  future,  and  show  that  the  masses  of  mankind  are  to
have  their  complete  trial  and  final  sentence  in  that  day,
they  also  teach  that  there  have  been  other  judgment  days,
during  which  certain  elect  classes  have  been  on  trial.


140


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


The  first  great  judgment  [trial  and  sentence]  was  at  the
beginning,  in  Eden,  when  the  whole  human  race,  as  repre-
sented in  its  head,  Adam,  stood  on  trial  before  God.  The
result  of  that  trial  was  the  verdict — Guilty,  disobedient,
unworthy  of  life ;  and  the  penalty  infli6ted  was  death —
"Dying  thou  shalt  die."  (Gen.  2:  17,  margin.)  And  so
"In  Adam  all  die."  That  trial  time  in  Eden  was  the
world's  first  judgment  day,  and  the  decision  of  the  Judge
(Jehovah)  has  ever  since  been  enforced.

"  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  from  heaven  against  all
unrighteousness. ' '  It  may  be  seen  in  every  funeral  proces-
sion. Every  tomb  is  a  witness  to  it.  It  is  felt  in  every
ache  and  pain  we  experience — all  of  which  are  results  of
the  first  trial  and  sentence — the  righteous  sentence  of  God,
that  we  are  unworthy  of  life  and  the  blessings  originally  pro-
vided for  man  when  obedient  and  in  God's  likeness.  But
mankind  are  to  be  recovered  from  the  sentence  of  that  first
trial  by  the  one  sacrifice  for  all,  which  the  great  Redeemer
provides.  All  are  to  be  rescued  from  the  grave  and  from
the  sentence  of  death — destruction — which  in  view  of  this
redemption  is  no  longer  to  be  considered  death  in  the  full,
everlasting  sense  of  the  word,  but  rather  a  temporary  sleep ;
because  in  the  Millennial  morning  all  will  be  awakened
by  the  Life-giver  who  redeemed  all.  Only  the  Church  of
believers  in  Christ  are  yet  in  any  sense  released  or  "es-
caped" from  this  original  sentence  and  penalty;  and  their
escape  is  not  yet  actual,  but  only  so  reckoned  by  faith.  "  We
are  saved  by  hope"  only.  Our  adtual  release  from  this  death
penalty  (incurred  in  Adam  and  escaped  from  by  getting  into
Christ)  will  not  be  fully  experienced  until  the  resurrec-
tion morning,  when  we  shall  be  satisfied  to  awake  in  our
Redeemer's  likeness.  But  the  fadl  that  we  who  have  come
to  a  knowledge  of  God's  gracious  plan  in  Christ  "have
escaped  the  corruption  that  is  [still]  on  the  world,"  so  far


Day  of  Judgment.


141


from  proving  that  others  will  have  no  future  hope  of  escape,
proves  rather  the  contrary  of  this ;  for  we  are  first-fruits  un-
to God  of  his  creatures.  Our  escape  from  death  in  Adam
to  life  in  Christ  is  but  a  foretaste  of  the  deliverance  of  who-
soever wills  to  be  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,
[death]  to  the  liberty  of  life  proper  to  all  whom  God  shall  rec-
ognize as  sons.  All  who  will  may  be  delivered  from  death
to  life,  regardless  of  the  distindions  of  nature  God  has  pro-
vided for  his  sons  on  different  planes  of  being.  The  Gospel
age  is  the  trial-day  for  life  or  death  to  those  called  to  the
divine  nature.

But  God  has  appointed  a  day,  in  which  he  will  judge  the
■world.  How  can  this  be?  Has  God  changed  his  mind?
Has  he  concluded  that  his  decision  in  the  trial  of  the  first
man  and  the  general  sentence  were  unjust,  too  severe,  that
he  now  concludes  to  judge  the  world  individually?  No;
•were  such  the  case,  we  should  have  no  better  guarantee  of  a
just  decision  in  the  future  trial  than  in  the  past.  It  is  not
that  God  considers  his  decision  in  the  first  judgment  unjust,
but  that  he  has  provided  a  redemption  from  the  penalty  of
the  first  judgment,  in  order  that  he  may  grant  another  judg-
ment (trial)  under  more  favorable  conditions  to  the  entire
race — all  having  then  had  experience  with  sin  and  its  result?.
God  has  not  changed  one  iota  from  his  original  purpose,
which  he  formed  before  the  world  began.  He  distinctly
informs  us  that  he  changes  not,  and  that  he  will  by  no  means
clear  the  guilty.  He  will  exact  the  full  penalty  which  he
justly  pronounced.  And  that  full  penalty  has  been  provided
by  the  Redeemer  or  substitute  whom  God  himself  provided —
Jesus  Christ,  who,  "  by  the  grace  [favor]  of  God,  tasted  death
for  every  man."  Our  Lord  having  provided  a  ransom  for
Adam's  race,  with  his  own  life,  can  justly  give  anewofferof
life  to  them  all.  This  offer  to  the  Church  is  under  the  Cov-
enant of  sacrifice  (Psa.  50:5;  Rom.  12:1):  to  the  world  it
will  be  under  the  New  Covenant. — Rom.  14:9;  Heb.  10:16;
Jer.  31:31.


142


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


We  are  further  informed  that  when  God  gives  the  •world
this  individual  trial,  it  will  be  under  Christ  as  Judge,  whom
Jehovah  will  thus  honor  because  of  his  obedience  even  un-
to death  for  our  redemption.  God  has  highly  exalted  him,
even  to  the  divine  nature,  that  he  may  be  a  Prince  and  a
Savior  (A6ls  5:31),  that  he  may  be  able  to  recover  from
death  and  grant  judgment  to  all  whom  he  purchased  with
his  own  precious  blood.  God  has  committed  all  judgment
unto  the  Son,  and  has  given  him  all  power  in  heaven  and
in  earth. — John  5:22

It  is,  then,  the  highly  exalted,  glorified  Christ,  who  so
loved  the  world  as  to  give  his  life  as  its  ransom-price,  who
is  to  be  the  Judge  of  the  world  in  its  promised  future  trial.
And  it  is  Jehovah  himself  who  has  appointed  him  to  that
office,  for  that  very  purpose.  Since  such  are  the  plain  dec-
larations of  the  Scriptures,  there  is  nothing  to  dread,  but  on
the  contrary  there  is  great  cause  for  rejoicing  on  the  part
of  all,  in  looking  forward  to  the  Judgment  Day.  The  char-
adler  of  the  Judge  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  that  the  judgment
will  be  just  and  merciful,  and  with  due  consideration  for  the
infirmities  of  all,  until  the  willing  and  obedient  are  brought
back  to  the  original  perfedlion  lost  in  Eden.

A  judge,  in  ancient  times,  was  one  who  executed  justice
and  relieved  the  oppressed.  Note,  for  instance,  how,  when
under  oppression  by  their  enemies  because  of  transgression
against  the  Lord,  Israel  was  time  and  again  released  and
blessed  by  the  raising  up  of  judges.  Thus  we  read,  "When
the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  Jehovah,  Jehovah  raised  up  a
deliverer,  .  .  .  Othniel.  And  the  spirit  of  Jehovah  came  upon
him,  and  he  judged  Israel,  and  went  out  to  war,  and  prevailed,
and  the  land  had  rest  forty  years."  (Judges  3:9-11.)  So,
though  the  world  has  long  been  under  the  power  and  oppres-
sion of  the  adversary,  Satan,  yet  shortly  he  who  pays  for
the  sins  of  all  with  his  own  precious  blood  will  take  his


Day  of  Judgment.


143


great  power  and  reign.  He  will  deliver  and  judge  those
whom  he  so  loved  as  to  redeem.

With  this  conclusion  all  the  prophetic  declarations  agree.
It  is  written:  "With  righteousness  shall  he  judge  the
-world,  and  the  people  with  equity." — Psa.  98 :  9.

This  coming  judgment  will  be  on  exacftly  the  same  prin-
ciples as  the  first.  The  same  law  of  obedience  will  be  pre-
sented, with  the  same  reward  of  life,  and  the  same  penalty
of  death.  And  as  the  first  trial  had  a  beginning,  progressed,
and  culminated  with  a  sentence,  so  also  will  the  second ;
and  the  sentence  will  be  life  to  the  righteous,  and  death  to
the  unrighteous.  The  second  trial  will  be  more  favorable
than  the  first,  because  of  the  experience  gained  under  the
results  of  the  first  trial.  Unlike  the  first  trial,  the  second
trial  will  be  one  in  which  every  man  will  stand  the  test
for  himself  alone,  and  not  for  another.  None  will  then
die  because  of  Adam's  sin,  or  because  of  inherited  iraper-
fedlions.  It  shall  no  more  be  said,  "  The  fathers  have  eat-
en a  sour  grape  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge ;
but  he  that  eateth  the  sour  grape,  his  teeth  shall  be  set  on
edge,"  "The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  (Ezek.  18:
4;  Jer.  31 :  29,  30.)  And  it  will  be  true  of  the  world  then,
as  it  is  of  the  Church  now,  that  a  man  will  not  be  judged
according  to  that  which  he  hath  not,  but  according  to  that
which  he  hath.  (2  Cor.  8  :  12.)  Under  the  reign  of  Christ,
mankind  will  be  gradually  educated,  trained  and  disciplined
until  they  reach  perfe6lion.  And  when  they  have  reached
perfection,  perfe(5l  harmony  with  God  will  be  required,  and
any  who  then  fall  short  of  perfect  obedience  will  be  cut  off,
being  judged  unworthy  of  life.  The  sin  which  brought
death  to  the  race  through  Adam  was  simply  one  disobedient
a6l ;  but  by  that  a<5t  he  fell  from  his  perfedlion.  God  had  a
right  to  demand  perfe6t  obedience  of  him,  since  he  was
created  i^erfedl ;  and  he  will  demand  the  same  of  all  men


144


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


when  the  great  work  of  restoring  them  is  complete.  None
will  be  permitted  to  have  everlasting  life  who  then  in  the
slightest  degree  fall  short  of  perfe6lion.  To  fall  short  of
perfection,  then,  will  be  to  sin  wilfully  against  full  light
and  perfe6t  ability.

Any  who  sin  wilfully,  against  full  light  and  ability,  will
perish  in  the  second  death.  And  should  any  one,  during
that  age  of  trial,  under  its  full  blaze  of  light,  spurn  the  offered
favors.and  make  no  progress  toward  perfection  for  a  hundred
years,  he  will  be  reckoned  unworthy  of  life  and  will  be  "  cut
off,"  though  at  a  hundred  years  he  would  be  in  the  period
of  comparative  childhood.  Thus  it  is  written  of  that  day:
"  As  a  lad  shall  one  die  a  hundred  years  old ;  and  as  a  sinner
shall  be  accursed  he  who  dieth  at  a  hundred  years  old."
(Isa.  65  :2o — LeeserS)  Thus  all  must  have  at  least  one  hun-
dred years  of  trial ;  and,  if  not  so  obstinate  as  to  refuse  to
make  progress,  their  trial  will  continue  throughout  the  en-
tire day  of  Christ,  reaching  a  culmination  only  at  its  close.

The  conclusion  of  the  world's  coming  judgment  is  clearly
shown  in  the  parable  of  the  sheep  and  the  goats  (Matt.
25:31-46),  in  Rev.  20:15;  2i:8andin  i  Cor.  15:25.  These
and  other  scriptures  show  that  at  its  close  the  two  classes
will  have  been  completely  separated — the  obedient  and  the
disobedient ;  those  in  harmony  with  the  letter  and  the  spirit
of  God's  law,  and  those  out  of  harmony  with  it.  They  enter
into  everlasting  life,  and  the  others  are  remanded  to  death,
extinction  ("second  death"),  the  same  sentence  as  in  the
first  judgment,  from  which  they  had  been  reckonedly  released
by  Christ  who  secured  the  right  to  release  them  by  the
giving  of  their  ransom — by  his  death.  This  will  be  their
second  death.  No  ransom  will  be  given  for  them,  and
there  will  be  no  release  or  resurredtion  for  them,  their
sin  being  a  wilful,  individual  sin  against  full  light  and  op-
portunity, under  a  most  favorable,  individual  trial.


Day  of  Judgmeni.


45


We  do  not  wish  to  be  understood  as  ignoring  the  present
responsibility  of  the  world,  which  every  man  has,  accord-
ing to  the  measure  of  light  enjoyed,  whether  it  be  much  or
little,  whether  it  be  the  light  of  nature  or  of  revelation.
"  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  beholding  the
evil  and  the  good,"  and  "  God  shall  bring  every  work  into
judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or
whether  it  be  evil."  (Prov.  15  :  3  ;  Eccl.  12  :  14.)  The  good
and  the  evil  deeds  of  the  present  time  will  receive  a  just
recompense  of  reward  either  now  or  hereafter.  "Some
men's  sins  are  open  beforehand,  going  before  to  judgment,
and  some  they  follow  after."  (i  Tim.  5  :  24.)  No  others
than  the  Lord's  favored  "little  flock"  have  as  yet  sufficient
light  to  incur  the  final  penalty,  the  second  death.  We  here
merely  broach  the  subject  of  the  world's  present  accounta-
bility, leaving  the  particulars  for  subsequent  consideration.

A  period  of  about  six  thousand  years  intervenes  between
the  world's  first  and  second  judgment  days,  and  during  this
long  period  God  has  been  sele<fting  two  special  classes  from
among  men,  and  specially  trying,  disciplining  and  training
them  to  be  his  honored  instruments  during  the  period  or
day  of  the  world's  judgment.

These  two  classes  are  respeftively  designated  by  Paul
(Heb.  3:5,6)  as  the  house  of  sons  and  the  house  of  serv-
ants, the  former  being  composed  of  those  overcomers  tried
and  found  faithful  during  the  Christian  dispensation,  and
the  latter  being  composed  of  the  faithful  overcomers  who
preceded  the  Christian  dispensation.  These  special  selec-
tions in  no  sense  interfere  with  the  judgment  or  trial
promised  to  the  world  of  mankind  in  the  age  to  fol-
low this  Gospel  Dispensation,  Those  who  successfully
pass  the  trial  for  either  of  thase  special  classes  will  not
come  into  judgment  with  the  world,  but  will  enter  upon
their  reward  when  the  world  is  coming  into  judgment,
10-A


146  The  Flan  of  the  Ages.

They  will  be  God's  agents  in  the  blessing  of  the  world —
in  giving  to  men  the  instru6tion  and  training  necessary  for
their  final  testing  and  judgment.  "Do  ye  not  know  that
the  saints  shall  judge  the  world  ?  ' ' — i  Cor.  6 :  2.

These  specially  selected  classes,  like  the  rest  of  mankind,
were  once  under  the  Adamic  concLemnation,  but  became
sharers  by  faith  in  the  benefits  of  Christ's  death.  After
being  first  justified  by  faith  in  God's  promises,  and  having
then  fulfilled  the  subsequent  conditions  of  their  respective
callings,  they  are  accounted  worthy  of  high  exaltation  to
stations  of  honor  and  authority.

The  trial  or  judgment  of  both  these  classes  has  been
much  more  severe  than  the  trial  of  the  world  will  be  in  its
judgment  day ;  because  these  have  had  to  withstand  Satan,
the  prince  of  this  world,  with  all  his  wiles  and  ensnarements,
while  in  the  world's  judgment  day  Christ  will  be  reigning,
and  Satan  will  be  bound,  that  he  may  not  deceive  the  na-
tions. (Rev.  20  :  3.)  These  have  suffered  persecution  for
righteousness'  sake,  while  then  men  will  be  rewarded  for
righteousness,  and  punished  only  for  unrighteousness.  These
have  had  great  stumbling  blocks  and  snares  in  the  way,
which  will  be  removed  when  the  world  is  placed  on  trial.
But  though  the  trial  of  these  two  special  companies  has  been
much  more  severe  than  the  trial  of  the  world  will  be,  the
rewards  are  correspondingly  greater.

Under  the  sophistries  of  the  great  deceiver,  Satan,  both
the  world  and  the  Church  nominal  have  been  robbed  of  the
blessed  assurances  of  the  coming  time  of  righteous  judg-
ment. They  know  that  the  Bible  tells  of  a  coming  judgment
day,  but  they  regard  it  with  only  fear  and  dread ;  and  be-
cause of  this  fear,  there  is  to  them  no  more  unwelcome  ti-
lings than  that  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  at  hand.  They  put
it  far  away  from  them,  and  do  not  wish  to  hear  it  even  men-
tioned.   They  have  no  idea  of  the  blessings  in  store  for  the


Day  of  Judgment.


J47


world  under  that  glorious  reign  of  him  whom  God  hath  ap-
pointed  to  judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  Among  the
greatest  of  the  blinding  influences  which  Satan  has  devised
to  keep  men  in  ignorance  of  the  truth  regarding  the  judg-
ment day  have  been  the  errors  which  have  crept  into  the
creeds  and  hymn  books  of  the  various  religious  se6ls.  Many
have  come  to  esteem  these  errors  as  of  paramount  impor-
tance to  the  Word  of  God.

How  differently  did  the  prophets  and  apostles  regard  that
promised  day  of  judgment !  Note  the  exultant  prophetic
utterance  of  David  (i  Chron.  i6:  31-34).    He  says; —

«  Let  the  heavens  be  glad.
And  let  the  earth  rejoice ;

And  let  men  say  among  the  nations,  Jehovah  reigneth.
Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof ;
Let  the  fields  rejoice,  and  all  that  are  therein.
Then  shall  the  trees  of  the  wood  sing  aloud
At  the  presence  of  Jehovah,
Because  he  cometh

To  JUDGE  THE  EARTH.

O  give  thanks  unto  Jehovah,  for  he  is  good;
For  his  mercy  endureth  forever."

To  the  same  day  the  Apostle  also  points,  assuring  us  that
it  will  be  a  glorious  and  desirable  day,  and  that  for  it  the
whole  creation  is  groaning  and  travailing  in  pain  together —
waiting  for  the  great  Judge  to  deliver  and  to  bless  the  world,
as  well  as  to  exalt  and  glorify  the  Church. — Rom  8:  21, 22.

In  John  5:28,  29  a  precious  promise  for  the  world  of  a
commg  judgment-trial  for  life  everlasting  is,  by  a  mistrans-
lation, turned  into  a  fearful  imprecation.  According  to
the  Greek,  they  that  have  done  evil — that  have  failed  of
divine  approval — will  come  forth  unto  resurrection  [raising
up  to  perfection]  by  judgments,  "stripes,"  disciplines.— »
See  the  Revised  Version.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages,


AFTERWARD.


*■  God's  ways  are  equal :  storm  or  cajm^

Seasons  of  peril  and  of  rest,
Tie  hurting  dart,  the  healing  balm.

Are  all  apportioned  as  is  best.
In  judgments  oft  misunderstood,

In  ways  mysterious  and  obscure.
He  brings  from  evil  lasting  good,

And  makes  the  final  gladness  sure.
'While  Justice  takes  its  course  with  strengtJ^

Love  bids  our  faith  and  hope  increase  .
He'll  give  the  chastened  world  at  length

His  afterward  of  peace.

*  When  the  dread  forces  of  the  gale

His  sterner  purposes  perform.
And  human  skill  can  naught  avail

Against  the  fury  of  the  storm.
Let  loving  hearts  trust  in  him  still.

Through  all  the  dark  and  devious  way;
For  who  would  thwart  his  blessed  will,

Which  leads  through  night  to  joyous  day »
Be  still  beneath  bis  tender  care;

For  he  will  make  the  tempest  cease,
And  bring  from  out  the  anguish  here

An  afterward  of  peace.

"Look  up,  O  Earth ;  no  storm  can  last

Beyond  the  limits  God  hath  set.
When  its  appointed  work  is  past.

In  joy  thou  shalt  thy  grief  forget.
Where  sorrow's  plowshare  hath  swept  thronjjjjj

Thy  fairest  flowers  of  life  shall  spring,
For  God  shall  grant  thee  life  anew.

And  all  thy  wastes  shall  laugh  and  sin^
Hope  thou  in  him;  his  plan  for  thee

Shall  end  in  triumph  and  release.
Fear  not,  for  thou  shalt  surely  see

His  afterward  of  oeace."


STUDY  IX.


RANSOM  AND  RESTITUTION.


}fj»E  Restitution  Guaranteed  by  the  Ransom. — Not  EvEai^AsnuG  Lira,
»UT  A  Trial  for  it.  Secured  by  the  Ransom. — The  Conditions  and  Ai>

VANTAGES  OP  THE  TkIAL. — ChRIST's  SACRIFICE  NeCESSARV.— HoW  TBB  KaC*

Could  be  and  was  Redeemed  by  the  Death  of  One. — Faith  and  Works
Still  Necessary — The  Wages  op  Wilful  Sin  Certain. — Will  -ihekh  ub
Room  on  the  Earth  for  the  Resurrectlij  Millions  f — Bsstiiutiow  viu*-
nus  Evolution.


'ROM  the  outline  of  God's  revealed  plan,  as  thus  far


sketched,  it  is  evident  that  his  design  for  mankind  is  a
restitution  or  restoration  to  the  perfedlion  and  glory  lost  in
Eden.  The  strongest,  and  the  conclusive,  evidence  on  this
sabjedl  is  most  clearly  seen  when  the  extent  and  nature  of
the  ransom  are  fully  appreciated.  The  restitution  foretold
by  the  apostles  and  prophets  must  follow  the  ransom  as  the
just  and  logical  sequence.  According  to  God's  arrangement
in  providing  a  ransom,  all  mankind,  unless  they  wilfully
Kesist  the  saving  power  of  the  Great  Deliverer,  must  l>e
delivered  from  the  original  penalty,  "the  bondage  of  cor-
ifuption,"  death,  else  the  ransom  does  not  avail  for  all.

Paul's  reasoning  on  the  subie<5l  is  most  clear  and  em-
,^hatic.  He  says  (Rom.  14:9),  "  For  to  this  end  Christ  died
»nd  lived  again,  that  he  might  be  Lord  [ruler,  controller]
Qifboth  the  dead  and  the  living."  That  is  to  say,  the  objefl  of
our  Lord's  death  and  resurredtion  was  not  merely  to  bless  and
»-ule  over  and  restore  the  living  of  mankind,  but  to  give  him
Authority  over,  or  full  control  of,  the  dead  as  well  as  the
iiving,  insuring  the  benefits  of  his  ransom  as  much  to  tl*


»49


15°


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


one  as  to  the  other.*  He  "gave  himself  a  ransom  [a  cor-
responding price]  for  all,"  in  order  that  he  might  bless  all,
and  give  to  every  man  an  individual  trial  for  life.  To  claim
that  he  gave  "ransom  for  all,"  and  yet  to  claim  that  only
a  mere  handful  of  the  ransomed  ones  will  ever  receive  any
benefit  from  it,  is  absurd;  for  it  would  imply  either  that
God  accepted  the  ransom-price  and  then  unjustly  refused  to
grant  the  release  of  the  redeemed,  or  else  that  the  Lord,
after  redeeming  all,  was  either  unable  or  unwilling  to  carry
out  the  original  benevolent  design.  The  unchangeableness
of  the  divine  plans,  no  less  than  the  perfedlion  of  the  divine
justice  and  love,  repels  and  contradidls  such  a  thought,  and
gives  us  assurance  that  the  original  and  benevolent  plan,  of
which  the  "ransom  for  all"  was  the  basis,  will  be  fully  carried
out  in  God's  "due  time,"  and  will  bring  to  faithful  be-
lievers the  blessing  of  release  from  the  Adamic  condemna-
tion and  an  opportunity  to  return  to  the  rights  and  liberties
of  sons  of  God,  as  enjoyed  before  sin  and  the  curse.

Let  the  acSlual  benefits  and  results  of  the  ransom  be  clearly
seen,  and  all  objedtions  to  its  being  of  universal  application
must  vanish.  The  "ransom  for  all"  given  by  "  the  man
Christ  Jesus  "  does  not  give  or  guarantee  everlasting  life  or
blessing  to  any  man ;  but  it  does  guarantee  to  every  man  an-
other opportunity  or  trial for  life  everlasting.  The  first  trial
of  man,  which  resulted  in  the  loss  of  the  blessings  at  first  con-
ferred, is  really  turned  i  nto  a  blessing  of  experience  to  the  loyal-
hearted,  by  reason  of  the  ransom  which  God  has  provided.
But  the  fad^  that  men  are  ransomed  from  the  first  penalty
does  not  guarantee  that  they  may  not,  when  individually
tried  for  everlasting  life,  fail  to  render  the  obedience
without  which  none  will  be  permitted  to  live  everlast-
ingly. Man,  by  reason  of  present  experience  with  sin
and  its  bitter  penalty,  will  be  fully  forewarned;  and
when,  as  a  result  of  the  ransom,  he  is  granted  another,

*  We  may  properly  recognize  an  additional  and  a  still  broader  mean-
ing in  the  Apostle's  words;  namely,  that  the  entire  human  family  was
included  in  the  expression  "the  dead."  From  God's  standpoint  the
entire  race,  under  sentence  of  death,  is  treated  as  though  already  dead
(Matt.  8:23);  hence  the  expression  "  the  living"  would  apply  beyond
the  human  family  to  some  whose  lives  had  not  been  forfeited — the
angels.


Ransom  and  Restitution.


an  individual  trial,  under  the  eye  and  control  of  him  who
so  loved  him  as  to  give  his  life  for  him,  and  who  would  not
that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  turn  to  God  and
live,  we  may  be  sure  that  only  the  wilfully  disobedient  will
receive  the  penalty  of  the  second  trial.  That  penalty  will
be  the  second  death,  from  which  there  will  be  no  ransom,
no  release,  because  there  would  be  no  obje6l  for  another  ran-
som or  a  further  trial.  All  will  have  fully  seen  and  tasted
both  good  and  evil ;  all  will  have  witnessed  and  experienced
the  goodness  and  love  of  God  ;  all  will  have  had  a  full,  fair,
individual  trial  for  life,  under  most  favorable  conditions.
More  could  not  be  asked,  and  more  will  not  be  given.
That  trial  will  decide  forever  who  would  be  righteous  and
holy  under  a  thousand  trials ;  and  it  will  determine  also
who  would  be  unjust,  and  unholy  and  filthy  still,  under  a
thousand  trials,

It  would  be  useless  to  grant  another  trial  for  life  under
exa6lly  the  same  circumstances ;  but  though  the  circum-
stances of  the  tried  ones  will  be  different,  more  favorable,
the  terms  or  conditions  of  their  individual  trial  for  life  will  be
the  same  as  in  the  Adamic  trial.  The  law  of  God  will  remain
the  same — it  changes  not.  It  will  still  say,  "The  soul  that
sinneth,  it  shall  die and  the  condition  of  man  will  be  no
more  favorable,  so  far  as  surroundings  are  concerned,  than
the  conditions  and  surroundings  in  Eden ;  but  the  great
difference  will  be  the  increased  knowledge.  The  experience
with  evil,  contrasted  with  the  experience  with  good,  which
will  accrue  to  each  during  the  trial  of  the  coming  age,  will
constitute  the  advantage  by  reason  of  which  the  results  of
the  second  trial  will  differ  so  widely  from  the  results  of  the
first,  and  on  account  of  which  divine  Wisdom  and  Love
provided  the  "ransom  for  all,"  and  thus  guaranteed  to  all
the  blessing  of  a  new  trial.  No  more  favorable  trial,  no
more  favorable  law,  no  more  favorable  conditions  or  cir-


«5»


The  Plan  of  the  Ages,


cumstances,  can  in  any  way  be  conceived  of  as  reasons  for
another  ransom  or  a  further  trial  for  any  beyond  the  Mil-
lennial age.

The  ransom  given  does  not  excuse  sin  in  any;  it  does  not
propose  to  count  sinners  as  saints,  and  usher  them  thus  into
everlasting  bliss.  It  merely  releases  the  accepting  sinner
from  the  first  condemnation  and  its  results,  both  dire<5l  and
indiredt,  and  places  him  again  on  trial  for  life,  in  which  trial
his  own  wilful  obedience  or  wilful  disobedience  will  decide
whether  he  may  or  may  not  have  life  everlasting.

Nor  should  it  be  assumed,  as  so  many  seem  disposed  to  as-
sume, that  all  those  who  live  in  a  state  of  civilization,  and
see  or  possess  a  Bible,  have  thus  a  full  opportunity  or  trial  for
life.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  fall  has  not  injured
all  of  Adam's  children  alike.  Some  have  come  into  the
world  so  weak  and  depraved  as  to  be  easily  blinded  by  the
god  of  this  world,  Satan,  and  led  captive  by  besetting  and
surrounding  sin  j  and  all  are  more  or  less  under  this  influ-
ence, so  that,  even  when  they  would  do  good,  evil  is  pres-
ent and  more  powerful  through  surroundings,  etc.,  and  the
good  which  they  would  do  is  almost  impossible,  while  the
evil  which  they  would  not  do  is  almost  unavoidable.

Small  indeed  is  the  number  of  those  who  in  the  present
time  truly  and  experimentally  learn  of  the  liberty  where-
with Christ  makes  free  those  who  accept  of  his  ransom,  and
put  themselves  under  his  control  for  future  guidance.  Yet
only  these  few,  the  Church,  called  out  and  tried  beforehand
for  the  special  purpose  of  being  co-workers  with  God  in
blessing  the  world — witnessing  now,  and  ruling,  blessing
and  judging  the  world  in  its  age  of  trial — yet  enjoy  to  any
extent  the  benefits  of  the  ransom,  or  are  now  on  trial  fo.r
life.  These  few  have  reckoned  to  them  (and  they  receive
by  faith')  all  the  blessings  of  restitution  which  will  be  pro-
vided for  the  world  during  the  coming  age.    These,  though


Ransom  and  Restitution.


153


not  perfect,  not  restored  to  Adam's  condition  adlually,  are
treated  in  such  a  manner  as  to  compensate  for  the  differ-
ence. Through  faith  in  Christ  they  are  reckoned  perfedl,
and  hence  are  restored  to  perfection  and  to  divine  favor,  as
though  no  longer  sinners.  Their  imperfedlions  and  una-
voidable weaknesses,  being  offset  by  the  ransom,  are  not
imputed  to  them,  but  are  covered  by  the  Redeemer's  perfec-
tion. Hence  the  Church's  trial,  because  of  her  reckoned
standing  in  Christ,  is  as  fair  as  that  which  the  world  will  have
in  Its  time  of  trial.  The  world  will  all  be  brought  to  a  full
knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  each  one,  as  he  accepts  of  its
provisions  and  conditions,  will  be  treated  no  longer  as  a
sinner,  but  as  a  son,  for  whom  all  the  blessings  of  restitu-
tion are  intended.

One  difference  between  the  experiences  of  the  world
under  trial  and  the  experiences  of  the  Church  during  her
trial  will  be  that  the  obedient  of  the  world  will  begin  at
once  to  receive  the  blessings  of  restitution  by  a  gradual  re-
moval of  their  weaknesses — mental  and  physical ;  whereas
the  Gospel  Church,  consecrated  to  the  Lord's  service  even
unto  death,  goes  down  into  death  and  gets  her  perfe6lion
instantaneously  in  the  first  resurredtion.  Another  differ-
ence between  the  two  trials  is  in  the  more  favorable  sur-
roundings of  the  next  age  as  compared  with  this,  in  that
then  society,  government,  etc.,  will  be  favorable  to  right-
eousness, rewarding  faith  and  obedience,  and  punishing  sin ;
whereas  now,  under  the  prince  of  this  world,  the  Church's
trial  is  under  circumstances  unfavorable  to  righteousness,
faith,  etc.  But  this,  we  have  seen,  is  to  be  compensated
for  in  the  prize  of  the  glory  and  honor  of  the  divine  nature
offered  to  the  Church,  in  addition  to  the  gift  of  everlast-
ing life.

Adam's  death  was  sure,  though  it  was  reached  by  nine
hundred  and  thirty  years  of  dying.    Since  he  was  himself


154


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


dying,  all  his  children  were  born  in  the  same  dying  condi-
tion and  without  right  to  life ;  and,  like  their  parents,  they
all  die  after  a  more  or  less  lingering  process.  It  should  be
remembered,  however,  that  it  is  not  the  pain  and  suffering
in  dying,  but  death — the  extindtion  of  life — in  which  the
dying  culminates,  that  is  the  penalty  of  sin.  The  suffering
is  only  incidental  to  it,  and  the  penalty  falls  on  many  with
but  little  or  no  suffering.  It  should  further  be  remembered
that  when  Adam  forfeited  life,  he  forfeited  it  forever ;  and
not  one  of  his  posterity  has  ever  been  able  to  expiate  his
guilt  or  to  regain  the  lost  inheritance.  All  the  race  are
either  dead  or  dying.  And  if  they  could  not  expiate  their
guilt  before  death,  they  certainly  could  not  do  it  when  dead —
when  not  in  existence.  The  penalty  of  sin  was  not  simply
to  die,  with  the  privilege  and  right  thereafter  of  returning  to
life.  In  the  penalty  pronounced  there  was  no  intimation
of  release.  (Gen.  2:  17.)  The  restitution,  therefore,  is  an
adl  of  free  grace  or  favor  on  God's  part.  And  as  soon  as
the  penalty  had  been  incurred,  even  while  it  was  being  pro-
nounced, the  free  favor  of  God  was  intimated,  which,  when
realized,  will  so  fully  declare  his  love.

Had  it  not  been  for  the  gleam  of  hope,  afforded  by  the  state-
ment that  the  seed  of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's
head,  the  race  would  have  been  in  utter  despair ;  but  this
promise  indicated  that  God  had  some  plan  for  their  benefit.
When  to  Abraham  God  sware  that  in  his  seed  all  the  fami-
lies of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,  it  implied  a  resurredtion
or  restitution  of  all ;  for  many  were  then  dead,  and  others
have  since  died,  unblessed.  Nevertheless,  the  promise  is
still  sure  :  all  shall  be  blessed  when  the  times  of  restitution
or  refreshing  shall  come.  (A6ts3:i9.)  Moreover,  since
blessing  indicates  favor,  and  since  God's  favor  was  with-
drawn and  his  curse  came  instead  because  of  sin,  this  prom-
ise of  a  future  blessing  implied  the  removal  of  the  curse.


Ransom  and  Restitution.


155


and  consequently  a  return  of  his  favor.  It  also  implied
either  that  God  would  relent,  change  his  decree  and  clear
the  guilty  race,  or  else  that  he  had  some  plan  by  which  it
could  be  redeemed,  by  having  man's  penalty  paid  by  another.

God  did  not  leave  Abraham  in  doubt  as  to  which  was
his  plan,  but  showed,  by  various  typical  sacrifices  which  all
who  approached  him  had  to  bring,  that  he  could  not  and
did  not  relent,  nor  excuse  the  sin  ;  and  that  the  only  way
to  blot  it  out  and  abolish  its  penalty  would  be  by  a  suffici-
ency of  sacrifice  to  meet  that  penalty.  This  was  shown  to
Abraham  in  a  very  significant  type :  Abraham's  son,  in
whom  the  promised  blessing  centered,  had  first  to  be  a  sac-
rifice before  he  could  bless,  and  Abraham  received  him  from
the  dead  in  a  figure.  (Heb.  11:19.)  In  that  figure  Isaac
typified  the  true  seed,  Christ  Jesus,  who  died  to  redeem
men,  in  order  that  the  redeemed  might  all  receive  the  prom-
ised blessing.  Had  Abraham  thought  that  the  Lord  would
excuse  and  clear  the  guilty,  he  would  have  felt  that  God
was  changeable,  and  therefore  could  not  have  had  full  con-
fidence in  the  promise  made  to  him.  He  might  have  rea-
soned, If  God  has  changed  his  mind  once,  why  may  he  not
change  it  again?  If  he  relents  concerning  the  curse  of
death,  may  he  not  again  relent  concerning  the  promised
favor  and  blessing?  But  God  leaves  us  in  no  such  uncer-
tainty. He  gives  us  ample  assurance  of  both  his  justice  and
his  unchangeableness.  He  could  not  clear  the  guilty,  even
though  he  loved  them  so  much  that  "  he  spared  not  his
own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  [to  death]  for  us  all."

As  the  entire  race  was  in  Adam  when- he  was  condemned,
and  lost  life  through  him,  so  when  Jesus  "gave  himself  a
ransom  for  all  "  his  death  involved  the  possibility  of  an  un-
born race  in  his  loins.  A  full  satisfaction,  or  correspond-
ing price,  for  all  men  was  thus  put  into  the  hands  of  Justice
— to  be  applied  "in  due  time,"  and  he  who  thus  bought  all
has  full  authority  to  restore  all  who  come  unto  God  by  him.


156  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

"  As  by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men
to  condemnation,  even  so  by  righteousness  of  one,  the  free
gift  came  upon  all  men  unto  justification  of  life.  For  as
by  one  man's  disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by
the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  be  made  righteous."
(Rom.  5  :  i8,  19.)  The  proposition  is  a  plain  one:  As  many
as  have  shared  death  on  account  of  Adam's  sin  will  have
life-privileges  offered  to  them  by  our  Lord  Jesus,  who
died  for  them  and  sacrificially  became  Adam'' s  substitute
before  the  broken  law,  and  thus  "gave  himself  a  ransom
for  all."  He  died,  "  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might
bring  us  to  God."  (i  Peter  3:  18.)  It  should  never  be
overlooked,  however,  that  all  of  God's  provisions  for  our
race  recognize  the  human  will  as  a  fadlor  in  the  securing  of
the  divine  favors  so  abundantly  provided.  Some  have  over-
looked this  feature  in  examining  the  text  just  quoted — Rom.
5:18,  19.  ^The  Apostle's  statement,  however,  is  that,  as
the  sentence  of  condemnation  extended  to  all  the  seed
of  Adam,  even  so,  through  the  obedience  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  to  the  Father's  plan,  by  the  sacrifice  of  him-
self on  our  behalf,  a  free  gift  is  extended  to  all — a  gift  of
forgiveness,  which,  if  accepted,  will  constitute  a  justifica-
tion or  basis  for  life  everlasting.  And  "as  by  one  man's
disobedience  many  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience
of  one  many  shall  be  [not  'were'\  made  righteous."  If  the
ransom  alone,  without  our  acceptance  of  it,  made  us  right-
eous, then  it  would  have  read,  by  the  obedience  of  one  many
were  made  righteous.

But  though  the  ransom-price  has  been  given  by
the  Redeemer  only  a  few  during  the  Gospel  age  have
been  made  righteous — ^justified — "through  faith  in  his
blood."  But  since  Christ  is  the  propitiation  (satisfac-
tion) for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  all  men  may
on   this  account   be   absolved  and  released  from  the


Ransom  and  Restitution.


157


penalty  of  Adam's  sin  by  him, — under  the  New  Covenant.

There  is  no  unrighteousness  with  God;  hence  "If  we
confess  our  sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins
and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."  (i  John  1:9.)
A5  he  would  have  been  unjust  to  have  allowed  us  to  escape  the
pronounced  penalty  before  satisfaction  was  rendered,  so  also
he  here  gives  us  to  understand  that  it  would  be  unjust  were
he  to  forbid  our  restitution,  since  by  his  own  arrangement
our  penalty  has  been  paid  for  us.  The  same  unswerving  jus-
tice that  once  condemned  man  to  death  now  stands  pledged
for  the  release  of  all  who,  confessing  their  sins,  apply  for
life  through  Christ.  "It  is  God  that  justifieth — who  is  he
that  condemneth?  It  is  Christ  that  died;  yea,  rather,  that  is
risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who
also  maketh  intercession  for  us." — Rom.  8:  33,  34.

The  completeness  of  the  ransom  is  the  very  strongest
possible  argument  for  the  restitution  of  all  mankind  who
will  accept  it  on  the  proffered  terms.  (Rev.  22:  17.)  The
very  charadler  of  God  for  justice  and  honor  stands  pledged
to  it;  every  promise  which  he  has  made  implies  it;  and
every  typical  sacrifice  pointed  to  the  great  and  sufficient
sacrifice — "the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  siM
OF  THE  world" — who  is  "the  propitiation  [satisfadion]
for  our  sins  [the  Church's],  and  not  for  ours  only,  but
also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  (John  1:29;  i  John
2:2.)  Since  death  is  the  penalty  or  wages  of  sin,  when  the
sin  is  canceled  the  wages  must  in  due  time  cea.<:e.  Any
other  view  would  be  both  unreasonable  and  unjust.  The
fadl  that  no  recovery  from  the  Adamic  loss  is  yet  accom-
plished, though  nearly  two  thousand  years  have  elapsed  since
our  Lord  died,  is  no  more  an  argument  against  restitution
than  is  the  fa(5t  that  four  thousand  years  elapsed  before  his
death  a  proof  that  God  had  not  planned  the  redemption  be-
fore the  foundation  of  the  world.    Both  the  two  thousand


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


years  since  and  the  four  thousand  years  before  the  death  of
Christ  were  appointed  times  for  other  parts  of  the  work,
preparatory  to  "the  times  of  restitution  of  all  things."

Let  no  one  hastily  suppose  that  there  is  in  this  view  any-
thing in  conflidt  with  the  teaching  of  the  Scriptures  that
faith  toward  God,  repentance  for  sin  and  reformation  of
charadler  are  indispensable  to  salvation.  This  feature  will
be  treated  more  at  length  hereafter,  but  we  now  suggest  that
only  the  few  have  ever  had  a  sufficiency  of  light  to  produce
full  faith,  repentance  and  reformation.  Some  have  been
blinded  in  part,  and  some  completely,  by  the  god  of  this
world,  and  they  must  be  recovered  from  blindness  as  well
as  from  death,  that  they,  each  for  hi'msef,  may  have  a  full
chance  to  prove,  by  obedience  or  disobedience,  their  worthi-
ness or  unworthiness  of  life  everlasting.  Then  those  who
prove  themselves  unworthy  of  life  will  die  again — the  second
death — from  which  there  will  be  no  redemption,  and  con-
sequently no  resurredion.  The  death  which  comes  on  ac-
count of  Adam's  sin,  and  all  the  imperfedlions  which  fol-
low in  its  wake,  will  be  removed  because  of  the  redemption
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus ;  but  the  death  which  comes  as  a
result  of  individual,  wilful  apostasy  is  final.  This  sin  hath
never  forgiveness,  and  ils  penalty,  the  second  death,  will
be  everlasting — not  everlasting  dying,  but  everlasting  death
— z.  death  unbroken  by  a  resurreftion.

The  philosophy  of  the  plan  of  redemption  will  be  treated
in  a  succeeding  volume.  Here  we  merely  establish  the
fadl  that  the  redemption  through  Christ  Jesus  is  to  be  as
far-reaching  in  its  blessed  results  and  opportunities  as  was
the  sin  of  Adam  in  its  blight  and  ruin — that  all  who  were
condemned  and  who  suffered  on  account  of  the  one  may
as  surely,  "in  due  time,"  be  set  free  from  all  those  ills  on
account  of  the  other.  However,  none  can  appreciate  this
Scriptural  argument  who  do  not  admit  the  Scriptural  state-


Ransom  and  Restitution.


59


ment  that  death — extindion  of  being — is  the  wages  of  sin.
Those  who  think  of  death  as  life  in  torment  not  only  dis-
regard the  meaning  of  the  words  death  and  life,  which  are
opposites,  but  involve  themselves  in  two  absurdities.  It  is
absurd  to  suppose  that  God  would  perpetuate  Adam's  ex-
istence forever  in  torment  for  any  kind  of  a  sin  which  he
could  commit,  but  especially  for  the  comparatively  small
offence  of  eating  forbidden  fruit.  Then,  again,  if  our
Lord  Jesus  redeems  mankind,  died  in  our  stead,  became
our  ransom,  went  into  death  that  we  might  be  set  free  from
it,  is  it  not  evident  that  the  death  which  he  suffered  for  the
unjust  was  of  exactly  the  same  kind  as  that  to  which  all
mankind  were  condemned  ?  Is  he,  then,  suffering  eternal
torture  for  our  sins  ?  If  not,  then  so  surely  as  he  died  for
our  sins,  the  punishment  for  cur  sins  was  death,  and  not  life
in  any  sense  or  condition.

But,  strange  tc  say,  finding  that  the  theory  of  eternal  tor-
ture is  inconsistent  with  the  statements  that  "  the  Lord  hath
laid  upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all,"  and  that  Christ  "died
for  our  sins,"  and  seeing  that  one  or  the  other  must  be
dropped  as  inconsistent,  some  are  so  wedded  to  the  idea  of
eternal  torture,  and  so  prize  it  as  a  sweet  morsel,  that  they
hold  to  it  regardless  of  the  Scriptures,  and  deliberately  deny
that  Jesus  paid  the  world's  ransom  price,  though  this  truth
is  taught  on  every  leaf  of  the  Bible.

IS  RESTITUTION  PRACTICABLE?

Some  have  supposed  that  if  the  billions  of  the  dead  were
resurredted,  there  would  not  be  room  for  them  on  the  earth  ;
and  that  if  there  should  be  room  for  them,  the  earth  would
not  be  capable  of  sustaining  so  large  a  population.  It  is
even  claimed  by  some  that  the  earth  is  one  vast  graveyard,
and  that  if  all  the  dead  were  awakened  they  would  trample
one  upon  another  for  want  of  room.


s6o  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

This  is  an  important  point.  How  strange  it  would  be  if
we  should  find  that  while  the  Bible  declares  a  resurredtion
for  all  men,  yet,  by  adlual  measurement,  they  could  not  find
a  footing  on  the  earth !  Now  let  us  see :  figure  it  out  and
you  will  find  this  an  unfounded  fear.  You  will  find  that
there  is  an  abundance  of  room  for  the  "restitution  of  all,"
as  "God  hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  his  holy  prophets."

Let  us  assume  that  it  is  six  thousand  years  since  the  crea-
tion of  man,  and  that  there  are  fourteen  hundred  mill-
ions of  people  now  living  on  the  earth.  Our  race  began
with  one  pair,  but  let  us  make  a  very  liberal  estimate  and
suppose  that  there  were  as  many  at  the  beginning  as  there
are  now;  and,  further,  that  there  never  were  fewer  than
that  number  at  any  time,  though  actually  the  flood  reduced
the  population  to  eight  persons.  Again,  let  us  be  liberal,
and  estimate  three  generations  to  a  century,  or  thirty-
three  years  to  a  generation,  though,  according  to  Gen.  5,
there  were  but  eleven  generations  from  Adam  to  the  flood,
a  period  of  one  thousand  six  hundred  and  fifty-six  years,
or  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  to  each  generation.
Now  let  us  see:  six  thousand  years  are  sixty  centuries;
three  generations  to  each  century  would  give  us  one  hui>-
dred  and  eighty  generations  since  Adam;  and  fourteen
hundred  millions  to  a  generation  would  give  two  hundred
and  fifty-two  billions  (252,000,000,000)  as  the  total  num-
ber of  our  race  from  creation  to  the  present  time,  accord-
ing to  this  liberal  estimate,  which  is  probably  more  than
twice  the  aflual  number.

Where  shall  we  find  room  enough  for  this  great  multi-
tude? Let  us  measure  the  land,  and  see.  The  State  of
Texas,  United  States,  contains  two  hundred  and  thirty-seven
thousand  square  miles.  There  are  twenty-seven  million  eight
hundeed  and  seventy-eight  thousand  four  hundred  square
feet  in  a  mile,  and,  therefore,  six  trillion  six  hundred  and


Ransom  and  Restitution.


seven  billion  one  hundred  and  eighty  million  eight  hun-
dred thousand  (6,607,180,800,000)  square  feet  in  Texas.
Allowing  ten  square  feet  as  the  surface  covered  by  each  dead
body,  we  find  that  Texas,  as  a  cemetery,  Avould  at  this  rate
hold  six  hundred  and  sixty  billion  seven  hundred  and  eigh-
teen million  and  eighty  thousand  (660,718,080,000)  bodies,
or  nearly  three  times  as  many  as  our  exaggerated  estimate
of  the  numbers  of  our  race  who  have  lived  on  the  earth.

A  person  standing  occupies  about  one  and  two-thirds
square  feet  of  space.  At  this  rate  the  present  population
of  the  earth  (one  billion  four  hundred  million  persons)  could
stand  on  an  area  of  eighty-six  square  miles — an  area  much
less  than  that  of  the  city  of  London  or  of  Philadelphia.
And  the  island  of  Ireland  (area,  thirty-two  thousand  square
miles)  would  furnish  standing-room  for  more  than  twice
the  number  of  people  who  have  ever  lived  on  the  earth,
even  at  our  exaggerated  estimate.

There  is  not  much  difficulty,  then,  in  settling  this  objec-
tion. And  when  we  call  to  mind  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah
(35:  1-6),  that  the  earth  shall  yield  her  increase;  that  the
desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose ;  that  in  the
•wilderness  shall  waters  break  out,  and  streams  in  the  desert,
we  see  that  God  indicates  that  he  has  foreseen  all  the  neces-
sities of  his  plan,  and  will  make  ample  provision  for  the  needs
of  his  creatures  in  what  will  seem  a  very  natural  way.

RESTITUTION  VERSUS  EVOLUTION.

It  may  be  objedled  by  some  that  the  testimony  of  the
Scriptures  concerning  human  restitution  to  a  former  estate
is  out  of  harmony  with  the  teachings  of  science  and
philosophy,  which,  with  apparent  reason,  point  us  to  the
superior  intelligence  of  this  twentieth  century,  and  claim
this  as  conclusive  evidence  that  primeval  man  must  have
been,  in  comparison,  very  lacking  in  intelligence,  which
11-A


s62  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

they  claim  is  the  result  of  development.  From  this  stand-
point, a  restitution  to  a  former  estate  would  be  far  from
desirable,  and  certainly  the  reverse  of  a  blessing.

At  first  sight  such  reasoning  appears  plausible,  and  many
seem  inclined  to  accept  it  as  truth  without  careful  examina-
tion, saying,  with  a  celebrated  Brooklyn  preacher,  If  Adam
fell  at  all  his  fall  was  upward,  and  the  more  and  faster  we
fall  from  his  original  state  the  better  for  us  and  for  all  con-
cerned.

Thus  philosophy,  even  in  the  pulpit,  would  make  the
Word  of  God  of  no  effeft,  and  if  possible  convince  us
that  the  apostles  were  fools  when  they  declared  that  death
and  every  trouble  came  by  the  first  man's  disobedience,
and  that  these  could  be  removed  and  man  restored  to  di-
vine favor  and  life  only  by  means  of  a  ransom.  (Rom.  5 :
10,  12,  17-19,  21 ;  8: 19-22 ;  A6ts  3 : 19-21 ;  Rev.  21 :  3-5.)
But  let  us  not  hastily  conclude  that  this  philosophy  is  im-
pregnable ;  for  should  we  be  obliged  to  discard  the  dodrines
of  the  apostles  relative  to  the  origin  of  sin  and  death,  and
of  restitution  to  an  original  perfe(5tion,  we  should,  in  hon-
esty, be  obliged  to  reje6l  their  testimony  entirely  and  on
every  subjeft,  as  uninspired  and  consequently  without  spe-
cial weight  or  authority.  Let  us,  then,  in  the  light  of  fa6ts,
briefly  examine  this  growingly  popular  view  and  see  how
deep  is  its  philosophy.

Says  an  advocate  and  representative  of  this  theory : —
"Man  was  first  in  a  stage  of  existence  in  which  his  animal
nature  predominated,  and  the  almost  purely  physical  ruled
him ;  then  he  slowly  grew  from  one  state  to  another  until
now,  when  the  average  man  has  attained  to  a  condition  in
which,  it  might  be  said,  he  is  coming  under  the  rule  of  the
brain.  Hence  this  age  may  be  regarded  and  designated  as
the  Brain  Age.  Brain  pushes  the  great  enterprises  of  the
day.  Brain  takes  the  reins  of  government ;  and  the  ele-
ments of  the  earth,  air  and  water  are  being  brought  under


Ransom  and  Restitution.  163

Bubjedlion.  Man  is  putting  his  hand  on  all  physical  forces,
and  slowly  but  surely  attaining  such  power  over  the  domain
of  nature  as  gives  evidence  that  ultimately  he  may  exclaim,
in  the  language  of  Alexander  Selkirk,  '  I  am  monarch  of
all  I  survey.'  "

The  fadl  that  at  first  glance  a  theory  appears  reasonable
should  not  lead  us  hastily  to  accept  it,  and  to  attempt  to  twist
the  Bible  into  harmony  with  it.  In  a  thousand  ways  we
have  proved  the  Bible,  and  know  beyond  peradventure  that
it  contains  a  superhuman  wisdom  which  makes  its  statements
unerring.  We  should  remember,  too,  that  while  scientific
research  is  to  be  commended,  and  its  suggestions  consid-
ered, yet  its  conclusions  are  by  no  means  infallible.  And
what  wonder  that  it  has  proven  its  own  theories  false  a  thou-
sand times,  when  we  remember  that  the  true  scientist  is
merely  a  student  attempting,  under  many  unfavorable  cir-
cumstances, and  struggling  against  almost  insurmountable
difficulties,  to  learn  from  the  great  Book  of  Nature  the  his-
tory and  destiny  of  man  and  his  home.

We  would  not,  then,  either  oppose  or  hinder  scientific
investigation  ;  but  in  hearing  suggestions  from  students  of
the  Book  of  Nature,  let  us  carefully  compare  their  deduc-
tions, which  have  so  often  proved  in  part  or  wholly  erro-
neous, with  the  Book  of  Divine  Revelation,  and  prove  or
disprove  the  teachings  of  scientists  by  "the  law  and  the
testimony.  If  they  speak  not  according  to  this  word,  it  is
because  there  is  no  light  in  them."  (Isa.  8:  20.)  An  accu-
rate knowledge  of  both  books  will  prove  them  to  be  harmo-
nious; but  until  we  have  such  knowledge,  God's  Revelation
must  take  precedence,  and  must  be  the  standard  among  the
children  of  God,  by  which  the  supposed  findings  of  fallible
fellow-men  shall  be  judged.

But  while  holding  to  this  principle,  let  us  see  whether
there  is  not  some  other  reasonable  solution  of  the  increased


f64


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


knowledge  and  skill  and  power  of  man  than  the  theory  of
Evolution — that  though  originally  developed  from  a  very
Jow  order  of  being,  man  has  now  reached  the  superior  or
"  Brain  Age. ' '  Perhaps  after  all  we  shall  find  that  the  in-
ventions and  conveniences,  the  general  education  and  wider
diffusion  and  increase  of  knowledge,  are  not  attributable  to  a
greater  brain  capacity,  but  to  more  favorable  circumstances
for  the  use  of  brains.  That  the  brain  capacity  to-day  is
greater  than  in  by-gone  ages,  we  deny ;  while  we  freely  admit
that,  owing  to  advantageous  circumstances,  the  use  of  what
brain  capacity  men  have  to-day  is  more  general  than  at  any
former  period,  and  hence  makes  a  much  larger  showing.
In  the  study  of  painting  and  sculpture,  do  not  the  scudents
of  this  "  Brain  Age  "  go  back  to  the  great  masters  of  the
past  ?  Do  they  not  by  so  doing  acknowledge  a  brain  power
and  originality  of  design  as  well  as  a  skill  of  workman-
ship worthy  of  imitation?  Does  not  the  present  "Brain
Age"  draw  largely  upon  the  original  designs  of  the  past
ages  for  its  architedlure  ?  Do  not  the  orators  and  logicians
of  this  "  Brain  Age  "  study  and  copy  the  methods  and  syl-
logysms  of  Plato,  Aristotle,  Demosthenes  and  others  of  the
past?  Might  not  many  of  the  public  speakers  of  to-day
well  covet  the  tongue  of  a  Demosthenes  or  an  ApoUos,  and
much  more  the  clear  reasoning  power  of  the  Apostle  Paul?

To  go  still  further  back  :  while  we  might  well  refer  to  the
rhetorical  powers  of  several  of  the  prophets,  and  to  the  sul>
lime  poetic  paintings  interspersed  throughout  the  Psalms,-,
we  refer  these  "Brain  Age"  philosophers  to  the  wisdom
and  logic,  no  less  than  to  the  fine  moral  sensibilities,  of  Job
and  his  comforters.  And  what  shall  we  say  of  Moses,
*'  learned  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians?"  The  laws
given  through  him  have  been  the  foundation  for  the  laws
of  all  civilized  nations,  and  are  still  recognized  as  the  em'
bodiment  of  marvelous  wisdom.


Ransom  and  Restitution.  165

The  exhuming  of  ancient  buried  cities  reveals  a  knowledge
of  the  arts  and  sciences  in  ages  past  which  is  surprising
some  ofthe  philosophers  of  this  so-called  "Brain  Age."  The
ancient  methods  of  embalming  the  dead,  of  tempering  cop-
per, of  making  elastic  glass  and  Damascus  steel,  are  among
the  achievements  of  the  remote  past  which  the  brain  of  the
present  age,  with  all  its  advantages,  is  unable  either  to  com-
prehend or  to  duplicate.

Going  back  four  thousand  years  to  about  Abraham's  time,
we  find  the  Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt — an  obje6t  of  wonder
and  amazement  to  the  most  learned  scientists  of  to-day.
lis  construdlion  is  in  exaft  accord  with  the  most  advanced
attainments  of  fhis  "  Brain  Age  "  in  the  sciences  of  Mathe-
matics and  Astronomy.  It  teaches,  positively,  truths  which
can  to-day  be  only  approximated  by  the  use  of  modern
instruments.  So  striking  and  clear  are  its  teachings  that
Bome  of  the  foremost  astronomers  of  the  world  have  unhesi-
tatingly pronounced  it  to  be  of  divine  origin.  And  even
if  our  "  Brain  Age  evolutionists  should  admit  that  it  is  of
divine  arrangement,  and  that  its  wisdom  is  superhuman,  they
must  still  admit  that  it  is  of  human  construdtion.  And  the
fa6t  that  in  that  remote  day  any  set  of  men  had  the  men-
tal capacity  to  work  out  such  a  divine  arrangement  as  very
few  men  to-day  would  be  capable  of  doing  with  a  modei
before  them,  and  with  all  modern  scientific  appliances  at
hand,  proves  that  our  "Brain  Age"  develops  more  self-
conceit  than  circumstances  and  fa6ts  warrant.

If,  then,  we  have  proven  that  the  mental  capacity  of  tO'
day  is  not  greater  than  that  of  past  ages,  but  probably  less,
how  shall  we  account  for  the  increase  of  general  knowledge,
modern  inventions,  etc.  ?  We  trust  we  shall  be  able  to  show
this  reasonably  and  in  harmony  with  Scripture.  The  inven-
tions and  discoveries  which  are  now  proving  so  valuable,
and  which  are  considered  proof  that  this  is  the  "  Braio


166


The  Plan  of  the  Ages,


Age,"  are  really  very  modern — nearly  all  having  come  with-
in the  past  century,  and  among  the  most  important  are
those  of  the  last  threescore  years  j  for  instance,  the  applica-
tion of  steam  and  ele6i:ricity — in  telegraphy,  railroading  and
steamboating,  and  to  the  machinery  of  the  various  me-
chanical industries.  If,  then,  these  be  evidences  of  in-
creased brain  power,  the  **  Brain  Age"  must  be  only  be-
ginning, and  the  logical  dedudtion  is  that  another  century
will  witness  every  form  of  miracle  as  an  every-day  occur-
rence; and  at  the  same  ratio  of  increase,  where  would  it
eventuate  ?

But  let  us  look  again  :  Are  all  men  inventors?  How  very
few  there  are  whose  inventions  are  really  useful  and  prac-
tical, compared  with  the  number  who  appreciate  and  use  an
invention  when  put  into  their  hand !  Nor  do  we  speak
disparagingly  of  that  very  useful  and  highly-esteemed  class
of  public  servants  when  we  say  that  the  smaller  number  of
them  are  men  of  great  brain-power.  Some  of  the  most  brainy
men  in  the  world,  and  the  deepest  reasoners,  are  not  me-
chanical inventors.  And  some  inventors  are  intellectually
so  sluggish  that  all  wonder  how  they  ever  stumbled  into
the  discoveries  they  made.  The  great  principles  (eleftric-
ity,  steam  power,  etc.),  which  many  men  in  many  years
work  out,  apply  and  improve  upon,  time  and  again,  were
generally  discovered  apparently  by  the  merest  accident,  with-
out the  exercise  of  great  brain  power,  and  comparatively
unsought.

From  a  human  standpoint  we  can  account  for  modern
inventions  thus:  The  invention  of  printing,  in  A.  D.  i44o>
may  be  considered  the  starting  point.  With  the  printing
of  books  came  records  of  the  thoughts  and  discoveries  of
thinkers  and  observers,  which,  without  this  invention,
would  never  have  been  known  to  their  successors.  With
books  came  a  more  general  education  and,  finally,  commOD


Ransom  and  Restttution.


167


schools.  Schools  and  colleges  do  not  increase  human  capac«
ity,  but  they  do  make  mental  exercise  more  general,  and
hence  help  to  develop  the  capacity  already  possessed.  As
knowledge  becomes  more  general  and  books  more  common,
the  generations  possessing  these  have  a  decided  advantage
over  previous  generations ;  not  only  in  that  there  are  now
a  thousand  thinkers  to  one  formerly,  to  sharpen  and  stim-
ulate each  other  with  suggestions,  but  also  in  that  each  of
the  later  generations  has,  through  books,  the  combined  ex-
perience of  the  past  in  addition  to  its  own.  Education  and
the  laudable  ambition  which  accompanies  it,  enterprise,  and
a  desire  to  achieve  distinction  and  a  competency,  aided  by
the  record  and  descriptions  of  inventions  in  the  daily  press,
have  stimulated  and  brightened  man's  perceptive  powers,
and  put  each  upon  the  alert  to  discover  or  to  invent,  if  pos-
sible, something  for  the  good  and  convenience  of  society.
Hence  we  suggest  that  modern  invention,  looked  at  from  a
purely  human  standpoint,  teaches,  not  an  increase  of  brain
capacity,  but  a  sharpened  perception  from  natural  causes.

And  now  we  come  to  the  Scriptures  to  see  what  they
teach  on  the  subje6l ;  for  while  we  believe,  as  suggested
above,  that  invention  and  the  increase  of  knowledge,  etc.,
among  men  are  the  results  of  natural  causes,  yet  we  believe
that  these  natural  causes  were  all  planned  and  ordered  by
Jehovah  God  long  ago,  and  that  in  due  time  they  have  come
to  pass — by  his  overruling  providence,  whereby  he  "work-
eth  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  his  own  will."  (Eph.
I  :  II.)  According  to  the  plan  revealed  in  his  Word,  God
purposed  to  permit  sin  and  misery  to  misrule  and  oppress
the  world  for  six  thousand  years,  and  then  in  the  seventh
millennium  to  restore  all  things,  and  to  extirpate  evil —
destroying  it  and  its  consequences  by  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he
hath  afore  ordained  to  do  this  work.  Hence,  as  the  six
thousand  years  of  the  reign  of  evil  began  to  draw  to  a  close.


The  Plan  of  thf  Ages.


God  permitted  circumstances  to  favor  discoveries,  in  the
»?tudy  of  both  his  Book  of  Revelation  and  his  Book  of  Na-
ture, as  well  as  in  the  preparation  of  mechanical  and  chemical
appliances  useful  in  the  blessing  and  uplifting  of  mankind
during  the  Millennial  age,  now  about  to  be  introduced.  That
this  was  God's  plan  is  clearly  indicated  by  the  prophetic  state-
ment :  "  O  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the  book,  even
to  the  time  of  the  end  ;  [then]  many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and
KNOWLEDGE  [not  capacity]  shall  be  increased,"  "and  none
of  the  wicked  shall  understand  [God's  plan  and  way],  but
the  wise  shall  understand  "and  there  shall  be  a  time  of
trouble  such  as  never  was  since  there  was  a  nation,  even  to
that  same  time." — Dan.  12:  i,  4,  jo.

To  some  it  may  appear  strange  that  God  did  not  so  ar-
range that  the  present  inventions  and  blessings  should  soon-
er have  come  to  man  to  alleviate  the  curse.  It  should  be
remembered,  however,  that  God's  plan  has  been  to  give
mankind  a  full  appreciation  of  the  curse,  in  order  that  when
the  blessing  comes  upon  all  they  may  forever  have  decided
upon  the  unprofitableness  of  sin.  Furthermore,  God  fore-
saw  and  has  foretold  what  the  world  does  not  yet  realize,
namely,  that  his  choicest  blessings  would  lead  to  and  be
productive  of  greater  evils  if  bestowed  upon  those  whose
hearts  are  not  in  accord  with  the  righteous  laws  of  the  uni-
verse. Ultimately  it  will  be  seen  that  God's  present  per-
mission of  increased  blessings  is  a  pradlical  lesson  on  this
subjedl,  which  may  serve  as  an  example  of  this  principle  to
all  eternity — to  angels  as  well  as  to  restored  men.  How
this  can  be,  we  merely  suggest : —

First :  So  long  as  mankind  is  in  the  present  fallen  or  de-
])raved  condition,  without  stringent  laws  and  penalties  an<?
a  government  strong  enough  to  enforce  them,  the  selfish
propensities  will  hold  more  or  less  sway  over  all.  And  witSu
the  unequal  individual  capacities  of  men  considered,  it  cm-


Ransom  and  Resiitutton.


169


not  possibly  happen  otherwise  than  that  the  result  of  the
invention  of  labor-saving  machinery  must,  aftw  the  flurry
and  stimulus  occasioned  by  the  manufacture  of  machinery,
tend  to  make  the  rich  richer,  and  the  poor  poorer.  The
manifest  tendency  is  tow  ard  monopoly  and  self-aggrandize-
ment, which  places  the  advantage  diredlly  in  the  hands  of
those  whose  capacity  and  natural  advantages  are  already
the  most  favorable.

Secondly  :  If  it  were  possible  to  legislate  so  as  to  divide  the
present  wealth  and  its  daily  increase  evenly  among  all  classes,
which  is  not  possible,  still,  without  human  perfedlion  or  a
supernatural  government  to  regulate  human  affairs,  the  re-
sults would  be  even  more  injurious  than  the  present  condition.
If  the  advantages  of  labor-saving  machinery  and  all  modern
appliances  were  evenly  divided,  the  result  would,  ere  long,
be  a  great  decrease  of  hours  of  labor  and  a  great  increase
of  leisure.  Idleness  is  a  most  injurious  thing  to  fallen  be-
ings. Had  it  not  been  for  the  necessity  of  labor  and  sweat
of  face,  the  deterioration  of  our  race  would  have  been  much
more  rapid  than  it  has  been.  Idleness  is  the  mother  of  vice ;
and  mental,  moral  and  physical  degradation  are  sure  tc
follow.  Hence  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  in  with-
holding these  blessings  until  it  was  due  time  for  their  in-
trodudlion  as  a  'preparation  for  the  Millennial  reign  o^
blessing.  Under  the  control  of  the  supernatural  govern-
ment of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  not  only  will  all  blessing?
be  equitably  divided  among  men,  but  the  leisure  will  b"
so  ordered  and  directed  by  the  same  supernatural  govern
ment  that  its  results  will  produce  virtue  and  tend  up-
ward toward  perfedlion,  mental,  moral  and  physical.  Tbf
present  multiplication  of  inventions  and  other  blessings  of  i«-
creasing  knowledge  is  permitted  in  this  "  day  of  prepara-
tion" to  come  about  in  so  natural  a  way  that  men  flatter
themselves  that  it  is  because  this  is  the  "Brain  Age;"  buH


17©


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


it  will  be  permitted  in  great  measure  to  work  out  in  a
manner  very  much  to  the  disappointment,  no  doubt,  of
these  wise  philosophers.  It  is  the  very  increase  of  these
blessings  that  is  already  beginning  to  bring  upon  the  world
the  time  of  trouble,  which  will  be  such  as  never  has  been
since  there  was  a  nation.

The  prophet  Daniel,  as  quoted  above,  links  together  the
increase  of  knowledge  and  the  time  of  trouble.  The
knowledge  causes  the  trouble,  because  of  the  depravity  of
the  race.  The  increase  of  knowledge  has  not  only  given  the
world  wonderful  labor-saving  machinery  and  conveniences,
but  it  has  also  led  to  an  increaseof  medical  skill  whereby  thou-
sands of  lives  are  prolonged,  and  it  has  so  enlightened  man-
kind that  human  butchery,  war,  is  becoming  less  popular,
and  thus,  too,  other  thousands  are  spared  to  multiply  still
further  the  race,  which  is  increasing  more  rapidly  to-day,
perhaps,  than  at  any  other  period  of  history.  Thus,  while
mankind  is  multiplying  rapidly,  the  necessity  for  his  labor
is  decreasing  correspondingly;  and  the  "Brain  Age"  phi-
losophers have  a  problem  before  them  to  provide  for  the
employment  and  sustenance  of  this  large  and  rapidly  in-
creasing class  whose  services,  for  the  most  part  supplanted
by  machinery,  can  be  dispensed  with,  but  whose  necessities
and  wants  know  no  bounds.  The  solution  of  this  problem,
these  philosophers  must  ultimately  admit,  is  beyond  their
brain  capacity.

Selfishness  will  continue  to  control  the  wealthy,  who  hold
the  power  and  advantage,  and  will  blind  them  to  common
sense  as  well  as  to  justice;  while  a  similar  selfishness,  com-
bined with  the  instindl  of  self-preservation  and  an  increased
knowledge  of  their  rights,  will  nerve  some  and  inflame  oth-
ers of  the  poorer  classes,  and  the  result  of  these  blessings
will,  for  a  time,  prove  terrible — a  time  of  trouble,  truly,
such  as  was  not  since  there  was  a  nation — and  this,  because


Ransom  and  Restitution.


17a


man  in  a  depraved  condition  cannot  properly  use  these  bless-
ings unguided  and  uncontrolled.  Not  until  the  Millennial
reign  shall  have  re-written  the  law  of  God  in  the  restored
human  heart  will  men  be  capable  of  using  full  liberty  with-
out injury  or  danger.

The  day  of  trouble  will  end  in  due  time,  when  he  who
spake  to  the  raging  Sea  of  Galilee  will  likewise,  with
authority,  command  the  raging  sea  of  human  passion,  say-
ing, "Peace!  Be  still!"  When  the  Prince  of  Peace  shall
"stand  up"  in  authority,  a  great  calm  will  be  the  result.
Then  the  raging  and  clashing  elements  shall  recognize  the
authority  of  "  Jehovah's  Anointed,"  "the  glory  of  the  Lord
shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together;"  and  in
the  reign  of  the  Christ  thus  begun  "shall  all  the  families  of
the  earth  be  blessed."

Then  men  will  see  that  what  they  attributed  to  evolution
or  natural  development  and  the  smartness  of  the  "Brain
Age"  was,  instead,  the  flashings  of  Jehovah's  lightnings
(Psa.  77  :  18)  in  "  the  day  of  his  preparation  "  for  the  bless-
ing of  mankind.  But  as  yet  only  the  saints  can  see,  and
only  the  wise  in  heavenly  wisdom  can  understand  this ;  for
"The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him  ;  and
he  will  show  them  his  covenant."  (Psa.  25:  14.)  Thanks
be  to  God,  that  while  general  knowledge  has  been  increased,
he  has  also  arranged  that  his  children  need  "  not  be  unfruit-
ful in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord"  and  in  the  appreciation
of  his  plans.  And  by  this  appreciation  of  his  Word  and
plans  we  are  enabled  to  discern  and  to  withstand  the  vain
philosophies  and  foolish  traditions  of  men  which  contradidl
the  Word  of  God.

The  Bible  account  of  man's  creation  is  that  God  cre-
ated him  pjrfedl  and  upright,  an  ear:hly  image  of  himself;
that  man  sought  out  various  inventions  and  defiled  himself
(Gen.  1 :  27 ;  Rom.  5:12;  Eccl.  7  :  29);  that,  all  being


172


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


sinners,  the  race  was  unable  to  help  itself,  and  none  could
by  any  means  redeem  his  brother  or  give  to  God  a  ransom
for  him  (Psa.  49 :  7,  15);  that  God  in  compassion  and  love
had  made  provision  for  this ;  that,  accordingly,  the  Son  of
God  became  a  man,  and  gave  man's  ransom-price;  that,  as
a  reward  for  this  sacrifice,  and  in  order  to  the  completion
of  the  great  work  of  atonement,  he  was  highly  exalted,  even
to  the  divine  nature ;  and  that  in  due  time  he  will  bring  to
pass  a  restitution  of  the  race  to  the  original  perfe6lion  and
to  every  blessing  then  possessed.  These  things  are  clearly
taught  in  the  Scriptures,  from  beginning  to  end,  and  are  in
direct  opposition  to  the  Evolution  theory ;  or,  rather,  such
"babblings  of  science,  falsely  so  called,"  are  in  violent  and
irreconcilable  confli6l  with  the  Word  of  God.

«        «  «

«'  Still  o'er  earth's  sky  the  clouds  of  anger  roll,
And  God's  revenge  hangs  heavy  on  her  soul ;
Yet  shall  she  rise — though  first  by  God  chastised—
In  glory  and  in  beauty  then  baptized.

"  Yes,  Earth,  thou  shalt  arise ;  thy  Father's  aid
Shall  heal  the  wound  his  chastening  hand  hath  made;
Shall  judge  the  proud  oppressor's  ruthless  sway,
And  burst  his  bonds,  and  cast  his  cords  away.

"Then  on  your  soil  shall  deathless  verdure  spring;
Break  forth,  ye  mountains,  and  ye  valleys,  sing  I
No  more  your  thirsty  rocks  shall  frown  forlorn.
The  unbeliever's  jest,  the  heathen's  scorn.

"The  sultry  sands  shall  tenfold  harvests  yield,
And  a  new  Eden  deck  the  thorny  field.
E'en  now  we  see,  wide-waving  o'er  the  land.
The  mighty  angel  lifts  his  golden  wand.

Courts  the  bright  vision  of  descending  power.

Tells  every  gate  and  measures  every  tower;

And  chides  the  tardy  seals  that  yet  detain

Thy  Lion,  Judah,  from  his  destined  reign."  — Heber,


STUDY  X.


SPIRITUAL  AND  HUMAN  NATURES  SEPARATE  AND

DISTINCT.

Common  Misapprehensions.— Earthly  or  Human  and  Heaveni.y  or  Snib-
rruAi.  Natures. — Earthly  Glory  and  Heavenly  Glory. — Bible  Testt-
MONY  Uegarding  Spikit  Beings.— Mortality  and  Immortality.— Cam
Mortal  Beings  Have  Everlasting  Life? — Justice  in  the  Bestowmens'
OP  Favors.— A  Supposed  Principle  Examined.— Variety  in  Perfection. —
God's  Sovereign  Rights. — God's  Provision  for  Man  a  Satisfying  Por-
tion.—Thb  Election  op  the  Body  of  Christ.— How  their  Change  ov
Naturb  is  Effected.

pAILING  to  see  that  the  plan  of  God  for  mankind  io
general  contemplates  a  restitution  to  their  former  estate
— the  human  perfedlion  lost  in  Eden — and  that  the  Chris-
tian  Church,  as  an  exception  to  this  general  plan,  is  to  hav?
a  change  of  nature  from  human  to  spiritual,  Christian  peo-
ple generally  have  supposed  that  none  will  be  saved  except
those  who  reach  the  spiritual  nature.  The  Scriptures,  how-
ever, while  holding  out  promises  of  life  and  blessing  and
restitution  to  all  the  families  of  the  earth,  offer  and  promfe«
the  change  to  spiritual  nature  only  to  the  Church  sele<5le4
during  the  Gospel  age ;  and  not  a  single  passage  can  b»
found  which  sustains  such  hopes  for  any  others.

If  the  masses  of  mankind  are  saved  from  all  the  degrada-
tion, weakness,  pain,  misery  and  death  which  result  fronm
sin,  and  are  restored  to  the  condition  of  human  perfedlion
enjoyed  before  the  fall,  they  are  as  really  and  completeHy
saved  from  that  fall  as  those  who,  under  the  special  "high-
calling"  of  the  Gospel  age,  become  "partakers  of  the  di-
vine nature."

'7i


274


JTie  Plan  of  the  Ages,


The  failure  to  understand  rightly  what  constitutes  a  per-
fedl  man,  the  misapprehension  of  the  terms  mortal  and  im-
mortal, and  wrong  ideas  of  justice,  have  together  tended
to  this  error,  and  mystified  many  scriptures  otherwise  easily
understood.  It  is  a  common  view,  though  unsupported  by
a  single  text  of  Scripture,  that  a  perfedl  man  has  never  been
on  earth ;  that  all  that  is  seen  of  man  on  earth  is  only  the
partially  developed  man,  and  that  to  reach  perfedlion  he
must  become  spiritual.  This  view  makes  confusion  of  the
Scriptures  instead  of  developing  that  harmony  and  beauty
•which  result  from  "rightly  dividing  the  word  of  truth."

The  Scriptures  teach  that  there  have  been  two,  and  only
two,  perfe<5l  men — Adam  and  Jesus.  Adam  was  created  in
the  image  of  God:  that  is,  with  the  similar  mental  powers  of
reason,  memory,  judgment  and  will,  and  the  moral  qualities
of  justice,  benevolence,  love  etc.  "Of  the  earth,  earthy,"
he  was  an  earthly  image  of  a  spiritual  being,  possessing
qualities  of  the  same  kind,  though  differing  widely  in  de-
gree, range  and  scope.  To  such  an  extent  is  man  an  image
of  God  that  God  can  say  even  to  tne  fallen  man,  "Come,
let  us  reason  together. ' '

As  Jehovah  is  ruler  over  all  things,  so  man  was  made  a
ruler  over  all  earthly  things — After  our  likeness,  let  him
have  dominion  over  the  beasts,  fowl,  fish,  etc.  (Gen.  i :  26.)
Moses  tells  us  (Gen.  1:31)  that  God  recognized  the  man
whom  he  had  made — not  merely  commenced  to  make,  but
completed — and  God  considered  his  creature  very  good,"
that  is,  perfe6l ;  for  in  God's  sight  nothing  short  of  per-
fedlion  is  t/^r)'^^?^?^/,  in  his  intelligent  creatures.

The  perfedlion  of  man,  as  created,  is  expressed  in  Psa.
8 :  5-8 :  "  Thou  hast  made  him  a  little  lower  than  the  an-
gels, and  hast  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honor.  Thou
madest  him  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  thy  hands;
thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet :  all  sheep  and  oxen,


Natures  Distinct.


75


yea,  the  beasts  of  the  field,  the  fowl  of  the  air  and  tlie  fish
of  the  sea."  It  has  been  suggested  by  some  who  would
make  the  Bible  conform  to  a  theory  of  evolution,  that  the
statement,  "a  little,"  in  Heb.  2  :  7,  might  be  understood
to  mean  a  little  wM/e  lower,  and  not  a  little  degree  lower
than  the  angels.  There  is,  however,  neither  authority  nor
reason  for  such  an  interpretation.  This  is  a  quotation  from
Psa  8 :  5,  and  a  critical  comparison  of  the  Hebrew  and
Greek  texts  can  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  import.  The
idea,  clearly  expressed,  is  a  little  lower  in  degree  than  angels.

David,  in  the  psalm,  refers  to  man  in  his  original  estate,
and  prophetically  intimates  that  God  has  not  abandoned
his  original  plan  to  have  man  in  his  own  image  and  the
king  of  earth,  and  that  he  will  remember  him,  redeem  him
and  restore  him  to  the  same  again.  The  Apostle  (Heb.
2  :  7)  calls  attention  to  the  same  facSl — that  God's  original
purpose  has  not  been  abandoned ;  that  man,  originally
grand  and  perfect,  the  king  of  earth,  is  to  be  remem-
bered, and  visited,  and  restored.  He  then  adds.  We  see
not  this  promised  restitution  yet,  but  we  do  see  the  first  step
God  is  taking  toward  its  accomplishment.  We  see  Jesus
crowned  with  this  glory  and  honor  of  perfedl  manhood,
that  he,  as  a  fitting  ransom  or  substitute  might  by  God's
favor  taste  death  for  every  man,  and  thus  prepare  the  way
for  the  restitution  of  man  to  all  that  was  lost.  Rotherham,
one  of  the  most  scrupulous  translators,  renders  this  passage
as  follows : —

"  What  is  man,  that  thou  rememberest  him ;
Or  man's  son,  that  thou  visitest  him?
Thou  madest  him  less  some  little  than  messengers :
With  glory  and  honor  thou  crownedst  him,
And  didst  appoint  him  over  the  works  of  thy  hands."

Nor  should  it  be  inferred  that  a  little  lower  in  degree
means  a  little  less  perfedt.    A  creature  may  be  perfect,  yet


276


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


on  a  lower  plane  of  being  than  another ;  thus,  a  perfedl
liorse  would  be  lower  than  a  perfeft  man,  etc.  There  are
various  natures,  animate  and  inanimate.  To  illustrate,  we
arrange  the  following  table :


Grades  of

Grades  of

Grades

Grades

Heavenly  or

Earthly  or

in  the  Veg-

in  the  Min-

Spiritual Being.

Animal  Being.

ctabli;  Domain.

eral  Domain.

Divine.

Ilumr.n.

Trees.

Gold.

Bru-  .

Shrubs.

Silver.

Fowl.

Grasses.

Copper.

Angelic.

Fish.

Mosses.

Iron.

Each  of  the  minerals  mentioned  may  be  pure,  yet  gold
ranks  the  highest.  Though  eacho.f'the  orders  of  plants  should
be  brought  to  perfe6lion,  they  would  still  d.ffer  in  nature
and  rank.  Likewise  with  animals :  if  each  species  should
be  brought  to  perfedlion,  there  would  still  be  variety;  for
perfecfling  a  nature  does  not  change  a  nature.*  The  grades
of  spiritual  being,  also,  though  perfefl,  stand  related  to
each  other  as  higher  and  lower  in  nature  or  kind.  The  di-
vine nature  is  the  highest  and  the  superior  of  all  spiritual
natures.  Christ  at  his  resurrecSiion  was  made"j<7  much
better'''  than  perfe£l;  angels  as  the  divine  is  superior  to  the
angelic  nature. — Heb.  i  :  3-5.

Note  carefully  that  while  the  classes  named  in  the  above
table  are  distindl  and  separate,  yet  a  comparison  between
them  may  be  instituted,  thus :  The  highest  grade  of  min-
eral is  inferior  to,  or  a  little  lower  than,  the  lowest  grade  of
vegetable,  because  in  vegetation  there  is  life.    So  the  high-

*  The  word  nature  is  sometimes  used  in  an  accommodated  sense,  as,  for
instance,  vrhen  it  is  said  that  a  dog  has  a  savage  nature,  or  that  a  horse
has  a  gentle  nature,  or  is  bad  natured.  But  in  using  the  word  thus  it
signifies  merely  the  disposition  of  the  one  described  as  compared  with
others,  and  does  not,  stri<^y  speaking,  relate  to  nature.


Natures  Distinct.


177


est  grade  of  vegetable  is  a  little  lower  than  the  lowest  grade
of  animal  life,  because  animal  life,  even  in  its  lowest  forms,
has  intelligence  enough  to  be  conscious  of  existence.  Like-
wise man,  though  the  highest  of  animal  or  earthly  beings,
is  "  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  because  angels  are  spir-
itual or  heavenly  beings.

There  is  a  wonderful  contrast  between  man  as  we  now
see  him,  degraded  by  sin,  and  the  perfedl  man  that  God
made  in  his  image.  Sin  has  gradually  changed  his  features,
as  well  as  his  charadler.  Multiplied  generations,  by  igno-
rance, licentiousness  and  general  depravity,  have  so  blurred
and  marred  humanity  that  in  the  large  majority  of  the  race
the  likeness  of  God  is  almost  obliterated.  The  moral  and
intellectual  qualities  are  dwarfed  ;  and  the  animal  instincts,
unduly  developed,  are  no  longer  balanced  by  the  higher.
Man  has  lost  physical  strength  to  such  an  extent  that,  with
all  the  aid  of  medical  science,  his  average  length  of  life  is
now  about  thirty  years,  whereas  at  first  he  survived  nine
hundred  and  thirty  yearsunderthesame  penalty.  But  though
thus  defiled  and  degraded  by  sin  and  its  penalty,  death,
working  in  him,  man  is  to  be  restored  to  his  original  per-
fedlion  of  mind  and  body,  and  to  glory,  honor  and  domin-
ion, during  and  by  the  Millennial  reign  of  Christ.  The
things  to  be  restored  by  and  through  Christ  are  those  things
which  were  Lost  through  Adam's  transgression.  (Rom.
5  :  18,  19.)  Man  did  not  lose  a  heavenly  but  an  earthly  par-
adise. Under  the  death  penalty,  he  did  not  lose  a  spiritual
but  a  human  existence ;  and  all  that  was  lost  was  purchased
back  by  his  Redeemer,  who  declared  that  he  came  to  seek
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost. — Luke  19 :  10.

In  addition  to  the  above,  we  have  proof  that  the  perfe6l
man  is  not  a  spiritual  being.  We  are  told  that  our  Lord,
before  he  left  his  glory  to  become  a  man,  was  "  in  a
fcrm  of  God ' ' — a  spiritual  form,  a  spirit  being ;  but  since
18-A


The  Plan  of  ihe  Ages.


to  be  a  ransom  for  mankind  he  had  to  be  a  man,  of
the  same  nature  as  the  sinner  whose  substitute  in  death  he
was  to  become,  it  was  necessary  that  his  nature  be  changed.
And  Paul  tells  us  that  he  took  not  the  nature  of  angels,  one
step  lower  than  his  own,  but  that  he  came  down  two  steps
and  took  the  nature  of  men — he  became  a  man  ;  he  was
*'made  flesh." — Heb.  2:16;  Phil.  2  :  7,  8  ;  John  i  :  14.

Notice  that  this  teaches  not  only  that  angelic  nature  is
not  the  only  order  of  spirit  being,  but  that  it  is  a  lower
nature  than  that  of  our  Lord  before  he  became  a  man  ;  and
he  was  not  then  so  high  as  he  is  now,  for  "God  hath  highly
exalted  him,"  because  of  his  obedience  in  becoming  man's
willing  ransom.  (Phil.  2  :  8,  9.)  He  is  now  of  the  highest
order  of  spirit  being,  a  partaker  of  the  divine  (Jehovah's)
nature.

But  not  only  do  we  thus  find  proof  that  the  divme,  an-
gelic and  human  natures  are  separate  and  distinft,  but  this
proves  that  to  be  a  perfe6t  man  is  not  to  be  an  angel,  any
more  than  the  perfecStion  of  angelic  nature  implies  that  angels
are  divine  and  equal  with  Jehovah ;  for  Jesus  took  twt  the  na-
ture of  angels,  but  a  different  nature — the  nature  ofvien  ;  not
the  imperfedl  human  nature  as  we  now  possess  it,  but  the
perfect  human  nature.  He  became  a  man;  not  a  depraved
and  nearly  dead  being  such  as  men  are  now,  but  a  man  in
the  full  vigor  of  perfedtion.

Again,  Jesus  must  have  been  a  perfe6l  man  else  he  could
not  have  kept  a  perfe6l  law,  which  is  the  full  measure  of  a
perfect  7nan's  ability.  And  he  must  have  been  a  perfedt
man  else  he  could  not  have  given  a  ransom  (a  correspond-
ing price — I  Tim.  2 :  6)  for  the  forfeited  life  of  the  per-
fe(5l  man  Adam;  "For  since  by  77zan  came  death,  by  man
came  also  the  resurredlion  of  the  dead."  (i  Cor.  15  :  21.)
Had  he  been  in  the  least  degree  imperfedl,  it  would  have
proved  that  he  was  under  condemnation,  and  therefore  he


JSlatures  Distinct.


179


could  not  have  been  an  acceptable  sacrifice ;  neither  could
he  have  kept  perfedlly  the  law  of  God.  A  perfe6l  man  was
tried,  and  failed,  and  was  condemned  ;  and  only  a  perfedl
man  could  give  the  corresponding  price  as  the  Redeemer.

Now  we  have  the  question  fairly  before  us  in  another
form,  viz.:  If  Jesus  in  the  flesh  was  a  perfe6l  man,  as  the
Scriptures  thus  show,  does  it  not  prove  that  a  perfedl  man
is  a  human,  fleshly  being — not  an  angel,  but  a  little  lower
than  the  angels?  The  logical  conclusion  is  unmistakable;
and  in  addition  we  have  the  inspired  statement  of  thePsalm-
ist  (Psa.  8 :  5-8)  and  Paul's  reference  to  it  in  Heb.  2:7-9.

Neither  was  Jesus  a  combination  of  the  two  natures,  hu-
man and  spiritual.  The  blending  of  two  natures  produces
neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  but  an  imperfedl,  hybrid
thing,  which  is  obnoxious  to  the  divine  arrangement.
When  Jesus  was  in  the  flesh  he  was  a  perfect  human  being ;
previous  to  that  time  he  was  a  perfefl  spiritual  being  ;  and
since  his  resurrecflion  he  is  a  perfedl;  spiritual  being  of  the
highest  or  divine  order.  It  was  not  until  the  time  of  his
consecration  even  unto  death,  as  typified  in  his  baptism —
at  thirty  years  of  age  (manhood,  according  to  the  Law,  and
therefore  the  right  time  to  consecrate  himself  as  a  man) —
that  he  received  the  earnest  of  his  inheritance  of  the  divine
nature.  (Matt.  3  :  16, 17.)  The  human  nature  had  to  be  con-
secrated to  death  before  he  could  receive  even  the  pledge  of
the  divine  nature.  And  not  until  that  consecration  was
adlually  carried  out  and  he  had  aflually  sacrificed  the  human
nature,  even  unto  death,  did  our  Lord  Jesus  become  a  full
partaker  of  the  divine  nature.  After  becoming  a  man  he
became  obedient  unto  death ;  wherefore,  God  hath  highly
exalted  him  to  the  divine  nature.  (Phil.  2  :  8,  9.)  If  this
Scripture  is  true,  it  follows  that  he  was  not  exalted  to  the
divine  nature  until  the  human  nature  was  adlually  sacrificed
— dead.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Thus  we  see  that  in  Jesus  there  was  no  mixture  of  na-
cres, but  that  twice  he  experienced  a.  change  of  nature .
Srst,  from  spiritual  to  human  ;  afterward,  from  human  to
the  highest  order  of  spiritual  nature,  the  divine ;  and  itr
«sich  case  the  one  was  given  up  for  the  other.

In  this  grand  example  of  perfedl  humanity,  which  stood
^mblemished  before  the  world  until  sacrificed  for  the  world's
Tedemption,  we  see  the  perfediion  from  which  our  race  fell
in  Adam,  and  to  which  it  is  to  be  restored.  In  becoming
imn's  ransom,  our  Lord  Jesus  gave  the  equivalent  for  that
■which  man  lost ;  and  therefore  all  mankind  may  receive
again,  through  faith  in  Christ,  and  obedience  to  his  require-
iwents,  not  a  spiritual,  but  a  glorious,  perfedl  human  nature
—"that  which  was  lost."

The  perfedl  faculties  and  powers  of  the  perfedl  human
l)eing  may  be  exercised  indefinitely,  and  upon  new  and
'varied  objedls  of  interest,  and  knowledge  and  skill  may  be
vastly  increased;  but  no  such  increase  of  knowledge  or
power  will  effedl  a  change  of  nature,  or  make  it  more  than
perfedl.  It  will  be  only  the  expanding  and  developing  of
(the  perfedl  human  powers.  Increase  of  knowledge  and
skill  will  doubtless  be  man's  blessed  privilege  to  all  eter-
ipity;  yet  he  will  still  be  man,  and  will  be  merely  learning
to  use  more  fully  the  powers  of  human  nature  already  pos-
sessed. Beyond  its  wide  limits  he  cannot  hope,  nor  will  he
desire,  to  advance,  his  desires  being  limited  to  the  scope  of
bxs  powers.

While  Jesus  as  a  man  was  an  illustration  of  perfedl
human  nature,  to  which  the  mass  of  mankind  will  be
restored,  yet  since  his  resurredlion  he  is  the  illustration  of
the  glorious  divine  nature  which  the  overcoming  Church
will,  at  resurredlion,  share  with  him.

Because  the  present  age  is  devoted  mainly  to  the  develop-
iBoent  of  this  class  which  is  offered  a  change  of  nature,  and  be-


Natures  Distinct.


isiuse  the  apostolic  epistles  are  devoted  to  the  instru6lion
this  "little  flock,"  it  should  not  be  inferred  that  God's
plans  end  with  the  completion  of  this  chosen  company.
Nor,  on  rhe  other  hand,  should  we  go  to  the  opposite  ex-
treme, and  suppose  that  the  special  promises  of  the  diviiic
nature,  spiritual  bodies,  etc. ,  made  to  these,  are  God's  de-
sign for  all  mankind.  To  these  are  the  "  exceeding  greaii
and  precious  promises,"  over  and  above  the  other  precious
promises  made  to  all  mankind.  To  rightly  divide  the  word
of  truth,  we  should  observe  that  the  Scriptures  recognize
the  perfection  of  the  divine  nature  in  the  "little  flock,"
and  the  perfe<5lion  of  the  human  nature  in  the  restored
world,  as  two  separate  things.

Let  us  now  inquire  more  particularly,  What  are  spirit  be^
ings  ?  what  powers  are  theirs  ?  and  by  what  laws  are  they
governed  ?  Many  seem  to  think,  because  they  do  not  un-
derstand the  nature  of  a  spirit  being,  that  it  must  be  a  mere
inyth,  and  on  this  subjedl  much  superstition  prevails.  But
Paul  does  not  appear  to  have  such  an  idea.  Though  he
mtimates  that  a  human  being  is  incapable  of  understanding
the  higher,  spiritual  nature  (i  Cor.  2  :  14),  yet  he  plainly
states,  as  if  to  guard  against  any  mythical  or  superstitious
notions,  that  there  is  a  spiritual  body,  as  well  as  a  natural!
(^human)  body,  a  celestial  as  well  as  a  terrestrial,  and  a  glory
of  the  earthly  as  well  as  of  the  heavenly.  The  glory  %ji
ihe  earthly,  as  we  have  seen,  was  lost  by  the  first  Adam's
sm,  and  is  to  be  restored  to  the  race  by  the  Lord  Jesus  an<l!
his  Bride  (the  Christ,  Head  and  body)  during  the  Millen-
nial reign.  The  glory  of  the  heavenly  is  as  yet  unseen  ex-
cept as  revealed  to  the  eye  of  faith  by  the  Spirit  through
the  Word.  These  glories  are  distindt  and  separate,  (i  Cor.
15  :  38-49.)  We  know  to  some  extent  what  the  natural^
earthly,  terrestrial  body  is,  for  we  now  have  such,  though,
we  can  only  approximately  estimate  the  glory  of  its  perfe«-


I82


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


tion.  It  is  flesh,  blood  and  bones;  for  "that  which  is
born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh. ' '  And  since  they  are  two  distinct
kinds  of  bodies,  we  know  that  the  spiritual,  whatever  it
may  be,  is  not  composed  of  flesh,  blood  and  bones :  it  is
heavenly,  celestial,  spiritual — "  That  which  is  born  of  the
Spirit  is  spirit."  But  what  a  spirit  body  is,  we  know  not,
for  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be ;  but  ...  we
shall  be  like  him" — like  our  Lord  Jesus. — John  3:  6;
I  John  3:  2.

We  have  no  record  of  any  being,  either  spiritual  or  hu-
man, ever  having  been  changed  from  one  nature  to  another,
except  the  Son  of  God ;  and  this  was  an  exceptional  case,
for  an  exceptional  purpose.  When  God  made  angels  he
doubtless  intended  them  \o  remain  angels  forever,  and  so
with  men,  each  being  perfect  on  his  own  plane.  At  least
the  Scriptures  give  ro  intimation  of  any  different  purpose.
As  in  the  inanimate  creation  there  is  a  pleasing  and  almost
endless  variety,  so  in  the  living  and  intelligent  creation
the  same  variety  in  perfeftion  is  possible.  Every  creature
in  its  perfection  is  glorious ;  but,  as  Paul  says,  the  glory  of
the  celestial  (heavenly)  is  one  kind  of  glory,  and  the  glory
of  the  terrestrial  (earthly)  is  another  and  a  different  glory.

By  examining  the  fails  recorded  of  our  Lord  Jesus  after
his  resurredlion,  and  of  angels,  who  are  also  spirit  beings,
thus  "comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual "  (i  Cor.
2:  13),  we  may  gain  some  general  information  with  regard
to  spirit  beings.  First,  then,  angels  can  be  and  frequently
are  present,  yet  invisible.  "The  angel  of  the  Lord  en-
campeth  round  about  them  that  fear  him;"  and  "Are  they
not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  for  them
who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?"  (Psa.  34  :  7  ;  Heb.  i  :  14.)
Have  they  ministered  visibly  or  invisibly?  Undoubtedly
the  latter.  Elisha  was  surrounded  by  a  host  of  Assyrians  ;
his  servant  was  fearful ;  Elisha  prayed  to  the  Lord,  and  th*^


Natures  Distinct.


183


young  man's  eyes  were  opened,  and  he  saw  tlie  mountains
round  about  them  full  of  chariots  of  fire  and  horsemen
of  fire  (or  like  fire).  Again,  while  to  Balaam  the  angel  was
invisible,  the  ass,  his  eyes  being  opened,  saw  him.

Secondly,  angels  can  assume  human  bodies  and  appear  as
men.  The  Lord  and  two  angels  so  appeared  to  Abraham,
who  had  a  supper  prepared  for  them,  of  which  they  ate.  At
first  Abraham  supposed  them  to  be  three  men,  and  it  was  not
until  they  were  about  to  go  that  he  discovered  one  of  them
lo  be  the  Lord,  and  the  other  two,  angels,  who  afterward
went  down  to  Sodom  and  delivered  Lot.  (Gen.  18 :  i,  2.)
An  angel  appeared  to  Gideon  as  a  man,  but  afterward  made
himself  known.  An  angel  appeared  to  the  father  and
mother  of  Samson,  and  they  thought  him  a  man  until  he
ascended  up  to  heaven  in  the  flame  of  the  altar. — Judges
6: 11-22 ;  13  :  20.

Thirdly,  spirit  beings  are  glorious  in  their  normal  con-
dition, and  are  frequently  referred  to  as  glorious  and  bright.
The  countenance  of  the  angel  who  rolled  away  the  stone
from  the  door  of  the  sepulchre  was  "as  the  lightning."
Daniel  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  spiritual  body,  which  he  de-
scribed, saying.  His  eyes  wereas  lamps  of  fire,  his  counte-
nance as  the  lightning,  his  arms  and  feet  like  in  color  to
polished  brass,  and  his  voice  as  the  voice  of  a  multitude.
Before  him  Daniel  fellas  a  dead  man.  (Dan.  10:  6,  10,  15,
17.)  Saul  of  Tarsus  caught  a  similar  glimpse  of  Christ's
glorious  body  shining  above  the  brightness  of  the  sun  at
noonday.    Saul  lost  his  sight  and  fell  to  the  ground.

Thus  far  we  have  found  spirit  beings  truly  glorious;
yet,  except  by  the  opening  of  men's  eyes  to  see  them,  or
by  their  appearing  in  flesh  as  men,  they  are  invisible  to  men.
This  conclusion  is  further  confirmed  when  we  examine  the
particular  details  of  these  manifestations.  The  Lord  was
seen  of  Saul  alone,  the  men  traveling  with  him  hearing  the


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


voice,  but  seeing  no  one.  (A6ls  9:7.)  The  men  that  were
with  Daniel  did  not  see  the  glorious  being  he  describes,  but
a  great  fear  fell  on  them,  and  they  ran  and  hid  themselves.
Again,  this  glorious  being  declared,  "The  prince  of  the
kingdom  of  Persia  withstood  me  one  and  twenty  days."
(Dan.  10:  13.)  Did  Daniel,  the  man  greatly  beloved  of  the
Lord,  fall  as  dead  before  this  one  whom  Persia's  prince  with-
stood one  and  twenty  days  ?  How  is  this  ?  Surely  he  did
not  appear  in  glory  to  the  prince  !  No  ;  either  he  was  in-
Tisihly  present  with  him,  or  else  he  appeared  as  a  man.

Our  Lord,  since  his  resurredtion,  is  a  spirit  being ;  conse-
quently the  same  powers  which  we  find  illustrated  in  angels
(spiritual  beings)  should  also  be  possessed  by  him.  And
such  is  the  case,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  in  a  succeeding
chapter.

Thus  we  find  that  the  Scriptures  regard  the  spiritual  and
the  human  natures  as  separate  and  distinct,  and  furnish  no
evidence  that  the  one  will  evolve  or  develop  into  the  other;
but,  on  the  contrary,  they  do  show  that  only  a  few  will  ever
be  changed  from  the  human  to  the  divine  nature,  to  which
Jesus,  their  head,  has  already  been  exalted.  And  this  re-
markable and  special  feature  in  Jehovah's  plan  is  for  the
remarkable  and  special  purpose  of  preparing  these  as  God's
agents  for  the  great  future  work  of  restoring  all  things.

Let  us  now  examine  the  terms

MORTALITY  AND  IMMORTALITY.

"VVe  shall  find  their  tnie  significance  in  exa<Sl:  harmony
■with  what  we  have  learned  from  our  comparison  of  Bible
statements  concerning  human  and  spiritual  beings,  and
earthly  and  heavenly  promises.  These  words  are  usually
given  very  uncertain  meanings,  and  wrong  ideas  of  their
meanings  produce  erroneous  views  of  subjects  with  which
they  stand  connedled,  in  general  and  in  .Scripture  usage.


Natures  Distinct.


'85


" Morfalify**  signifies  a  state  or  condition  of  liability  to
death;  not  a  condition  of  death,  but  a  condition  in  which
death  is  a  possibility.

'^Immortality"  signifies  a  state  or  condition  not  liable  to
death  ;  not  merely  a  condition  of  freedom  from  death,  but
a  condition  in  which  death  is  an  iinpossibility.

The  common  but  erroneous  idea  of  mortality  is,  a  state
or  condition  in  which  death  is  unavoidable,  while  the  com-
mon idea  of  the  significance  of  immortality  is  more  nearly
corredl.

The  word  immortal  signifies  not  mortal;  hence  the  very
construdlion  of  the  words  indicates  their  true  definitions.
It  is  because  of  the  prevalence  of  a  wrong  idea  of  the  word
mortal  that  so  many  are  confused  when  trying  to  deter-
mine whether  Adam  was  mortal  or  immortal  before  his  trans-
gression. They  reason  that  if  he  had  been  immortal  God
would  not  have  said,  "In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof
thou  shalt  surely  die;"  because  it  is  impossible  for  an
immortal  being  to  die.  This  is  a  logical  conclusion.  On
the  other  hand,  say  they,  Had  he  been  mortal,  wherein
could  have  consisted  the  threat  or  penalty  of  the  statement,
"Thou  shalt  surely  die since  if  mortal  (according  to  their
erroneous  definition)  he  could  not  have  avoided  death  any-
how?

The  difficulty,  it  will  be  perceived,  is  in  the  false  mean-
ing given  to  the  word  mortality.  Apply  the  corredl  defini-
tion, and  all  is  clear.  Adam  was  mortal — that  is,  in  a  con-
dition in  which  death  was  a  possibility.  He  had  life  in  full
and  perfc6l  measure,  yet  not  inherent  life.  His  was  a  life
sustained  hy  "every  tree  of  the  garden  "  save  the  one  tree
forbidden  ;  and  so  long  as  he  continued  in  obedience  to
and  in  harmony  with  his  Maker,  his  life  was  secure — the
sustaining  elements  would  not  be  denied.  Thus  seen,  Adaro
had  life;  and  death  was  entirely  avoidable,  yet  he  was  w


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


'Such  a  condition  that  death  was  possible — he  was  mortal.

The  question  arises,  then,  If  Adam  was  mortal  and  on
trial,  was  he  on  trial  for  immortality  ?  The  general  answer
would  be,  Yes.  We  answer.  No.  His  trial  was  to  see  whether
he  was  worthy  or  unworthy  of  a  continuance  of  the  life  and
blessings  already  possessed.  Since  it  was  nowhere  prom-
ised that  if  obedient  he  would  become  immortal,  we  are
bound  to  leave  all  such  speculations  out  of  the  question.
He  was  promised  a  continuance  of  the  blessings  then  enjoyed
so  long  as  obedient,  and  threatened  with  the  loss  of  all —
death — if  disobedient.  It  is  the  false  idea  of  the  meaning
of  the  word  mortal  that  leads  people  in  general  to  con-
clude that  all  beings  who  do  not  die  are  immortal.  In
this  class  they  therefore  include  our  heavenly  Father,  our
Lord  Jesus,  the  angels  and  all  mankind.  This,  however,
is  an  error :  the  great  mass  of  mankind  saved  from  the
fall,  as  well  as  the  angels  of  heaven,  will  always  be
mortal;  though  in  a  condition  of  perfedlion  and  bliss,
they  will  always  be  of  that  mortal  nature  which  could
suffer  death,  the  wages  of  sin,  if  they  Avould  commit  sin.
The  security  of  their  existence  will  be  conditioned,  as  it
was  with  Adam,  upon  obedience  to  the  all-wise  God,  whose
justice,  love  and  wisdom,  and  whose  power  to  cause  all
things  to  work  together  for  good  to  those  who  love  and  serve
him,  will  have  been  fully  demonstrated  by  his  dealings  with
sin  in  the  present  time.

Nowhere  in  the  Scriptures  is  it  stated  that  angels  are  im-
mortal, nor  that  mankind  restored  will  be  immortal.  On
the  contrary,  immortality  is  ascribed  only  to  the  divine  na-
ture— originally  to  Jehovah  only  ;  subsequently  to  our  Lord
Jesus  in  his  present  highly  exalted  condition ;  and  finally
by  promise  to  the  Church,  the  body  of  Christ,  when  glori-
fied with  him. — i  Tim.  6  :  i6  ;  John  5  :  26  ;  2  Pet.  1:4;
I  Cor.  15  :  53,  54,


Natures  Distinct.


187


Not  only  have  we  evidence  that  immortality  pertains  only
to  the  divine  nature,  but  we  have  proof  that  angels  are  mor-
tal, in  the  fa6l  that  Satan,  who  was  once  a  chief  of  their
number,  is  to  be  destroyed.  (Heb.  2  :  14.)  The  fa6l  that  he
can  be  destroyed  proves  that  angels  as  a  class  are  mortal.

Thus  considered,  we  see  that  when  incorrigible  sinners  are
blotted  out,  both  immortal  and  mortal  beings  will  live  for-
ever in  joy  and  happiness  and  love — the  first  class  possess-
ing a  nature  incapable  of  death,  having  inherent  life — life
in  themselves  (John  5  :  26);  and  the  latter  having  a  nature
susceptible  to  death,  yet,  because  of  perfection  of  being
and  knowledge  of  the  evil  and  sinfulness  of  sin,  giving  no
cause  for  death.  They,  being  approved  of  God's  law,  shall
be  everlastingly  supplied  with  those  elements  necessary  to
sustain  them  in  perfedlion,  and  shall  never  die.

The  proper  recognition  of  the  meaning  of  the  terms
mortal  and  immortal,  and  of  their  use  in  the  Scriptures,  de-
stroys the  very  foundation  of  the  doflrine  of  eternal  tor-
ment. It  is  based  upon  the  unscriptural  theory  that  God
created  man  immortal,  that  he  cannot  cease  to  exist,  and  that
God  cannot  destroy  him;  hence  the  argument  is  that  the
incorrigible  must  live  on  somewhere  and  somehow,  and  the
conclusion  is  that  since  they  are  out  of  harmony  with  God
their  eternity  must  be  one  of  misery.  But  God's  Word  as-
sures us  that  he  has  provided  against  such  a  perpetuation  of
sin  and  sinners :  that  man  is  mortal,  and  that  the  full  pen-
alty of  wilful  sin  against  full  light  and  knowledge  will  not
be  a  life  in  torment,  but  a  second  death.  "  The  soul  that
sinneth,  it  shall  die."

"WHO  ART  THOU  THAT  REPLIEST  AGAINST  GOD?"
ROM.  9  :  20.

It  is  the  mistaken  idea  of  some  that  justice  requires  that
God  should  make  no  difference  in  the  bestowment  of  his


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


favors  among  his  creatures ;  that  if  he  exalts  one  to  a  high
position,  in  justice  he  must  do  the  same  for  all,  unless  it
can  be  shown  that  some  have  forfeited  their  rights,  in  which
case  such  might  justly  be  assigned  to  a  lower  position.

If  this  principle  be  a  correal  one,  it  would  show  that  God
had  no  right  to  create  Jesus  higher  than  the  angels,  and  then
further  to  exalt  him  to  the  divine  nature,  unless  he  intended
to  do  the  same  for  all  the  angels  and  for  all  men.  And  to
carry  the  principle  still  further,  if  some  men  are  to  be  highly
exacted  and  made  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  all  men  must
eventually  be  elevated  to  the  same  position.  And  why  not
carry  the  principle  to  its  extreme  limit,  and  apply  the  same
law  of  progression  to  the  brute  and  inse6l  creation,  and  say
that  since  they  are  all  God's  creatures  they  must  all  event-
ually attain  to  the  very  highest  plane  of  existence — the  di-
vine nature?  This  is  a  manifest  absurdity,  but  as  reasona-
ble as  any  other  deduction  from  this  assumed  principle.

Perhaps  none  would  be  inclined  to  carry  the  erroneous
assumption  so  far.  Yet  if  it  were  a  principle  founded  in
simple  justice,  where  could  it  stop  short  and  still  be  just  ?
And  if  such  were  indeed  the  plan  of  God,  where  would  be
the  pleasing  variety  in  all  his  works?  But  such  is  not
God's  plan.  All  nature,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  ex-
hibits the  glory  and  diversity  of  divine  power  and  wisdom.
And  as  "  the  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the
firmament  showeth  his  handiwork"  in  wonderful  variety
and  beauty,  much  more  shall  his  intelligent  creation  exhibit
in  variety  the  superior  glory  of  his  power.  We  so  con-
clude— from  the  express  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God,  from
reason  and  from  the  analogies  of  nature.

It  is  very  important  that  we  have  right  ideas  of  justice.
A  /(Z&^^r  should  never  be  esteemed  as  a  justly  merited  recom-
pense. An  a6t  of  simple  justice  is  no  occasion  for  special
gratitude,  nor  is  it  any  proof  of  love  ;  but  God  commend-


Natures  Distinct.


189


eth  his  great  love  to  his  creatures,  in  an  endless  train  of
unmerited  favors,  which  should  call  forth  their  love  and
praise  in  return.

God  had  a  right,  if  he  chose,  to  make  us  merely  the  crea-
tures of  a  brief  space  of  time,  even  if  we  had  never  sinned.
Thus  he  has  made  some  of  his  lower  creatures.  He  might
have  permitted  us  to  enjoy  his  blessings  for  a  season,  and
then,  without  injustice,  might  have  blotted  us  all  out  of  exist-
ence. In  fa6t,  even  so  brief  an  existence  would  be  a  favor.
It  is  only  of  his  favor  that  we  have  an  existence  at  all.  How
much  greater  favor  is  the  redemption  of  the  existence  once
forfeited  by  sin  !  And  further,  it  is  of  God's  favor  that  we
are  men  and  not  beasts;  it  is  purely  of  God's  favor  that
angels  are  by  nature  a  little  higher  than  men  ;  and  it  is  also  of
God's  favor  that  the  Lord  Jesus  and  his  bride  become  partak-
ers of  the  divine  nature.  It  becomes  all  his  intelligent  crea-
tures, therefore,  to  receive  with  gratitude  whatever  God  be-
stows. Any  other  spirit  justly  merits  condemnation,  and,
if  indulged,  Avill  end  in  abasement  and  destrudtion.  A
man  has  no  right  to  aspire  to  be  an  angel,  never  having  been
invited  to  that  position  ;  nor  has  an  angel  any  right  to  aspire
to  the  divine  nature,  that  never  having  been  offered  to  him.

It  was  the  aspiration  of  Satan's  pride  which  brought  his
abasement,  and  will  end  in  his  destruction.  (Isa.  14:  14.)
"  Whosoever  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased  ;  and  he  that
humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted  "  (Luke  14:  11),  but  not
necessarily  to  the  highest  position.

Partly  from  false  ideas  of  justice,  and  partly  from  other
causes,  the  subje6l  of  election  as  taught  in  the  Scriptures
has  been  the  occasion  of  much  dispute  and  misunderstand-
ing. That  the  Scriptures  leach  eledlion  few  would  deny,
but  on  just  what  principle  the  eledtion  or  selection  is  based
is  a  matter  of  considerable  difference  of  opinion,  some  claim-
ing that  it  is  an  arbitrary,  unconditional  election,  and  others


190


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


that  it  is  conditional.  There  is  a  measure  of  truth,  we  be-
lieve, in  both  of  these  views.  An  eledlion  on  God's  part
is  the  expression  of  his  choice  for  a  certain  purpose,  office
or  condition.  God  has  elected  or  chosen  that  some  of  his
creatures  should  be  angels,  that  some  should  be  men,  that
some  should  be  beasts,  birds,  insedls,  etc. ,  and  that  some
should  be  of  his  own  divine  nature.  And  though  God  se-
le6ls  according  to  certain  conditions  all  who  will  be  admit-
ted to  the  divine  nature,  yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  these
more  than  others  merit  it ;  for  it  is  purely  of  favor  that  any
creature  has  existence  on  any  plane.

"  So  then  it  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that
runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy ' ' — kindness  or
favor.  (Rom.  9:  16.)  It  is  not  because  the  chosen  ones
were  better  than  others,  that  God  gave  them  the  invi-
tation to  the  divine  nature,  for  he  passed  by  the  angels
who  had  not  sinned  and  called  some  of  the  redeemed  sin-
ners to  divine  honors.  God  has  a  right  to  do  as  he  pleases
with  his  own  ;  and  he  chooses  to  exercise  this  right  for  the
accomplishment  of  his  plans.  Since,  then,  all  we  have  is
of  divine  favor,  "  Who  art  thou,  O  man,  that  repliest  against
God  ?  Shall  the  thing  formed  say  unto  him  who  formed  it.
Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus  ?  Hath  not  the  potter  power
over  the  clay,  to  make  one  vessel  unto  honor  and  another
unto  dishonor" — or  less  honor?  (Rom.  9:  20,21.)  All
were  created  by  the  same  divine  power — some  to  have  higher
nature  and  greater  honor,  and  some  to  have  lower  nature
and  less  honor.

"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  his  [man's]
maker  :  Ask  me  of  things  to  come.  Concerning  my  chil-
dren, and  concerning  the  work  of  my  hands,  command  ye
me  ?  I  have  made  the  earth,  and  created  man  upon  it :  I,
even  my  hands,  have  stretched  out  the  heavens,  and  all
their  host  have  I  commanded. "   "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  that


Natures  Distinct.


191


created  the  heavens,  God  himself  that  formed  the  earth  and
made  it ;  he  hath  established  it,  he  created  it  not  in  vain,
he  formed  it  to  be  inhabited :  I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is
none  else."  (Isa.  45  :  11,  12,  18.)  None  have  a  right  to
dictate  to  God.  If  he  established  the  earth,  and  if  he
formed  it  not  in  vain,  but  made  it  to  be  inhabited  by  re-
stored, perfecft  men,  who  are  we  that  we  should  reply  against
God,  and  say  that  it  is  unjust  not  to  change  their  nature
and  make  them  all  partakers  of  a  spiritual  nature  either  like
unto  the  angels,  or  like  unto  his  own  divine  nature?  How
much  more  becoming  to  come  humbly  to  God's  Word  and
to  '^Ask  "  concerning  things  to  come,  than  to  ^'command"
or  to  assert  that  he  must  carry  out  our  ideas  ?  Lord,  keep
back  thy  servants  from  presumptuous  sins :  let  them  not  have
dominion  over  us.  None  of  God's  children,  we  believe,
would  knowingly  dictate  to  the  Lord  ;  yet  how  easily  and
almost  unconsciously  many  fall  into  this  error.

The  human  race  are  God's  children  by  creation — the
•work  of  his  hands — and  his  plan  with  reference  to  them
is  clearly  revealed  in  his  Word.  Paul  says  that  the  first
man  (who  was  a  sample  of  what  the  race  will  be  when  per-
fect) was  of  the  earth,  earthy ;  and  his  posterity,  with  the
exception  of  the  Gospel  Church,  will  in  the  resurrection
still  be  earthy,  human,  adapted  to  the  earth,  (i  Cor.  15  :
38,  44.)  David  declares  that  man  was  made  only  a  little
lower  than  the  angels,  and  crowned  with  glory,  honor,
dominion,  etc.  (Psa.  8:  4-8.)  And  Peter,  our  Lord,  and
all  the  prophets  since  the  world  began,  declare  that  the  hu-
man race  is  to  be  restored  to  that  glorious  perfedtion,  and
is  again  to  have  dominion  over  earth,  as  its  representative,
Adam,  had. — A6ls  3  :  19-21.

It  is  this  portion  that  God  has  eledled  to  give  to  the  human
race.  And  what  a  glorious  portion  !  Close  your  eyes  for  a
moment  to  the  scenes  of  misery  and  woe,  degradation  and


192


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


sorrow  that  yet  prevail  on  account  of  sin,  and  picture  before
your  mental  vision  the  glory  of  the  perfedl  earth.  Not  a
stain  of  sin  mars  the  harmony  and  peace  of  a  perfedl  soci-
ety ;  not  a  bitter  thought,  not  an  unkind  look  or  word  :
love,  welling  up  from  every  heart,  meets  a  kindred  response
in  every  other  heart,  and  benevolence  marks  every  act.
There  sickness  shall  be  no  more  ;  not  an  ache  nor  a  pain,
nor  any  evidence  of  decay — not  even  the  fear  of  such  things.
Think  of  all  the  pictures  of  comparative  health  and  beauty
of  human  form  and  feature  that  you  have  ever  seen,  and
know  that  perfect  humanity  will  be  of  still  surpassing  love-
liness. The  inward  purity  and  mental  and  moral  perfe6lion
will  stamp  and  glorify  every  radiant  countenance.  Such
will  earth's  society  be  ;  and  weeping  bereaved  ones  will  have
their  tears  all  wiped  away,  when  thus  they  realize  the  resur-
redlion  work  complete. — Rev.  21:4.

And  this  is  the  change  in  human  society  only.  We  call
to  mind  also  that  the  earth,  which  was  "made  to  be  inhab-
ited" by  such  a  race  of  beings,  is  to  be  a  fit  and  pleasing
abode  for  them,  as  represented  in  the  Edenic  paradise,  in
which  the  representative  man  was  at  first  placed.  Paradise
shall  be  restored.  The  earth  shall  no  more  bring  forth
thorns  and  briers,  and  require  the  sweat  of  man's  face  to
yield  his  bread,  but  "the  earth  shall  [easily  and  naturally]
yield  her  increase."  "The  desert  shall  blossom  as  the
rose;"  the  lower  animal  creation  will  be  perfe6l,  willing
and  obedient  servants  ;  nature  with  all  its  pleasing  variety
will  call  to  man  from  every  diredlion  to  seek  and  know
the  glory  and  power  and  love  of  God  ;  and  mind  and  heart
will  rejoice  in  him.  The  restless  desire  for  something  new,
that  now  prevaib,  is  not  a  natural  but  an  abnormal  condi-
tion, due  to  our  imperfe(5lion,  and  to  our  present  unsatis-
fadlory  surroundings.  It  is  not  God-like  restlessly  to  crave
iOKiething  new.    Mogt  things  are  old  to  God  :  and  he  re-


Natures  Distinct.


193


joices  most  in  those  things  which  are  old  and  perfe6l.  So
will  it  be  with  man  when  restored  to  the  image  of  God.
The  perfedl  man  will  not  know  or  appreciate  fully,  and
hence  will  not  prefer,  the  glory  of  spiritual  being,  because
of  a  different  nature,  just  as  fishes  and  birds,  for  the  same
reason,  prefer  and  enjoy  each  their  own  nature  and  element
most.  Man  will  be  so  absorbed  and  enraptured  with  the
glory  that  surrounds  him  on  the  human  plane  that  he  will
have  no  aspiration  to,  nor  preference  for,  another  nature  or
other  conditions  than  those  possessed.  A  glance  at  the
present  experience  of  the  Church  will  illustrate  this.  "How
hardly,"  with  what  difficulty,  shall  those  who  are  rich  in
this  world's  goods  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  The
few  good  things  possessed,  even  under  the  present  reign  of
evil  and  death,  so  captivate  the  human  nature  that  we  need
special  help  from  God  to  keep  our  eye  and  purpose  fixed  on
the  spiritual  promises.

That  the  Christian  Church,  the  body  of  Christ,  is  an  ex-
ception to  God's  general  plan  for  mankind,  is  evident  from
the  statement  that  its  sele6tion  was  determined  in  the  divine
plan  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  (Eph.  i  :  4,  5),  at
which  time  God  not  only  foresaw  the  fall  of  the  race  into
sin,  but  also  predetermined  the  justification,  the  sandlifica-
tion  and  the  glorification  of  this  class,  which,  during  the
Gospel  age,  he  has  been  calling  out  of  the  world  to  be  con-
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son,  to  be  partakers  of  the
divine  nature  and  to  be  fellow-heirs  with  Christ  Jesus  of  the
Millennial  Kingdom  for  the  establishment  of  universal
righteousness  and  peace. — Rom.  8  :  28-31.

This  shows  that  the  eledlion  or  choice  of  the  Church  was
a  predetermined  thing  on  God's  part ;  but  mark,  it  is  not
an  unconditional  eledlion  of  the  individual  members  of  the
Church.  Before  the  foundation  of  the  world  God  deter-
mined that  such  a  company  should  be  seledled  for  such  a  pur-
»3


394


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


pose  within  a  specific  time — the  Gospel  age.  While  we  can-
not doubt  that  God  could  have  foreseen  the  adlion  of  each
Individual  member  of  the  Church,  and  could  have  fore-
Iknown  just  who  would  be  worthy  and  therefore  constitute
members  of  that  "little  flock,"  yet  this  is  not  the  way  in
which  God's  Word  presents  the  dodlrine  of  eledlion.  It
was  not  the  thought  of  an  individual  predestination  which
Ihe  apostles  sought  to  inculcate,  but  that  a  class  was  prede-
termined in  God's  purpose  to  fill  the  honorable  position,
ithe  selection  of  which  would  be  upon  conditions  of  severe
trials  of  faith  and  obedience  and  the  sacrifice  of  earthly
privileges,  etc.,  even  unto  death.  Thus  by  an  individual
•trial,  and  by  individually  "overcoming,"  the  individual
members  of  the  predetermined  class  are  being  chosen  or  ac-
cepted into  all  the  blessings  and  benefits  predetermined  of
God  for  this  class.

The  word  "glorified"  in  Rom.  8  :  30,  from  the  Greek
doxazo,  signifies  honored.  The  position  to  which  the  Church
is  ele6ted  is  one  of  great  honor.  No  man  could  think  of
aspiring  to  so  great  an  honor.  Even  our  Lord  Jesus  was  first
invited  before  he  aspired  to  it,  as  we  read  :  "So  also  Christ
glorified  \_doxazo — honored]  not  himself  to  be  made  an
High  Priest,  but  he  that  said  unto  him,  '  Thou  art  my  Son,
to-day  have  I  begotten  thee. '  ' '  The  heavenly  Father  thus
honored  our  Lord  Jesus ;  and  all  of  the  eledl  body  who  are
to  be  joint-heirs  with  him  will  be  thus  honored  by  Jeho-
vah's favor.  The  Church,  like  its  Head,  experiences  a  be-
ginning of  the  "honor"  when  begotten  of  God  to  spirit-
iaal  nature  through  the  word  of  truth  (James  i :  18),  and
w'ill  be  fully  ushered  into  the  honor  when  born  of  the  Spirit,
spiritual  beings — in  the  image  of  the  glorified  Head.  Those
whom  God  would  thus  honor  must  be  perfect  and  pure ;
and  since  we  were  by  inheritance  sinners,  he  not  only  called
or  invited  us  to  the  honor,  but  also  provided  justijicaiion


Natures  Distinct.


195


from  sin  through  the  death  of  his  Son,  to  enable  us  to  re-
ceive the  honor  to  which  he  calls  us.

In  selecting  the  little  flock,  God  makes  a  very  general
call — "many  are  called."  All  are  not  called.  The  call
was  confined  at  first,  during  our  Lord's  ministry,  to  Israel
after  the  flesh ;  but  now,  as  many  as  the  servants  of  God
meet  (Luke  14 :  23)  are  to  be  urged  or  constrained  (not
compelled)  to  come  to  this  special  feast  of  favor.  But  even
of  those  who  hear  and  come,  all  are  not  worthy.  Wedding
garments  (the  imputed  righteousness  of  Christ)  are  pro-
vided, but  some  will  not  wear  them,  and  must  be  rejedled  ;
and  of  those  who  do  put  on  the  robes  of  justification,  and
who  receive  the  honor  of  being  begotten  to  a  new  nature^
some  fail  to  make  their  calling  and  eledtion  sure  by  faith-
fulness to  their  covenant.  Of  those  worthy  to  appear  with
the  Lamb  in  glory,  it  is  declared,  "They  are  called zx^d,
chosen  and  faithful.^'' — Rev.  14:  i  and  17  :  14.

The  call  is  true;  the  determination  of  God  to  selecSt  and
exalt  a  Church  is  unchangeable ;  but  who  will  be  of  this
chosen  class  is  conditional.  All  who  would  share  the  pre=
destined  honors  must  fulfil  the  conditions  of  the  call,
"  Let  us  therefore  fear,  lest,  a  promise  being  left  us  of  enter-
ing into  his  rest,  any  of  you  should  seem  to  come  short  of
it."  (Heb.  4:1.)  While  the  great  favor  is  not  of  him  that
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  it  is  to  him  that  willetb
and  to  him  that  runneth,  when  called.

Having  thus,  we  trust,  clearly  vindicated  God's  absolute
right  and  purpose  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own,  we  caH
attention  to  the  fadl  that  the  principle  which  charadler-
izes  the  bestowment  of  all  God's  favors  is  the  general  good
of  all.

While,  then,  on  the  authority  of  the  Scriptures,  we  reckoo
it  an  established  fa6l  that  the  human  and  spiritual  natures
are  separate  and  distin6l — that  the  blending  of  the  two  na-


196


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


tures  is  no  part  of  God's  design,  but  would  be  an  imperfec-
tion, and  that  the  change  from  one  nature  to  another  is
not  the  rule,  but  the  exception,  in  the  single  instance  of
the  Christ — it  becomes  a  matter  of  deep  interest  to  learn
how  the  change  is  to  be  accomplished,  upon  what  condi-
tions it  may  be  attained  and  in  what  manner  it  will  be
effeaed.

The  conditions  on  which  the  Church  may  be  exalted  with
her  Lord  to  the  divine  nature  (2  Pet.  i  :  4)  are  precisely  the
same  as  the  conditions  on  which  he  received  it ;  even  by
following  in  his  footprints  (i  Pet.  2  :  21),  presenting  her-
self a  living  sacrifice,  as  he  did,  and  then  faithfully  carry-
ing out  that  consecration  vow  until  the  sacrifice  terminates
in  death.  This  change  of  nature  from  human  to  divine  is
given  as  a  reward  to  those  who,  within  the  Gospel  age,  sac-
rifice the  human  nature,  as  did  our  Lord,  with  all  its  inter-
ests, hopes  and  aims,  present  and  future — even  unto  death.
In  the  resurredtion  such  will  awake,  not  to  share  with  the
rest  of  mankind  in  the  blessed  restitution  to  human  perfec-
tion and  all  its  accompanying  blessings,  but  to  share  the
likeness  and  glory  and  joy  of  the  Lord,  as  partakers  with
him  of  the  divine  nature. — Rom  8:17;  2  Tim.  2:12.

The  beginning  and  development  of  the  new  nature  is
likened  to  the  beginning  and  development  of  human  life.
As  in  the  one  case  there  is  a  begetting  and  then  a  birth,  so
also  in  the  other.  The  saints  are  said  to  be  begotten  of  God
through  the  word  of  truth,  (i  Pet.  1:3;!  John  5  :  18;
James  i  :  18.)  That  is,  they  receive  the  first  impulse  in  the
divine  life  from  God  through  his  Word.  When,  having
been  justified  freely  by  faith  in  the  ransom,  they  hear  the  call,
"Present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  [ransomed,
justified — and  therefore]  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is
your  reasonable  service"  (Rom.  12:1);  and  when,  in  obedi-
dience  to  that  call,  they  fully  consecrate  their  justified  human-


Natures  Distinct.


197


iity  to  God,  a  living  sacrifice,  side  by  side  with  that  of  Jesus,
It  is  accepted  of  God  ;  and  in  that  very  act  the  spiritual  life
IS  begun.  Such  find  themselves  at  once  thinking  and  adling
as  the  new  [transformed]  mind  prompts,  even  to  the  cruci-
fixion of  the  human  desires.  From  the  moment  of  conse-
cration these  are  reckoned  of  God  as  "new  creatures."

Thus  to  these  embryo  "new  creatures"  old  things  [human
desires,  hopes,  plans,  etc.]  pass  away,  and  all  things  become
new.  The  embryo  "  new  creature  ' '  continues  to  grow  and
develop,  as  the  old  human  nature,  with  its  hopes,  aims,  de-
sires, etc.,  is  crucified.  These  two  processes  progress  simul-
taneously, from  the  time  consecration  begins  until  the  death
of  the  human  and  the  birth  of  the  spiritual  result.  As  the
Spirit  of  God  continues  to  unfold,  through  his  Word,  more
and  more  of  his  plans,  he  thus  quickens  even  our  mortal
bodies  (Rom.  8:11),  enabling  these  mortal  bodies  to  ren-
der him  service ;  but  in  due  time  we  will  have  new  bodies
— spiritual,  heavenly,  adapted  in  all  respedls  to  the  new,
divine  mind.

The  birth  of  the  "new  creature"  is  in  the  resurredlion
(Col.  1:18);  and  the  resurreflion  of  this  class  is  designated
the  (or  choice)  resurredl ion.  (Rev  20:  6.)  It  should
be  remembered  that  we  are  not  adlually  spirit  beings  until
the  resurre6lion,  though  from  the  time  we  receive  the  spirit
of  adoption  we  are  reckoned  as  such.  (Rom.  8  :  23-25  ;
Eph.  I  :  13,  14;  Rom.  6  :  10,  11.)  When  we  become  spirit
beings  adlually,  that  is,  when  we  are  born  of  the  Spirit,  we
will  no  longer  be  fleshly  beings;  for  "that  which  is  born
of  the  Spirit  is  spirit.''

This  birth  to  the  spiritual  nature  in  the  resurrection  must
be  preceded  by  a  begetting  of  the  Spirit  at  consecration,
just  as  surely  as  the  birth  of  the  flesh  is  preceded  by  a  be-
getting of  the  flesh.  All  that  are  born  of  the  flesh  in  the
iikeness  of  the  first  Adam,  the  earthly,  were  first  begotten


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


of  the  flesh ;  and  some  have  been  begotten  agaiti,  by  the
Spirit  of  God  through  the  word  of  truth,  that  in  due  time
they  may  be  born  of  the  Spirit  into  the  heavenly  likeness,
in  the  first  resurre6tion :  "As  we  have  borne  the  image  of
the  earthly,  we  [the  Church]  shall  also  bear  the  image  of
the  heavenly" — unless  there  be  a  falling  away. — i  Cor.
15  :  49  ;  Heb.  6  :  6.

Though  the  acceptance  of  the  heavenly  call  and  our  con-
secration in  obedience  to  it  be  decided  at  one  particular
moment,  the  bringing  of  every  thought  into  harmony  with
the  mind  of  God  is  a  gradual  work  ;  it  is  a  gradual  bend-
ing heavenward  of  that  which  naturally  bends  earthward.
The  Apostle  terms  this  process  a  transforming  work,  saying,
"  Be  not  conformed  to  this  world ;  but  be  ye  transformed
[to  the  heavenly  nature]  by  the  renewing  of  your  minds,  that
ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and  perfedl
will  of  God." — Rom.  12:2.

It  should  be  noticed  that  these  words  of  the  Apostle  are
not  addressed  to  the  unbelieving  world,  but  to  those  whom
he  recognizes  as  brethren,  as  shown  by  the  preceding  verse
• — "I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  .  .  .  that  ye  pre-
sent your  bodies  living  sacrifices,  holy  and  acceptable
unto  God."

It  is  commonly  believed  that  when  a  man  is  converted
or  turned  from  sin  to  righteousness,  and  from  unbelief  and
opposition  to  God  to  reliance  upon  him,  that  is  the  trans-
forming which  Paul  meant.  Truly  that  is  a  great  change — a
transformation,  but  not  the  transformation  that  Paul  here
refers  to.  That  is  a  transformation  of  chara6ler ;  but  Paul
refers  to  a  transformation  of  nature  promised  to  believers
during  the  Gospel  age,  on  certain  conditions,  and  he  was
urging  believers  to  fulfil  those  conditions.  Had  not  sucli  a
transformation  of  character  already  taken  place  in  those
whom  he  addressed,  he  could  not  have  termed  them  breth-


Natures  Distinct.


199


ren — brethren,  too,  who  had  something  "  holy  and  accept-
able unto  God ' '  to  offer  in  sacrifice  ;  for  only  those  who
are  justified  by  faith  in  the  ransom  are  reckoned  of  God  as
holy  and  acceptable.  Transformation  of  nature  results  to
those  who,  during  the  Gospel  age,  present  their  justified
humanity  a  living  sacrifice,  as  Jesus  presented  his  perfect
humanity  a  sacrifice,  laying  down  all  right  and  claim  to
future  human  existence,  as  well  as  ignoring  present  human
gratification,  privileges,  rights,  etc.  The  first  thing  sacri-
ficed is  the  human  will ;  and  thenceforth  we  may  not  be
guided  either  by  our  own  or  by  any  other  human  will,  but
only  by  the  divine  will.  The  divine  will  becomes  our  will,
and  we  reckon  the  human  will  as  not  ours,  but  as  the  will
of  another,  to  be  ignored  and  sacrificed.  The  divine  will
having  become  our  will,  we  begin  to  think,  to  reason  and
to  judge  from  the  divine  standpoint :  God's  plan  becomes
our  plan,  and  God's  ways  become  our  ways.  None  can
fully  understand  this  transformation  who  have  not  in  good
faith  presented  themselves  as  sacrifices,  and  in  consequence
come  to  experience  it.  Previously  we  might  enjoy  any-
thing that  was  not  aflually  sinful ;  for  the  world  and  all  its
good  things  were  made  for  man's  enjoyment,  the  only  diflS-
culty  being  to  subdue  the  sinful  propensities.  But  the  con-
secrated, the  transformed,  in  addition  to  the  effort  to  sub-
due sin,  must  sacrifice  the  present  good  things  and  devote
all  their  energies  to  the  service  of  God.  And  those  faith-
ful in  service  and  sacrifice  will  indeed  realize  daily  that  this
world  is  not  their  resting  place,  and  that  here  they  have  no
continuing  city.  But  their  hearts  and  hopes  will  be  turned
to  that  "rest  that  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God."  And
that  blessed  hope  in  turn  will  quicken  and  inspire  to  con-
tinued sacrifice.

Thus,  through  consecration,  the  mind  is  renewed  or
transformed,  and  the  desires,  hopes  and  aims  begin  to  riso


200


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


toward  the  spiritual  and  unseen  things  promised,  while  the
human  hopes,  etc.,  die.  Those  thus  transformed,  or  in
process  of  change,  are  reckoned  "new  creatures,"  begotten
of  God,  and  partakers  to  that  extent  of  the  divine  nature.
Mark  well  the  difference  between  these  "new  creatures'*
and  those  believers  and  "brethren"  who  are  only  justified.
Those  of  the  latter  class  are  still  of  the  earth,  earthy,  and,
aside  from  sinful  desires,  their  hopes,  ambitions  and  aims
are  such  as  will  be  fully  gratified  in  the  promised  restitution
of  all  things.  But  those  of  the  former  class  are  not  of  this
world,  even  as  Christ  is  not  of  this  world,  and  their  hopes  cen-
ter in  the  things  unseen,  where  Christ  sitteth  at  the  right  hand
of  God.  The  prospect  of  earthly  glory,  so  enchanting  to
the  natural  man,  would  no  longer  be  a  satisfying  portion  to
those  begotten  of  this  heavenly  hope,  to  those  who  see  the
glories  of  the  heavenly  promises,  and  who  appreciate  the
part  assigned  them  in  the  divine  plan.  This  new,  divine
mind  is  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance  of  the  complete  di-
vine nature — mind  and  body.  Some  may  be  a  little  start-
led by  this  expression,  a  divine  body;  but  we  are  told  that
Jesus  is  now  the  express  image  of  his  Father's  person,  and
that  the  overcomers  will  "be  like  him  and  see  him  as  he
(i  John  3:2.)  "  There  is  a  natural  [human]  body,  and  there
is  a  spiritual  body."  (i  Cor.  15  :  44.)  We  could  not  im-
agine either  our  divine  Father  or  our  Lord  Jesus  as  merely
great  minds  without  bodies.  Theirs  are  glorious  spiritual
bodies,  though  it  doth  not  yet  appear  how  great  is  the
glory,  and  it  shall  not,  until  we  also  shall  share  the  divine
nature.

While  this  transforming  of  the  mind  from  human  to  spir-
itual is  a  gradual  work,  the  change  from  a  human  to  a  spir-
iual  body  will  not  be  gradual,  but  instantaneous,  (i  Cor.
15  :  52.)  Now,  as  Paul  says,  we  have  this  treasure  (the  di-
vine mind)  in  earthen  vessels,  but  in  due  time  the  treasure


Natures  Distinct.


70s


^11  be  in  a  glorious  vessel  appropriate  to  it — the  spirit-
ual body.

We  have  seen  that  the  human  nature  is  a  likeness  of  the
spiritual.  (Gen.  5:1.)  For  instance,  God  has  a  will,  so  have
men  and  angels ;  God  has  reason  and  memory,  so  have  his
intelligent  creatures — angels  and  men.  The  charafler  of
the  mental  operations  of  each  is  the  same.  With  the  same
data  for  reasoning,  and  under  similar  conditions,  these  dif-
ferent natures  are  able  to  arrive  at  the  same  conclusions.
Though  the  mental  faculties  of  the  divine,  the  angelic  and
the  human  natures  are  similar,  yet  we  know  that  the  spir-
itual natures  have  powers  beyond  and  above  the  human —
powers  which  result,  we  think,  not  from  different  faculties,
but  from  the  wider  range  of  the  same  faculties  and  the  dif-
ferent circumstances  under  which  they  operate.  The  hu-
man nature  is  a  perfect  earthly  image  of  the  spiritual  nature,
having  the  same  faculties,  but  confined  to  the  earthly  sphere,
and  with  ability  and  disposition  to  discern  only  so  much
t>eyond  it  as  God  sees  fit  to  reveal  for  man's  benefit  and
happiness.

The  divine  is  the  highest  order  of  the  spiritual  nature ;
and  how  immeasurable  is  the  distance  between  God  and  his
creatures  !  We  are  able  to  catch  only  glimpses  of  the
glory  of  the  divine  wisdom,  power  and  goodness  as  in  pan-
oramic view  he  causes  some  of  his  mighty  works  to  pass
before  us.  But  we  may  measure  and  comprehend  the  glory
of  perfect  humanity.

With  these  thoughts  clearly  in  mind,  we  are  able  to  ap-
preciate  how  the  change  from  the  human  to  the  spiritual
nature  is  effected,  viz. ,  by  carrying  the  same  mental  powers
over  to  higher  conditions.  When  clothed  with  the  heaven-
ly body,  we  shall  have  the  heavenly  powers  which  belong
to  that  glorious  body;  and  we  shall  have  the  range
thought  and  scope  of  power  which  belong  to  it.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


The  change  or  transformation  of  mind,  from  earthly  to
thicavenly,  which  the  consecrated  -experience  here,  is  the  be-
ginning of  that  change  of  nature.  It  is  not  a  change  of
brain,  nor  a  miracle  in  its  changed  operation,  but  it  is  the
will  and  the  bent  of  mind  that  are  changed.  Our  will  and
sentiments  represent  our  individuality;  hence  we  are  trans-
formed, and  reckoned  as  actually  belonging  to  the  heavenly
nature,  when  our  wills  and  sentiments  are  thus  changed.
True,  this  is  but  a  very  small  beginning ;  but  a  begetting,  ?&
this  is  termed,  is  always  but  a  small  beginning;  yet  it  is  the
earnest  or  assurance  of  the  finished  work. — Eph.  i :  13,  14.

Some  have  asked,  How  shall  we  know  ourselves  when
changed?  How  shall  we  then  know  that  we  are  the  same
beings  that  lived  and  suffered  and  sacrificed  that  we  might
be  partakers  of  this  glory?  Will  we  be  the  same  conscious
beings?  Most  assuredly,  yes.  If  we  be  dead  with  Christ,
we  shall  also  live  with  him.  (Rom.  6  :  8.)  Changes  which
daily  occur  to  our  human  bodies  do  not  cause  us  to  forget
the  past,  or  to  lose  our  identity.*

These  thoughts  may  help  us  to  understand  also  how  the
Son,  when  changed  from  spiritual  to  human  conditions —
to  human  nature  and  earthly  limitations — was  a  man ;  and
though  it  was  the  same  being  in  both  cases,  under  the  first
conditions  he  was  spiritual  and  under  the  second  conditions

*  Our  human  bodies  are  constantly  changing.  Science  declares  that
each  seven  years  witnesses  a  complete  change  in  our  component  atoms.
So  the  promised  change  from  human  to  spiritual  bodies  will  not  destroy
either  memory  or  identity,  but  will  increase  their  power  and  range.
The  same  divine  mind  that  now  is  ours,  with  the  same  memory,  the
same  reasoning  powers,  etc.,  will  then  find  its  powers  expanded  to  im-
measurable heights  and  depths,  in  harmony  with  its  new  spiritual  body;
and  memory  will  trace  all  our  career  from  earliest  human  infancy,  and
we  will  be  able,  by  contrast,  fully  to  realize  the  glorious  reward  of  our
s.icrifice.  But  this  could  not  be  the  case  if  the  human  were  not  am
image  of  the  spiritvial.


Natures  Distinct.


he  was  human.  Because  the  two  natures  are  separate  and
distindt,  and  yet  the  one  a  likeness  of  the  other,  therefore,
the  same  mental  faculties  (memory,  etc.)  being  common
to  both,  Jesus  could  realize  his  former  glory  which  he
had  before  becoming  a  man,  but  which  he  had  not  when
he  had  become  a  man,  as  his  words  prove — "Father,  glo-
rify thou  me  with  thine  own  self,  with  the  glory  which  I
had  with  thee  before  the  world  was"  (John  17:  5) — the
glory  of  the  spiritual  nature.  And  that  prayer  is  more
than  answered  in  his  present  exaltation  to  the  highest
form  of  spirit  being,  the  divine  nature.

Referring  again  to  Paul's  words,  we  notice  that  he  does
not  say.  Do  not  conform  yourselves  to  this  world,  but  trans-
form yourselves  into  the  divine  likeness  ;  but  he  says,  "Be
not  conformed,  .  .  .  but  ye  transformed."  This  is  well
expressed ;  for  we  do  not  either  conform  or  transform  our-
selves ;  but  we  do  either  submit  ourselves  to  be  conformed
to  the  world  by  the  worldly  influences,  the  spirit  of  the
world  around  us,  or  submit  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God,
the  holy  will  or  Spirit,  to  be  transformed  by  heavenly
influences  exercised  through  the  Word  of  God.  You  that
are  consecrated,  to  which  influences  are  you  submitting?
The  transforming  influences  lead  to  present  sacrifice  and
suffering,  but  the  end  is  glorious.  If  you  are  develop-
ing under  these  transforming  influences,  you  are  proving  dai-
ly what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and  perfe6t  will  of  God.

Let  such  as  have  laid  their  all  upon  the  altar  of  sacrifice
continually  bear  in  mind  that,  while  the  Word  of  God  con-
tains both  earthly  and  heavenly  promises,  only  the  latter
belong  to  us.  Our  treasure  is  in  heaven  :  let  our  hearts
continually  be  there."  Our  calling  is  not  only  to  the  spir-
itual nature,  but  to  the  highest  order  of  the  spiritual,  the
divine  nature — "so  much  better  than  the  angels."  (2  Pet.
1:4;  Heb.  1:4.)    This  heavenly  calling  is  confined  to  the


804


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Gospel  age :  it  was  never  made  before  it,  and  it  will  cease
with  its  close.  An  earthly  calling  was  made,  though  im-
perfectly understood,  before  the  heavenly  calling,  and  we
are  told  that  it  will  be  continued  after  the  Gospel  age.  Life  [for
those  restored  as  human  beings]  and  immortality  [the  prize
for  which  the  body  of  Christ  is  running]  have  both  been
brought  to  light  during  this  age.  (2  Tim.  i  :  10.)  Both  the
human  and  spiritual  natures  will  be  glorious  in  their  per-
fection, yet  distinct  and  separate.  No  insignificant  feature
of  the  glory  of  God's  finished  work  will  be  the  beautifiil
variety,  yet  wonderful  harmony,  of  all  things,  animate  and
inanimate — harmony  with  each  other  and  harmony  with  Go(L


THE  CHURCH  OF  GOD.

Zion,  arise,  break  forth  in  songs

Of  everlasting  joy ;
To  God  eternal  praise  belongs.

Who  doth  thy  foes  destroy.
Thou  Church  of  God,  awake !  awake !

For  light  beams  from  on  high ;
From  earth  and  dust  thy  garments  shake.

Thy  glory's  drawing  nigh.

To  raise  thee  high  above  the  earth,

God  will  his  power  employ ;
He'll  turn  thy  mourning  into  mirth.

Thy  sorrow  into  joy.
In  shining  robes  thyself  array,

Put  on  thy  garments  pure  ;
Thy  King  shall  lead  thee  in  the  way

That's  holy,  safe  and  sure."


STUDY  XI.


THE  THREE  WAYS— THE  BROAD  WAY,  THE  NARROW


Xhb  Broad  Road  to  Destruction.— The  Narrow  Way  to  Life.— What  n
Life? — The  Divine  Nature. — The  Relationship  of  the  Divine  and
Human  Natures. — The  Reward  at  the  End  op  the  Narrow  Wat. — Th»
High  Calling  Limited  to  the  Gospel  Age. — Difficulties  and  Dangers  o»
the  Narrow  Way.— The  Highway  of  Holiness.


''TiriDE  is  the  gate  of  destruction,  and  broad  that  way  leading
Vl  thither;  and  many  are  they  who  enter  through  it.  How  nar-
row  is  the  gate  of  life!  how  difficult  that  way  leading  thither!  and  how
few  are  they  who  find  it!" — Matt.  7  :  13,  14,  Diaglott  translation.

"And  a  highway  shall  be  there,  and  a  way,  and  it  shall
be  called  the  way  of  holiness;  the  unclean  shall  not  pass
over  it;  but  it  shall  be  for  those:  the  wayfaring  men,
though  fools,  shall  not  err  therein.  No  lion  shall  be  there,  nor
any  ravenous  beast  shall  go  up  thereon,  nor  be  found  there;
but  they  that  walk  there  shall  be  delivered." — Isa  35  :  8,  9.

Three  ways,  the  "broad  road,"  the  "narrow  way"  and
the  "highway,"  are  thus  brought  to  our  attention  in  the
Scriptures.


This  road  is  thus  named  because  it  is  most  easy  to  the
degenerate  human  race.  Six  thousand  years  ago,  as  a  sin-
ner condemned  to  destruction,  Adam  (and  the  race  repre-
sented in  him)  started  upon  this  road,  and  after  nine  hun-
dred and  thirty  years  he  reached  its  end — destruction.
As  years  and  centuries  have  rolled  on,  the  downward  path
has  become  more  and  more  smoothly  worn,  and  the  race  has
sped  more  and  more  rapidly  to  destrudion,  the  way  becom-
ing daily  more  glazed  and  slimed  and  slippery  with  sin.


WAY,  THE  HIGHWAY.


THE  BROAD  ROAD  TO  DESTRUCTION.


205


2o6


"yhe  Plan  of  the  Ages.


And  not  only  does  the  way  grow  more  slippery,  but  man-
kind daily  loses  the  power  of  resistance,  so  that  now  the
average  length  of  human  life  is  about  thirty-five  years.
Men  now  reach  the  end  of  the  road — destruction — nine
hundred  years  quicker  than  did  the  first  man.

For  six  thousand  years  the  race  has  steadily  pursued  the
broad,  downward  way.  Only  a  few,  comparatively,  have
tried  to  change  their  course  and  retrace  their  steps.  In
faft,  to  retrace  all  the  steps,  and  reach  the  original  per-
fe6lion,  has  been  impossible,  though  the  effort  of  some  to
do  so  has  been  commendable,  and  not  without  beneficial
results.  For  six  thousand  years  sin  and  death  have  reigned
relentlessly  over  mankind,  and  driven  them  upon  this  broad
road  to  destruction.  And  not  until  the  Gospel  age  was  a
way  of  escape  brought  to  light.  Though  in  previous  ages
rays  of  hope  were  dimly  seen  in  types  and  shadows,  which
were  joyfully  hailed  and  afted  upon  by  a  few,  yet  life  and
immortality  were  not  brought  to  light  until  the  appearing
of  our  Lord  and  Savior,  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  proclama-
tion by  the  apostles  of  the  good  tidings  of  redemption  and
remission  of  sins  and  a  consequent  resurrection  from  the
destruction.  (2  Tim.  i:  10.)  The  teachings  of  Jesus  and
the  apostles  bring  to  light  life — a  restitution  or  restoration
to  life,  for  all  mankind,  as  based  upon  the  merit  and  sacrifice
of  the  Redeemer  ;  and  they  show  this  to  be  the  significance
of  many  Old  Testament  types.  They  also  bring  to  light
immortality,  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  the  Gospel
Church.

Although  a  way  of  escape  from  the  broad  road  to  de-
struction has  been  brought  to  light  through  the  gospel,  the
great  mass  of  mankind  heeds  not  the  good  tidings,  because
depraved  by  sin  and  blinded  by  the  adversary.  Those
who  now  gratefully  accept  the  promise  of  life,  restoration
to  human  existence,  through  Christ,  have  pointed  out  to


The  Tliree  Ways.


207


them  a  new  way  which  has  been  opened  up,  by  which  con-
secrated believers  may  go  beyond  the  human  nature  and
be  changed  to  a  higher  nature — the  spiritual.  This  new
■way  "consecrated  for  us" — the  royal  priesthood  (Heb,
.to :  20) — our  Lord  called

"THE  NARROW  WAY  TO  LIFE."

Our  Master  tells  us  that  it  is  because  of  the  narrowness
of  this  way  that  the  many  prefer  to  remain  on  the  broad
Toad  to  destruftion.  "  Strait  [difficult]  is  the  gate  and
narrow  is  the  way  that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be
that  find  it."

Before  considering  this  way  and  its  dangers  and  difficul-
ties, let  us  notice  the  end  to  which  it  leads — life.  As  al-
ready seen,  life  may  be  enjoyed  on  various  planes  of  being,
higher  as  well  as  lower  than  human.  Life  is  a  broad  and
comprehensive  term,  but  here  our  Lord  uses  it  in  reference
to  that  highest  form  of  life,  pertaining  to  the  divine  nature
— ^immortality — the  prize  for  which  he  invited  us  to  run.
What  is  life?  We  not  only  realize  it  in  ourselves,  but  we
see  its  operation  in  lower  animals,  and  even  in  vegetation,
and  we  are  told  of  its  existence  in  higher  forms,  angelic
and  divine.    How  shall  we  define  a  term  so  comprehensive  ?

While  we  may  not  be  able  to  discover  the  secret  springs
of  life  in  all,  we  may  safely  assume  that  the  Divine  Being,
Jehovah,  is  the  great  fountain  of  all  life,  from  which  all
these  springs  are  supplied.  All  living  things  result  from
and  depend  on  him  for  life.  All  life,  whether  in  God  oif
in  his  creatures,  is  the  same :  it  is  an  energizing  principle,
not  a  substance.  It  is  a  principle  which  inheres  in  God,
but  which  in  his  creatures  results  from  certain  causes  which
God  has  ordained,  and  of  it  he  is  therefore  the  cause,
the  author  or  fountain.  Hence  the  creature  is  in  no  sense
a  part  or  an  offspring  of  the  Creator's  essence  or  nature.


3o8


7%e  Plan  of  the  Ages,


as  some  imagine,  but  he  is  God's  handiwork  infused  with  life.

Recognizing  the  fa6l  that  only  in  the  divine  nature  is
life  independent,  unlimited,  eximustless,  ever  continuous
and  neither  produced  nor  controlled  by  circumstances,  we
see  that  of  necessity  Jehovah  is  superior  to  those  physical
laws  and  supplies  which  he  ordained  for  the  sustenance  of
his  creatures.  It  is  this  quality,  which  pertains  only  to
the  divine  nature,  that  is  described  by  the  term  immor-
tal'ty.  As  shown  in  the  preceding  chapter,  immortal
signifies  death-proof,  consequently  disease  and  pain-proof.
In  fadl  immortality  may  be  used  as  a  synonym  for  divinity
From  the  divine,  immortal  fountain  proceed  all  life  and
tlessing,  every  good  and  perfe6l  gift,  as  from  the  sun  the
earth  receives  her  light  and  vigor.

The  sun  is  the  great  fountain  of  light  to  the  earth,  illumi-
nating all 'things,  producing  many  varieties  of  color  and
shades  of  light,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  object  upon
which  it  shines.  The  same  sunlight  shining  upon  a  dia-
mond upon  a  brick,  and  upon  various  kinds  of  glass,  produces
strikingly  different  effe6ts.  The  light  is  the  same,  but  the
objefts  upon  which  it  shines  differ  in  their  capacity  to
receive  and  to  transmit  it.  So  with  life:  it  all  flows  from  the
one  exhaustless  fountain.  The  oyster  has  life,  but  its  or-
ganism is  such  that  it  cannot  make  use  of  much  life,  just
as  the  brick  cannot  refledl  much  of  the  light  of  the  sun.
So  with  each  of  the  higher  manifestations  of  life,  in  beast,
fish  and  fowl.  Like  the  various  kinds  of  glass  under  sun-
light, so  these  various  creatures  show  forth  differently  the
various  organic  powers  they  possess,  when  life  animates
their  organisms.

The  polished  diamond  is  so  adapted  to  the  light  that  it
appears  as  though  it  possessed  it  within  itself,  and  were  itself
a  miniature  sun.  So  with  man,  one  of  the  master-pieces
of  God's  creation,  made  only  "a  little  lower  than  the  an-


The  Three  Way:,.


209


gels. ' '  He  was  so  grandly  formed  as  to  be  able  to  receive
and  retain  life  by  the  use  of  the  means  which  God  supplied,
and  never  grow  dim.  Thus  was  Adam  before  he  fell  grander
than  any  other  earthly  creature,  not  by  reason  of  any  differ-
ence in  the  life  principle  implanted,  but  because  of  a  grander
organism.  Yet,  let  us  remember  that  as  the  diamond  can
reflect  no  light  except  when  shone  upon  by  the  sun,  so  man
can  possess  and  enjoy  life  only  as  the  supply  of  life  is
continued.  Man  has  not  inherent  life :  he  is  no  more  a
fountain  of  life  than  a  diamond  is  a  fountain  of  light.  And
one  of  the  very  strongest  evidences  that  we  have  not  an
exhaustless  supply  of  life  in  ourselves,  or,  in  other  words,
that  we  are  not  immortal,  is  that  since  sin  entered,  death
has  passed  upon  all  our  race.

God  had  arranged  that  man  in  Eden  should  have  access
to  life  sustaining  trees,  and  the  paradise  in  which  he  was
placed  was  abundantly  supplied  with  numbers  of  "every
pcind  of]  tree"  good  for  food  or  for  adornment.  (Gen.  2 : 9,
16,  17.)  Among  the  trees  of  life  good  for  food  was  one
forbidden.  While  for  a  time  forbidden  to  eat  of  the  tree  of
knowledge,  he  was  permitted  to  eat  freely  of  trees  which
sustained  life  perfectly;  and  he  was  separated  from  them
only  after  transgression,  that  thereby  the  death-penalty
might  go  into  effect. — Gen.  3  :  22.

Thus  the  glory  and  beauty  of  humanity  are  seen  to  be  de-
pendent on  the  continued  supply  of  life,  just  as  the  beauty
of  the  diamond  is  dependent  on  the  continued  supply  cf
sunlight.  When  sin  deprived  humanity  of  the  right  to
life,  and  the  supply  was  withheld,  immediately  the  jewel
began  to  lose  its  brilliancy  and  beauty,  and  finally  it  is
deprived  of  its  last  vestige  in  the  tomb.  His  beauty  con-
sumes away  like  a  moth.  (Psa.  39:  11.)  As  the  diamond
loses  its  beauty  and  brilliancy  when  the  light  is  withdrawn,
so  man  loses  life  when  God  withholds  the  supplies  from  him.


2IO


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


"Yea,  man  giveth  up  the  ghost  [life]  and  where  is  he?"
(Job  14:10.)  "His  sons  come  to  honor,  and  he  knoweth
it  not ;  and  they  are  brought  low,  but  he  perceiveth  it  not
of  them."  (Verse  21.)  "For  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,
nor  knowledge,  nor  wisdom,  in  the  grave  whither  thou
goest."  (Eccl.  9:10.)  But  since  a  ransom  has  been  found,
since  the  death  penalty  has  been  provided  by  the  Redeemer,
the  jewel  is  to  have  its  beauty  restored,  and  is  again  to  re-
fle6l  perfectly  the  Creator's  image  when  the  Sun  of  Right-
eousness shall  arise  with  healing  in  his  wings.  (Mai.  4:2.)
It  is  because  of  the  sin-offering,  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  that
'•  All  that  are  in  their  graves  shall  come  forth."  There
shall  be  a  restitution  of  all  things;  first  an  opportunity  or
offer  of  restitution  to  all,  and  ultimately  the  attainment
of  human  perfedlion  by  all  who  will  obey  the  Redeemer.

This,  however,  is  not  the  reward  to  which  Jesus  refers
as  the  end  of  the  narrow  way.  From  other  Scriptures  we
learn  that  the  reward  promised  to  those  who  walk  the  nar-
row way  is  the  "  divine  nature" — life  inherent,  life  in  that
superlative  degree  which  only  the  divine  nature  can  possess
— immortality.  What  a  hope !  Dare  we  aspire  to  such  a
height  of  glory?  Surely  not  without  positive  and  explicit
invitation  could  any  rightfully  thus  aspire.

From  I  Tim.  6:  14-16  we  learn  that  the  immortal  or
divine  nature  was  originally  the  possession  of  divinity  only.
We  read :  "He  [Jesus]  in  his  time  [the  Millennial  age]
will  show  who  is  the  blessed  and  only  potentate — the  King
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  who  only  hath  immortality,
dwelling  in  the  light  which  no  man  can  approach  unto,
whom  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can  see."  All  other  beings,
angels,  men,  beasts,  birds,  fish,  etc.,  are  but  vessels,  holding
each  its  measure  of  life,  and  all  differing  in  character,
capacity  and  quality  according  to  the  organism  which  it
has  pleased  the  Creator  to  provide  for  each.


The  Three  Ways.


211


Further,  we  learn  that  Jehovah,  who  alone  possessed  im-
mortality originally,  has  highly  exalted  his  Son,  our  Lord
Jesus,  to  the  same  divine,  immortal  nature;  hence  he  is
now  the  express  image  of  the  Father's  person.  (Heb.  i  :  3.)
So  we  read,  "As  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself  [God's
definition  of  "immortality" — life  in  himself- — not  drawn
from  other  sources,  nor  dependent  on  circumstances,  but
independent,  inherent  life],  so  hath  he  given  to  the  Son
to  have  life  in  himself."  (John  5  :  26.)  Since  the  resur-
rection of  the  Lord  Jesus,  then,  two  beings  are  immortal ;
and,  amazing  grace !  the  same  offer  is  made  to  the  Bride
of  the  Lamb,  being  selected  during  the  Gospel  age.  Yet
not  all  of  the  great  company  who  are  nominally  of  the
Church  will  receive  this  great  prize,  but  only  that  "little
flock"  of  overcomers  whoso  run  as  to  obtain  it;  who  fol-
low closely  in  the  Master's  footsteps;  who,  like  him,  walk
the  narrow  way  of  sacrifice,  even  unto  death.  These,  when
born  from  the  dead  in  the  resurrection,  will  have  the  divine
nature  and  form.  This  immortality,  the  independent,  self-
existent,  divine  nature,  is  the  life  to  which  the  narrow
way  leads.

This  class  is  not  to  be  raised  from  the  tomb  human  beings ;
for  we  are  assured  by  th^  Apostle  that,  though  sown  in  the
tomb  natural  bodies,  they  will  be  raised  spiritual  bodies.
These  all  shall  be  "changed,"  and  even  as  they  once  bore
the  image  of  the  earthly,  human  nature,  they  shall  bear
the  image  of  the  heavenly.  But  "it  doth  not  yet  appear
what  we  shall  be" — what  a  spiritual  body  is;  but  "  we  know
that  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him,^^  and  share
in  "the  glory  to  be  revealed." — i  John  3:2;  Col.  i :  27;
2  Cor.  4:  17;  John  17:  22;  i  Pet.  5  :  10;  2  Thes.  2:  14.

Not  only  is  this  high  calling  to  a  change  of  nature  con-
fined exclusively  to  the  Gospel  age,  but  it  is  the  only  offer
of  this  age.    Hence  our  Lord's  words  quoted  at  the  begin-


213


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ning  of  this  chapter  include  on  the  broad  road  to  destruc-
tion all  who  are  not  on  the  way  to  the  only  prize  now
offered.  All  others  are  still  on  the  broad  road — these  only
have  as  yet  escaped  the  condemnation  that  is  on  the  world.
This,  the  only  way  of  life  now  open,  because  of  its  diffi-
culty, finds  few  who  care  to  walk  in  it.  The  masses  of  man-
kind in  their  weakness  prefer  the  broad,  easy  way  of  self-
gratification.

The  narrow  way,  while  it  ends  in  life,  in  immortality,
might  be  called  a  way  of  death,  since  its  prize  is  gained
through  the  sacrifice  of  the  human  nature  even  unto  death.
It  is  the  narrow  way  of  death  to  life.  Being  reckoned  free
from  the  Adamic  guilt  and  the  death  penalty,  the  consecrated
voluntarily  surrender  or  sacrifice  those  human  rights,  reck-
oned theirs,  which  in  due  time  they,  with  the  world  in
general,  would  have  actually  received.  As  "the  man  Christ
Jesus"  laid  down  or  sacrificed  his  life  for  the  world,  so
these  become  joint-sacrificers  with  him.  Not  that  his  sacri-
fice was  insufficient  and  that  others  were  needed;  but  while
his  is  all-sufficient,  these  are  permitted  to  serve  and  to  suf-
fer with  him  in  order  to  become  his  bride  and  joint-heir.
So,  then,  while  the  world  is  under  condemnation  to  death,
and  is  dying  Adam,  this  "little  flock,"  through  the
process  of  faith  reckonings  and  sacrifice,  already  described,
are  said  to  die  with  Christ.  They  sacrifice  and  die  with
him  as  human  beings,  in  order  to  become  partakers  of  the
divine  nature  and  glories  with  him ;  for  we  believe  that  if
we  be  dead  with  him,  we  shall  also  live  with  him.  If  we
suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  be  glorified  together. — Rom.
8  :  17  and  2  Tim.  2:11,  12.

In  the  beginning  of  the  Millennial  age,  those  who  now
walk  the  narrow  way  will  have  gained  the  great  prize  for
which  they  ran,  immortality;  and  being  thus  clothed  with
the  divine  nature  and  power,  they  will  be  prepared  for


The  Three  Ways.


213


the  great  work  of  restoring  and  blessing  the  world  during
that  age.  With  the  end  of  the  Gospel  age,  the  narrow
way  to  immortality  will  close,  because  the  select  "little
flock  "  that  it  was  designed  to  test  and  prove  will  have  been
completed.  "Now  is  the  accepted  [Greek,  dektos,  accept-
ableor  receivable]  time  " — the  time  in  which sacrificers,  com-
ing in  the  merit  of  Jesus  and  becoming  dead  with  him,
are  acceptable  to  God — a  sacrifice  of  sweet  odor.  Death,
as  the  Adamic  penalty,  will  not  be  permitted  forever;  it
will  be  abolished  during  the  Millennial  age;  as  a  sacrifice
it  will  be  acceptable  and  rewarded  only  during  the  Gospel  age.

It  is  only  as  "■new  creatures'"  that  the  saints  of  this
age  are  on  the  way  to  life ;  and  only  as  human  beings  are
we  consecrated  to  destruction,  as  sacrifices.  If,  as  human
creatures,  we  be  dead  with  Christ,  as  new,  spiritual  beings,
we  shall  live  with  him.  (Rom.  6:8.)  The  mind  of  God
in  us,  the  transformed  mind,  is  the  germ  of  the  new  nature.

The  new  life  would  be  easily  choked ;  and  Paul  assures
us  that  when  begotten  of  the  spirit  through  the  truth,  if
we  live  after  the  flesh,  we  shall  die  (lose  our  life),  but  if
we,  through  the  spirit,  do  mortify  (put  to  death)  the  deeds
of  the  body  (the  disposition  of  the  human  nature),  we  (as
new  creatures)  shall  live ;  for  the  sons  of  God  are  those  led
by  the  spirit  of  God.  (Rom.  8  :  13,  14.)  This  is  a  thought
of  utmost  importance  to  all  the  consecrated;  for  if  we
have  covenanted  with  God  to  sacrifice  the  human  nature,
and  if  that  sacrifice  was  accepted  by  him,  it  is  useless  to
attempt  to  take  it  back.  The  human  is  reckoned  of  God
as  dead  now,  and  must  actually  die,  never  again  to  be
restored.  All  that  can  be  gained,  then,  by  turning  back
to  live  after  the  flesh,  is  a  little  human  gratification  at  the
expense  of  the  new  spiritual  nature.

There  are,  however,  many  consecrated  ones  desirous  of
the  prize,  and  who  have  been  begotten  of  the  spirit,  who


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


are  partially  overcome  by  the  allurements  of  the  world,
the  desires  of  the  flesh,  or  the  arts  of  the  devil.  They
partially  lose  sight  of  the  prize  set  before  us,  and  try  to
walk  upon  a  middle  road — to  keep  the  favor  of  God
and  the  favor  of  the  world,  forgetting  that  "  the  friendship
of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God"  (James  4:  4),  and  that
the  instru6lions  to  those  running  the  race  for  the  prize  are.
Love  not  the  world,  and,  Seek  not  honor  one  of  another,
but  that  honor  which  cometh  from  God  only. — i  John
2  :  15;  John  5  :  44.

These,  who  love  the  present  world,  but  who  have  not
wholly  forsaken  the  Lord  and  despised  their  covenant,
receive  a  scourging  and  purifying  by  the  fire  of  affli6tion.
As  the  Apostle  expresses  it,  they  are  delivered  over  to  Satan
for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  (the  newly
begotten  nature)  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus,
(i  Cor.  5:5.)  And  if  rightly  exercised  by  the  discipline,
they  will  finally  be  received  into  the  spiritual  condition.
They  will  have  everlasting,  spiritual  life  as  angels  have  it,  but
will  lose  the  prize  of  immortality.  They  will  serve  God
in  his  temple,  and  stand  before  the  throne,  having  palms  in
their  hands  (Rev.  7  :  9-17);  but  though  that  will  be  glori-
ous, it  will  not  be  so  glorious  as  the  position  of  the  "little
flock"  of  overcomers,  who  will  be  kings  and  priests  unto
God,  seated  with  Jesus  in  the  throne  as  his  bride  and  joint-
heir,  and  with  him  crowned  with  immortality.

Ours  is  a  rugged,  steep,  narrow  way,  and  were  it  not  that
strength  is  furnished  for  each  successive  step  of  the  jour-
ney, we  could  never  reach  the  goal.  But  our  Captain's
word  is  encouraging:  Be  of  good  cheer;  I  have  overcome ;
my  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,  for  my  strength  is  made  per-
fect in  weakness.  (John  16  :  33  ;  2  Cor.  12:9.)  The  diffi-
culties of  this  way  are  to  aCl  as  a  separating  principle  to
sandtify  and  refine  a  ' '  peculiar  people  "  to  be  "  heirs  of  God


The  Three  Ways.


and  joint-heirs  with  Jesus  Christ. ' '  In  view  of  these  things,
let  us  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  ob-
tain mercy  and  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need,  while  we
fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  and  lay  hold  on  "the  crown  of
glory" — immortalityj  the  divine  nature. — 2  Tim.  4:8;
I  Peter  5  :  4.

THE  HIGHWAY  OF  HOLINESS.

While  the  special  hope  of  the  Gospel  age  is  so  surpass-
ingly glorious,  and  the  way  to  it  is  correspondingly  difficult
— narrow,  hedged  in  by  hardships  and  dangers  at  every
step — so  that  few  find  it,  and  obtain  the  great  prize  at  its
end,  the  new  order  of  things  in  the  age  to  come  is  to  be
entirely  different.  As  a  different  hope  is  held  out,  so  also
a  different  way  leads  to  it.  The  way  to  immortality  has
been  a  way  which  required  the  sacrifice  of  the  otherwise
lawful  and  proper  hopes,  ambitions  and  desires — the  sacri-
fice forever  of  the  human  nature.  But  the  way  to  human
perfection,  to  restitution,  the  hope  of  the  world,  requires
only  the  putting  away  of  sin  :  not  the  sacrifice  of  human
rights  and  privileges,  but  their  proper  enjoyment.  It  will
lead  to  personal  purification  and  restoration  to  the  image  of
God  as  enjoyed  by  Adam  before  sin  entered  the  world.

The  way  back  to  adlual  human  perfection  is  to  be  made
very  plain  and  easy  ;  so  plain  that  none  may  mistake  the
way;  so  plain  that  "the  wayfaring  man,  and  those  unac-
quainted therewith,  shall  not  go  astray"  (Isa.  35:8.—
Leesery,  so  plain  that  none  will  need  to  teach  his  neighbor,
saying,  Know  the  Lord,  for  all  shall  know  the  Lord  from
the  least  unto  the  greatest.  (Jer.  31  :  34.)  Instead  of  be-
ing a  narrow  way  that  few  can  find,  it  is  termed  "a  high-
way," a  public  roadway — not  a  narrow,  steep,  rugged,  diffi-
cult, hedged  by-way,  but  a  way  specially  prepared  for  easy
travel — specially  arranged  for  the  convenience  and  comfort


2l6


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


of  the  travelers.  Verses  8  and  9  show  that  it  is  a  public
road,  open  to  all  the  redeemed — every  man.  Every  man
for  whom  Christ  died,  who  will  recognize  and  avail  himself
of  the  opportunities  and  blessings  purchased  by  the  pre-
cious blood,  may  go  up  on  this  Highway  of  Holiness  to  the
grand  goal  of  perfedt  restitution  to  human  perfedlion  and
everlasting  life.

Nor  will  these  be  reckoned  justified  and  granted  a  reck-
oned standing  of  holiness  and  perfection  in  the  sight  of
God;  when  started  upon  this  highway  of  holiness  they
may  go  up  thereon  to  aHual  perfe6lion,  as  a  result  of
endeavor  and  obedience,  to  which  all  things  will  be  made
favorable  by  their  Redeemer,  then  reigning  in  power.
Each  individual  will,  according  to  his  necessities,  be  aided
by  the  wise  and  perfedt  administration  of  the  new  kingdom.
This,  as  will  occur  to  some,  is  the  legitimate  result  of  the
ransom.  Since  our  Lord,  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  gave  him-
self a  ransom  for  all,  and  desires  all  to  come  to  a  knowledge  of
the  truth,  and  thereby  to  aftual  perfedtion,  why  does  he  not
at  once  make  a  good  and  broad  highway  for  all?  Why  does
he  not  remove  the  obstru6lions,  the  stumbling-stones,  the
pitfalls  and  snares?  Why  not  help  the  sinner  back  to  full
harmony  with  God,  instead  of  making  the  way  narrow,
rugged,  thorny,  hard  to  find,  and  still  harder  to  walk  in?
A  failure  rightly  to  divide  the  Word  of  truth,  and  to  see
that  the  present  narrow  way  leads  to  the  special  prize,  and
is  for  the  trial  and  seledlion  of  a  little  flock  of  joint-heirs,
the  body  of  Christ,  which,  when  seleCted  and  exalted  with
their  Head,  shall  bless  all  nations,  has  led  some  to  very  con-
fused ideas  on  thesubje6l.  Failing  to  see  God's  plan,  many
try  to  preach  a  highway  of  holiness,  an  easy  way  to  life,
in  the  present  age,  when  no  such  way  exists,  and  they  con-
fuse and  compromise  the  matter  to  fit  the  fa<5ts  and  the
Scriptures  with  their  mistaken  theories.    On  the  highway


The  TJiree  Ways.


217


soon  to  be  opened,  only  sinful  things  will  be  prohibited,
while  those  who  travel  the  narrow  way  must  deny  themselves
and  sacrifice  many  things  not  sinful,  as  well  as  war  contin-
ually against  besetting  sins.  This  is  a  pathway  of  sacrifice,
as  that  of  the  coming  age  is  to  be  a  highway  of  righteousness.

Of  that  highway  it  is  significantly  stated  in  symbolic
language  that  "No  lion  shall  be  there,  nor  any  ravenous
beast  shall  go  up  thereon;  it  shall  not  be  found  there."
(Isa.  35  :  9.)  How  many  frightful  lions  are  now  in  the  way  of
those  who  would  be  glad  to  forsake  sinful  ways,  and  to  pursue
righteousness !  There  is  the  lion  of  a  degenerate  publicsenti-
ment,  which  deters  many  from  venturing  to  obey  the  dic-
tates of  conscience  in  matters  of  every-day  life — dress,  home
and  business  arrangements,  etc.  The  lion  of  temptation
to  strong  drink  hinders  thousands  who  would  be  glad  to
see  it  removed.  Prohibitionists  and  temperance  workers
now  find  a  herculean  task  on  their  hands,  which  only  the
authority  and  power  of  the  next  age  can  remove ;  and  the
same  may  be  said  of  other  worthy  efforts  at  moral  reform.
"Nor  shall  any  ravenous  beast  go  up  thereon."  No  giant
corporations,  organized  to  advance  selfish,  individual  inter-
ests  at  the  expense  of  the  general  good,  will  be  tolerated.
"  They  shall  not  hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain  "
(kingdom)  saith  the  Lord.  (Isa.  11:9.)  Though  there  v.i  11
be  difficulties  to  labor  against  in  overcoming  propensities
to  evil,  etc. ,  yet,  in  comparison  with  the  narrow  way  of  this
age,  that  will  be  an  easy  way.  The  stones  (stumbling-
stones)  shall  all  be  gathered  out,  and  the  standard  of  truth
shall  be  lifted  up  for  the  people.  (Isa.  62:10.)  Ignorance
and  superstition  will  be  things  of  the  past,  and  righteous-
ness will  receive  its  due  reward,  while  to  evil  will  be  meted
out  its  just  deserts.  (Mai.  3:  15,  18.)  By  wholesome  chas-
tisements, fitting  encouragements  and  plain  instrudlions,
as  returned  prodigals,  mankind  will  be  trained  and  disci-


2l8


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


plined  up  to  the  grand  perfedlion  from  which  father  Adam
fell.  Thus  "  the  ransomed  of  the  Lord  shall  return
[from  destru6tion,  by  the  grand  highway  of  hohness]
.  .  .  with  songs  and  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads ;  they
shall  obtain  joy  and  gladness,  and  sorrow  and  sighing  shall
flee  away."  (Isa.  35  :  lo.)  Our  Lord  referred  to  but  two  of
these  ways,  because  the  third  was  not  yet  due  to  be  opened
up — ^just  as  when  announcing  the  good  tidings  he  said,
"This  Scripture  is  fulfilled  in  your  ears,"  but  omitted  men-
tioning the  "day  of  vengeance,"  because  it  was  not  then
due.  (Compare  Luke  4:19  and  Isa.  61 :  2.)  (Now,  however,
as  the  narrow  way  draws  to  a  close,  the  grand  highway  of
righteousness  begins  to  be  seen  more  and  more  distindlly,
in  the  light  of  the  dawning  day.

Thus  we  have  found  a  "Broad  Road,"  on  which  at  pres-
ent the  masses  of  mankind  travel,  deluded  by  the  "  prince
of  this  world,"  and  led  by  perverted  tastes.  We  have  found
that  it  was  opened  up  and  that  our  race  was  started  in  its  head-
long course  upon  it  by  "one  man's  disobedience."  We  have
found  that  the  "Highway  of  Holiness"  is  to  be  opened  up
by  our  Lord,  who  gave  himself  a  ransom  for  all  and  re-
deems all  from  the  destruction  to  which  the  "Broad
Road"  leads,  and  that  it  will,  in  due  time,  be  accessible
and  easy  for  all  the  redeemed  ones  whom  he  bought  with  his
own  precious  blood.  We  have  found,  furthermore,  that  the
present  "Narrow  Way,"  opened  up  by  the  merit  of  the
same  precious  blood,  is  a  special  way  leading  to  a  special
prize,  and  is  made  specially  narrow  and  difficult  as  a  test  and
discipline  for  those  now  being  seledled  to  be  made  partak-
ers of  the  divirie  nature  and  joint-heirs  with  our  Lord  Jesus
in  the  Kingdom  of  glory  soon  to  be  revealed  for  the  bless-
ing of  all.  Such  as  have  this  hope — who  see  this  prize —
may  count  all  other  hopes  as  but  loss  and  dross  in  com-
parison.— Phil.  3:8-15.


STUDY  XII.

EStPLANATION  OF  CHART  REPRESENTING  THE  PLAN
OF  THE  AGES.


TrbAgbs. — Thb  Marvhsts. — Planes  of  Actual  and  Rhckokkd  Standins.
Thb  Course  op  our  Lord  Jesus.— Thh  Course  of  His  Followers.— Thrbb
Classes  in  the  Nominal  Church. — Separation  in  the  Harvest. — The
Anointed  Class  Glorified. — The  Great  Tribulation  Class. — Thb  Tarbs
Burned. — Thb  World  Blessed. — The  Outcome  Glorious.


S  the  frontispiece  of  this  volume  we  give  a  chart  repre-


^  senting  the  plan  of  God  for  the  world's  salvation.  By
it  we  have  sought  to  aid  the  mind,  through  the  eye,  in
understanding  something  of  the  progressive  character  of
God's  plan,  and  the  progressive  steps  which  must  be  taken
by  all  who  ever  attain  the  complete  ' '  change ' '  from  the
human  to  the  divine  nature.

First,  we  have  an  outline  of  the  three  great  dispensa-
tions, j4,  B,  C — the  first  of  these,  A,  lasting  from  man's  crea-
tion to  the  flood ;  the  second,  B,  from  the  flood  to  the  com-
mencement of  the  Millennial  reign  of  Christ,  at  his  sec-
ond advent;  and  the  third,  or  "Dispensation  of  the  Ful-
ness of  Times,"  C,  lasting  from  the  beginning  of  Christ's
reign  for  "ages  to  come."  (Eph.  i  :  lo;  2:7.)  These
three  great  dispensations  are  frequently  referred  to  in  the
Scriptures:  A  is  called  "the  world  that  was;"  B  by  our
Lord  Jesus  is  called  "this  world,"  by  Paul  "the  present
evil  world,"  by  Peter  "  the  world  that  now  is."  C  is  called
"the  world  to  come,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness,"  in
contrast  with  the  present  evil  world.  Now  evil  rules  and  the
righteous  sufi"er,  while  in  the  world  to  come  this  order  is
to  be  reversed :  righteousness  will  rule  and  evil-doers  will
suffer,  and  finally  ali  evil  will  be  destroyed.


219


220


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


In  each  ot  these  three  great  dispensations,  epochs  or
"worlds  "  God's  plan  with  reference  to  men  has  a  distinct
and  separate  outline;  yet  each  is  but  a  part  of  the  one
great  plan  which,  when  complete,  will  exhibit  the  divine
wisdom — though  these  parts  considered  separately  fail  to
show  their  deep  design.  Since  the  first  "world"  ("heav-
ens and  earth,"  or  that  order  of  things)  passed  away  at
the  time  of  the  flood,  it  follows  that  it  must  have  been  a
different  order  from  "this  present  evil  world"  of  which
our  Lord  said  Satan  is  the  prince;  hence  the  prince  of
this  present  evil  world  was  not  the  prince  of  the  world
that  was  before  the  flood,  although  he  was  not  without  in-
fluence then.  Several  scriptures  throw  light  on  God's  deal-
ings during  that  time,  and  thus  give  a  clear  insight  into
his  plan  as  a  whole.  The  thought  suggested  by  these  is
that  the  first  "world,"  or  the  dispensation  before  the  flood,
was  under  the  supervision  and  special  ministration  of  an-
gels, who  were  permitted  to  try  what  they  could  do  to
recover  the  fallen  and  degenerate  race.  Doubtless,  with
God's  permission,  they  were  anxious  to  try  it;  for  theii
interest  was  manifested  in  the  singing  and  shouting  foi
joy  over  the  works  of  creation.  (Job.  38:  7.)  That  angels
were  the  permitted  though  unsuccessful  rulers  of  that  first
epoch  is  not  only  indicated  by  all  references  to  that  pe-
riod, but  it  may  reasonably  be  inferred  from  the  Apostle's
remark  when,  contrasting  the  present  dispensation  with
the  past  and  the  future,  he  says  (Heb.  2:5),  "Unto  the
angels  hath  he  not  put  in  subjection  the  world  to  come."
No ;  that  world  is  to  be  under  the  control  of  the  Lord  Je-
sus and  his  joint-heirs ;  and  hence  it  will  not  only  be  a
more  righteous  administration  than  that  of  "the  present
evil  world,"  but  it  will  also  be  more  successful  than  that
of  the  first  world  or  dispensation  under  the  "ministration
of  angels,"  whose  inability  to  reclaim  the  race  is  manifest


Plan  of  the  Ages.


22X


from  the  fact  that  man's  wickedness  became  so  great  that
God  in  his  wrath  and  righteous  indignation  destroyed  with
a  flood  the  whole  of  the  race  then  living  with  the  excep-
tion of  eight  persons. — Gen.  7  :  13.

During  the  "present  evil  world,"  man  is  permitted  to
try  governing  himself;  but  by  reason  of  the  fall  he  is
under  the  control  of  Satan,  the  "prince  of  this  world,"
against  whose  secret  machinations  and  intrigues  he  has  vain-
ly striven  in  his  efforts  at  self-government  during  the  long
period  from  the  flood  to  the  present  time.  This  attempted
reign  of  man  under  Satan  is  to  end  in  the  greatest  time  of
trouble  the  world  has  ever  known.  And  thus  will  have
been  proven  the  futility,  not  only  of  angelic  power  to  save
the  race,  but  also  of  man's  own  efforts  to  reach  satisfa6lory
conditions.

The  second  of  these  great  dispensations,  B,  is  composed
of  three  distinct  ages,  each  of  which,  as  a  progressive  step,
leads  upward  and  onward  in  God's  plan.

Age  D  was  the  one  during  which  God's  special  dealings
were  with  such  patriarchs  as  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob.

Age  E  is  the  Jewish  Age,  or  the  period  following  the
death  of  Jacob,  during  which  all  of  his  posterity  were  treat-
ed by  God  as  his  special  charge — "his  people."  To  these
he  showed  special  favors,  and  declared,  "  You  only  have  I
known  (recognized  with  favor)  of  all  the  families  of  the
earth."  (Amos  3:2.)  These,  as  a  nation,  were  typical  of
the  Christian  Church,  the  "holy  nation,  the  peculiar  peo-
ple. ' '  The  promises  made  to  them  were  typical  of  the  ' '  bet-
ter promises"  made  to  us.  Their  journey  through  the
wilderness  to  the  land  of  promise  was  typical  of  our  jour-
ney through  the  wilderness  of  sin  to  the  b^avenly  Canaan.
Their  sacrifices  justified  them  typically,  not  really ;  for  the
blood  of  bulls  and  goats  can  never  take  away  sin.  (Heb.
10:  4,)    But  in  the  Gospel  Age,      we  have  the  "better


222


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


sacrifices,"  which  do  make  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the
whole  world.  We  have  the  "royal  priesthood,"  composed
of  all  those  who  offer  themselves  to  God  "  living  sacrifices,"
holy  and  acceptable,  through  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  Chief
or  "  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  "  (Heb.  3:1.)  In  the
Gospel  age  we  find  the  realities  of  which  the  Jewish  age
and  its  services  and  ordinances  were  shadows. — Heb.  10:  i.

The  Gospel  age,  F,  is  the  period  during  which  the  body
of  Christ  is  called  out  of  the  world,  ar\d  shown  by  faith
the  crown  of  life,  and  the  exceeding  great  and  precious
promises  whereby  (by  obedience  to  the  call  and  its  require-
ments) they  may  become  partakers  of  the  divine  nature.
(2  Pet.  1:4.)  Evil  is  still  permitted  to  reign  over  or  rule
the  world,  in  order  that  by  contact  with  it  these  may  be
tried  to  see  whether  they  are  willing  to  give  up  the  human
nature  with  its  privileges  and  blessings,  a  living  sacrifice,
being  made  conformable  to  Jesus'  death,  that  they  may  be
accounted  worthy  to  be  in  his  likeness  in  the  resurrection.
— Psa.  17  :  15.

The  third  great  dispensation,  C,  is  to  be  composed  of
many  ages — "  The  Ages  to  Come."  The  first  of  these,  the
Millennial  age,  G,  is  the  only  one  concerning  which  we
have  any  definite  information.  It  is  the  thousand  years
during  which  Christ  will  reign  over  and  thereby  bless
all  the  families  of  the  earth,  accomplishing  the  "restitu-
tion of  all  things  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  holy
prophets."  (Acts  3:19-21.)  During  that  age,  sin  and
death  shall  be  forever  blotted  out;  for  "Christ  must  reign
till  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  .  .  .  The  last
enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death" — Adamic  death,
(i  Cor.  15  :  25,  26.)  That  will  be  the  great  reconstruction
period.  Associated  with  Christ  Jesus  in  that  reign  will  be
the  Church,  his  bride,  his  body,  even  as  he  promised,  say-
ing, "To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with


Plan  of  ihe  Ages.


223


me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame,  and  am  set
down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne." — Rev.  3:21.

The  "Ages  to  Come,"  H,  following  the  great  reconstruc-
tion period,  are  to  be  ages  of  perfection,  blessedness  and
happiness,  regarding  the  work  of  which,  the  Scriptures  are
silent.  It  is  enough  to  know,  at  this  distance,  that  they
will  be  ages  of  glory  and  blessing  under  divine  favor.

Each  of  these  dispensations  has  its  distin<5t  seasons  for
the  beginning  and  development  of  its  work,  and  each  ends
with  a  harvest  manifesting  its  fruits.  The  harvest  at  the
close  of  the  Jewish  age  was  a  period  of  forty  years,  lasting
from  the  beginning  of  Jesus'  ministry,  when  he  was  anoint-
ed of  God  by  the  Spirit  (Acts  10:37,  38),  A.  D.  29,  until
the  destru6lion  of  Jerusalem,  A.  D.  70.  In  this  harvest
the  Jewish  age  ended  and  the  Gospel  age  began.  There
was  a  lapping  of  these  dispensations,  as  represented  in  the
diagram.

The  Jewish  age  ended  in  a  measure  when,  at  the  end  of
his  three  and  one-half  years'  ministry,  the  Lord  rejected  that
nation,  saying,  "Your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate."
(Matt.  23  :  38.)  Yet  there  was  favor  shown  them  for  three
and  one-half  years  after  this,  by  the  confining  to  them  of
the  Gospel  call,  in  harmony  with  the  prophet's  declaration
(Dan.  9  :  24-27)  regarding  seventy  weeks  (of  years)  of  fa-
vor toward  them,  in  the  midst  of  the  last  of  which,  Mes-
siah should  be  cut  off[die],  but  not  for  himself,  "Christ
died  [not  for  himself,  but]  for  our  sins,"  and  thus  caused
the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease,  in  the  midst  of  the
week — three  and  one-half  years  before  the  expiration  of  the
seventy  covenant  weeks  of  Jewish  favor.  When  the  true
sacrifice  had  been  made,  of  course  the  typical  ones  could
no  longer  be  recognized  by  Jehovah.

There  was,  then,  a  fuller  sense  in  which  that  Jewish  age
closed  with  the  end  of  the  seventieth  week,  or  three  and


224  The  Plan  of  the  Ages.

one-half  years  after  the  cross — after  which  tne  gospel  was
preached  to  the  Gentiles  also,  beginning  with  Cornelius.
(Adts  lo  :  45.)  This  ended  their  age  so  far  as  God's  favor
toward  and  recognition  of  the  Jewish  church  was  con-
cerned ;  their  national  existence  terminated  in  the  great
time  of  trouble  which  followed.

In  that  period  of  the  Jewish  harvest  the  Gospel  age  had
its  beginning.  The  design  of  this  age  is  the  call,  devel-
opment and  trial  of  "the  Christ  of  God " — Head  and  body.
This  is  the  Spirit  dispensation ;  hence,  it  is  proper  to  say
that  the  Gospel  age  began  with  the  anointing  of  Jesus  "  with
the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  power"  (Adts  10  38 ;  Luke  3 :  22  ;
4:  I,  18)  at  the  time  of  his  baptism.  In  relation  to  the
Church,  his  body,  it  commenced  three  and  a  half  years  later.

A  "harvest"  constitutes  the  closing  period  of  the  Gos-
pel age  also,  during  which  there  is  again  a  lapping  of  two
ages — the  Gospel  age  ending,  and  the  Restitution  or  Mil-
lennial age  beginning.  The  Gospel  age  closes  by  stages,
as  did  its  pattern  or  "shadow,"  the  Jewish  age.  As  there
the  first  seven  years  of  the  harvest  were  devoted  in  a  special
sense  to  a  work  in  and  for  Israel  after  the  flesh,  and  were
years  of  favor,  so  here  we  find  a  similar  seven  years  indicated
as  having  the  same  bearing  upon  the  Gospel  Church,  to  be
followed  by  a  period  of  trouble  ("fire")  upon  the  world,
as  a  punishment  for  wickedness,  and  as  a  preparation  for  the
reign  of  righteousness — of  which  more  again.

THE  PATH  TO  GLORY.

K,  L,  M,  N,  P,  R,  each  represents  a  different  plane.  N
is  the  plane  of  perfect  human  nature.  Adam  was  on  this
plane  before  he  sinned ;  but  from  the  moment  of  disobedi-
ence he  fell  to  the  depraved  or  sinful  plane,  P,  on  which
all  his  posterity  are  born.  This  corresponds  to  the  "  Broad
Way  "  which  leads  to  destrudlion.  P  represents  the  plane
of  typical  justification,  reckoned  as  affeded  by  the  sacri*


Plan  of  the  Ages.


fices  of  the  Law.  It  was  not  adlual  perfecSlion,  for  "  the
Law  made  nothing  perfe6t." — Heb.  7  :  19.

N  represents  not  only  the  plane  of  human  perfedlion,  aa
once  occupied  by  the  perfedl  man,  Adam,  but  also  the
standing  of  all  justified  persons.  "  Christ  died  for  our  sins,
according  to  the  Scriptures,"  and  in  consequence  all  be-
lievers in  Christ — all  who  accept  of  his  perfedl  and  finished
work  as  their  justifier — are,  through  faith,  reckoned  of  God
as  justified,  as  though  perfedl  men,  as  though  they  had  never
been  sinners.  In  God's  sight,  then,  all  who  accept  of  Christ
as  their  Redeemer  are  reckonedly  on  the  plane  of  human
perfetSlion,  N.  This  is  the  only  standpoint  from  which  man
may  approach  God,  or  have  any  communion  with  him.  All
on  this  plane  God  calls  sons — human  sons.  Adam  was  thus
a  son  (Luke  3  :  38),  and  had  communion  before  he  became
disobedient.  All  who  accept  of  our  Lord  Jesus'  finished
ransom  work  are  counted  or  reckoned  as  restored  to  primitive
purity ;  and  in  consequence  they  have  fellowship  or  com-
munion with  God.

During  the  Gospel  age  God  has  made  a  special  offer  to
justified  human  beings,  telling  them  that  on  certain  con-
ditions they  may  experience  a  change  of  nature,  that  they
may  cease  to  be  earthly,  human  beings,  and  become  heavenly,
spiritual  beings,  like  Christ,  their  Redeemer.  Some  be-
lievers— ^justified  persons— are  satisfied  with  what  joy  and
peace  they  have  through  believing  in  the  forgiveness  of
their  sins,  and  so  do  not  heed  the  voice  which  calls  them
to  come  up  higher.  Others,  moved  by  the  love  of  God  as
shown  in  their  ransom  from  sin,  and  feeling  that  they  are
not  their  own,  having  been  bought  with  a  price,  say,  "  Lord,
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?• '  Such  have  the  Lord's
answer  through  Paul,  who  says,  "I  beseech  you,  brethren,
by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living
sacrifice t  holy,  acceptable  to  God,  your  reasonable  service."


33U


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


(Rom.  12  :  I.)  What  does  the  Apostle  mean  by  thus  urging
the  presentation  of  ourselves  as  living  sacrifices  ?  He  means
that  we  should  consecrate  to  God's  service  every  power  and
talent  we  possess,  that  henceforth  we  may  live  not  for  self,
nor  for  friends,  nor  for  family,  nor  for  the  world,  nor  for
anything  else  but  for,  and  in  the  obedient  service  of,  him  who
bought  us  with  his  own  precious  blood.

But  since  God  would  not  accept  of  blemished  or  imper-
fefl  typical  sacrifices,  and  since  we  all  became  sinners
through  Adam,  can  we  be  acceptable  sacrifices  ?  Paul  shows
that  it  is  only  because  we  are  holy  that  we  are  acceptable  sac-
rifices. We  are  not  holy  like  Jesus,  who  knew  no  sin,  for
we  are  of  the  condemned  race ;  nor  yet  because  we  have
entirely  succeeded  in  reaching  perfedlion  of  condudl,  for
we  reckon  not  to  have  attained  that  perfedlion  to  which  we
are  called ;  but  we  have  this  treasure  in  (fragile  and  leaky)
earthen  vessels,  that  the  glory  of  our  ultimate  perfe6tion
may  be  seen  to  be  of  God's  favor,  and  not  of  our  own
ability.  But  our  holiness,  and  our  acceptableness  to  God
as  sacrifices,  come  from  the  fadl  that  God  has  justified  us
freely  from  all  sin,  through  our  faith  in  Christ's  sacrifice  on
our  behalf.

As  many  as  appreciate  and  obey  this  call  rejoice  to  be
accounted  worthy  to  suffer  reproach  for  the  name  of  Christ,
and  look  not  at  the  things  that  are  seen,  but  at  the  things
that  are  not  seen — at  the  "crown  of  life" — "the  prize
of  our  high-calling  in  Christ  Jesus"  and  "the  glory  that
shall  be  revealed  in  us."  These,  from  the  moment  of
consecration  to  God,  are  no  longer  reckoned  as  men,  but
as  having  been  begotten  of  God  through  the  word  of
truth — no  longer  human,  but  thenceforth  spiritual  chil-
dren. They  are  now  one  step  nearer  the  prize  than  when
they  first  believed.  But  their  spiritual  being  is  yet  imper-
fe<Sl :  they  are  only  begotten,  not  yet  l)or?i  of  the  spirit.


Plan  of  the  Ages.


227


They  are  embryo  spiritual  children,  on  plane  the  plane
of  spirit  begetting.  Because  begotten  of  the  Spirit,  they
are  no  longer  reckoned  as  human,  but  as  spiritual ;  for  the
human  nature,  once  theirs,  once  justified,  they  have  now
given  up  or  reckoned  dead — a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  ac-
ceptable to  and  accepted  of  God.  They  are  now  new  crea-
tures in  Christ  Jesus :  old  things  (human  hopes,  will  and  am-
bitions) have  passed  away,  and  all  things  have  become  new;
for  "  ye  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  the  spirit,  if  so  be  that
the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  you. ' '  (2  Cor.  5:173  Rom.  8  :  9.)
If  you  have  been  begotten  of  the  Spirit,  "ye  (as  human
beings)  are  dead,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."

Plane  L  represents  the  condition  of  perfect  spiritual  hQ-
ing ;  but  before  plane  L  can  be  reached,  the  conditions  of
our  covenant  must  be  carried  out.  It  is  one  thing  to  cov-
enant with  God  that  we  will  be  dead  to  all  human  things,  and
a  further  thing  to  perform  that  covenant  throughout  our  earth-
ly career — keeping  the  "body  under"  (dead),  keeping  our
own  will  out  of  sight,  and  performing  only  the  Lord's  will.
The  entrance  upon  planeZ  is  called  birth,  or  the  full  entrance
into  life  as  a  spirit  being.  The  entire  Church  will  enter  on
this  plane  when  gathered  out  (seledled)  from  the  world
in  the  "harvest"  or  end  of  the  Gospel  age.  The  "dead
in  Christ  shall  rise  first."  Then  we,  who  are  alive  and
remain,  shall  be  changed  in  a  moment — made  perfect  spirit-
ual beings  with  bodies  like  unto  Christ's  glorious  body  (for
"this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality").  Then,  that  which
is  perfedl  having  come,  that  which  is  in  part  (the  begotten
condition  with  the  various  hindrances  of  the  flesh  to  which
we  are  now  subjedl)  shall  be  done  away.

But  there  is  a  still  further  step  to  be  taken  beyond  a  per-
fection of  spiritual  being,  viz.,  to  "the  glory  that  shall  fol-
low"— plane  K.  We  do  not  here  refer  to  a  glory  of  per-
son, but  to  a  glory  of  power  or  office.    The  reaching  of


228


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


plane  L  brings  full  personal  glory;  /.  e.,  glorious  being,
like  unto  Christ.  But  after  we  are  thus  perfedted,  and  made
entirely  like  our  Lord  and  Head,  we  are  to  be  associated
with  him  in  the  "glory"  of  power  and  office — to  sit  with
him  in  his  throne,  even  as  he,  after  being  perfeded  at  his
resurredtion,  was  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty
on  high.    Thus  shall  we  enter  everlasting  glory,  plane  K.

Let  us  now  carefully  study  the  chart  and  note  its  illustra-
tions of  the  various  features  of  the  plan  of  God.  In  these
illustrations  we  use  the  pyramid  figure  to  represent  perfec-
tion, because  of  its  fitness  and  because  of  evident  reference
to  it  in  the  Scriptures.

Adam  was  a  perfe6l  being,  pyramid  a.  Notice  its  posi-
tion— on  plane  N,  which  represents  human  perfe6lion.  On
plane  R,  the  plane  of  sin  and  imperfedtion  or  the  de-
praved plane,  the  topless  pyramid,  b,  an  imperfeft  figure,
represents  fallen  Adam  and  his  posterity — depraved,  sinful
and  condemned.

Abraham  and  others  of  that  day,  justified  to  fellowship
with  God  on  account  of  faith,  are  represented  by  a  pyra-
mid (c)  on  plane  N.  Abraham  was  a  member  of  the  de-
praved human  family  and  by  nature  belonged  with  the  rest  on
plane  R;  but  Paul  tells  us  that  Abraham  was  justified  by  faith;
that  is,  he  was  reckoned  of  God  a  sinless  and  perfedl  man
because  of  his  faith.  This,  in  God's  estimation,  lifted  him
up  above  the  world  of  depraved  sinful  men  to  plane  N ;
and  though  actually  still  imperfe<5t,  he  was  received  into  the
favor  that  Adam  had  lost,  viz.,  communion  with  God  as  a
"  friend."  (James  2  :  23.)  All  on  the  perfe6l  (sinless)  plane
N  are  friends  of  God,  and  he  is  a  friend  of  theirs ;  but
sinners  (on  plane  R)  are  at  enmity  against  God — "  enemies
through  wicked  works."

The  world  of  mankind  after  the  flood,  represented  by
figure  d,  was  still  on  plane  R — still  at  enmity,  where  it


Plan  of  the  Ages.


229


continues  until  the  Gospel  Church  is  selefled  and  the  Mil-
lennial age  begins.

"  Israel  after  the  flesh,"  during  the  Jewish  age,  when  the
typical  sacrifices  of  bulls  and  goats  cleansed  them  (not
really,  but  typically,  "for  the  Law  made  nothing  perfe6l"
— Heb.  7  :  19),  were  typically  justified,  hence  they  are
{e)  on  plane  P,  the  plane  of  typical  justification,  which
lasted  from  the  giving  of  the  Law  at  Mount  Sinai  until
Jesus  made  an  end  of  the  Law,  nailing  it  to  his  cross.
There  the  typical  justification  ended  by  the  institution  of
the  "better  sacrifices"  than  the  Jewish  types,  those  which
adlually  "take  away  the  sin  of  the  world  "  and  "make  the
comers  thereunto  [adtually]  perfe6l." — Heb.  10:  i.

The  fire  of  trial  and  trouble  through  which  fleshly  Israel
passed,  when  Jesus  was  present,  sifting  them  and  taking  out
of  their  nominal  church  the  wheat,  the  "Israelites  indeed,"
and  especially  when,  after  the  separation  of  the  wheat,  he
"burned  up  the  chaff"  [the  refuse  part  of  that  syste7n\  with
unquenchable  fire,"  is  illustrated  by  figure  f.  It  was  a  time
of  trouble  which  they  were  powerless  to  avert.  See  Luke
3:17,  21,  22;  I  Thess.  2:16.

Jesus,  at  the  age  of  thirty  years,  was  a  perfedl,  mature
man  (»•),  having  left  the  glory  of  the  spiritual  condition
and  become  a  man  in  order  that  he  (by  the  grace  of  God)
should  taste  death  for  every  man.  The  justice  of  God's
law  is  absolute :  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  and
a  life  for  a  life.  It  was  necessary  that  a  perfedt  man  should
die  for  mankind,  because  the  claims  of  justice  could  be  met
in  no  other  way.  The  death  of  an  angel  could  no  more
pay  the  penalty  and  release  man  than  could  the  death  of
"  bulls  and  of  goats,  which  can  never  take  away  sin. "  There-
fore, he  who  is  termed  "the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of
God ' '  became  a  man,  was  "made  flesh,"  that  he  might  give
that  ransom  (corresponding  price)  which  would  redeem


330


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


mankind.  He  must  have  been  a  perfefl  man  else  he  could
have  done  no  more  than  any  member  of  the  fallen  race
to  pay  the  price.  He  was  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and
separate  from  sinners."  He  took  the  same  form  or  like-
ness which  sinners  have — "the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  " —
the  human  likeness.  But  he  took  that  likei^ess  in  its  per-
fedlion  :  he  did  not  partake  of  its  sin  nor  did  he  share  its
imperfe<5lion,  except  as  he  voluntarily  shared  the  sorrows
and  pains  of  some  during  his  ministry,  taking  their  pains
and  infirmities  as  he  imparted  to  them  his  vitality  and  health
and  strength.  It  is  written  that  "  Himself  took  our  infirmi-
ties and  bare  our  sicknesses"  (Isa.  53  :  4),  and  "virtue  [life,
vitality,  vigor]  went  out  of  him  and  healed  them  all." —
Mark  5  :  30  ;  Luke  6:19;  Matt.  8  :  16,  17.

Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  (perfedl)  man,  he  humbled
himself  and  became  obedient  unto  death.  He  presented
himself  to  God,  saying,  "Lo,  I  come  (in  the  volume  of  the
book  it  is  written  of  me)  to  do  thy  will,  O  God  " — and  sym-
bolized this  consecration  by  a  baptism  in  water.  When  he
thus  presented  himself,  consecrated  his  being,  his  off'ering
■was  holy  (pure)  and  acceptable  to  God,  who  showed  his
acceptance  by  filling  him  with  his  Spirit  and  power — when
the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon  him,  thus  anointing  him.

This  filling  with  the  Spirit  was  the  begetting  to  a  new
nature — the  divine — which  should  be  fully  developed  or
born  when  he  had  fully  accomplished  the  offering — the  sac-
rifice of  the  human  nature.  This  begetting  was  a  step  up
from  human  conditions,  and  is  shown  by  pyramid  //,  on  plane
M,  the  plane  of  spirit  begetting.  On  this  plane  Jesus  spent
three  and  one-half  years  of  his  life — until  his  human  exist-
ence ended  on  the  cross.  Then,  after  being  dead  three
days,  he  was  raised  to  life — to  the  perfedlion  of  spirit  be-
ing (/,  plane  Z),  born  of  the  Spirit — "  the  first  born  from
the  dead."    "That  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit"


Plan  of  the  Ages.


231


Jesus,  therefore,  at  and  after  his  resurredlion,  was  a  spirit —
a  spirit  being,  and  no  longer  a  human  being  in  any  sense.

True,  after  his  resurrection  he  had  power  to  appear,  and
did  appear,  as  a  man,  in  order  that  he  might  teach  his  dis-
ciples and  prove  to  them  that  he  was  no  longer  dead ;  but
he  was  not  a  man,  and  was  no  longer  controlled  by  human
conditions,  but  could  go  and  come  as  the  wind  (even  when
the  doors  were  shut),  and  none  could  tell  whence  he  came
or  whither  he  went.  "So  is  every  one  that  is  dorn  of  the
Spirit." — John  3:  8.    Compare  20:  19,  26.

From  the  moment  of  his  consecration  to  sacrifice,  at  the
time  of  his  baptism,  the  human  had  been  reckoned  dead —
and  there  the  new  nature  was  reckoned  begun,  which  was
completed  at  the  resurredlion,  when  he  reached  the  perfedt
spirit  plane,  L — was  raised  a  spiritual  body.

Forty  days  after  his  resurre6tion,  Jesus  ascended  to  the
majesty  on  high — the  plane  of  divine  glory,  X  (pyramid  k).
During  the  Gospel  age  he  has  been  in  glory  (/),  "set  down
with  the  Father  on  his  throne,"  and  Head  over  his  Church
on  earth — her  diredtor  and  guide.  During  this  entire  Gospel
age  the  Church  has  been  in  process  of  development,  dis-
cipline and  trial,  to  the  intent  that  in  the  end  or  harvest  of
the  age  she  may  become  his  bride  and  joint-heir.  Hence
she  has  fellowship  in  his  sufferings,  that  she  may  be  also
glorified  together  with  him  (plane  K),  when  the  proper  time
comes.

The  steps  of  the  Church  to  glory  are  the  same  as  those
of  her  Leader  and  Lord,  who  "hath  set  us  an  example  that
we  should  walk  in  his  footsteps" — except  that  the  Church
starts  from  a  lower  plane.  Our  Lord,  we  have  seen,  came
into  the  world  on  the  plane  of  human  perfection,  JV,  while
all  we  of  the  Adamic  race  are  on  a  lower  plane,  — the
plane  of  sin,  imperfe<5lion  and  enmity  against  God.  The
first  thing  necessary  for  us,  then,  is  to  be  justified,  and  thus


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


to  reach  plane  N.  How  is  this  accomplished  ?  Is  it  by
good  works  ?  No ;  sinners  can  do  no  good  works.  We
could  not  commend  ourselves  to  God,  so  "God  commend-
ed his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,
Christ  died  for  us."  (Rom.  5:8.)  Then  the  condition  upon
■which  we  come  to  the  justified  or  perfedl  human  plane  is
that  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  redeemed  us  and  lifted  us  up,
♦'through  faith  in  his  blood,"  to  the  perfedl  plane,  from
■which,  in  Adam,  we  fell.  "  We  are  justified  [lifted  to  plane
iV]  by  faith."  And  "being  justified  by  faith,  we  have
peace  with  God  "  (Rom.  5  :  i),  and  are  no  longer  esteemed
by  God  as  enemies,  but  as  justified  human  sons,  on  the
same  plane  as  Adam  and  our  Lord  Jesus,  except  that  they
■were  adlually  perfedl,  while  we  are  merely  reckoned  so  by
God.  This  reckoned  justification  we  realize  through  faith
in  God's  Word,  which  says.  Ye  are  "bought,"  "redeemed,"
♦'justified  freely  from  all  things."  We  stand  in  God's
sight  blameless,  spotless  and  holy  in  the  robes  of  Christ's
righteousness  imputed  to  us  by  faith.  Our  sins  he  consent-
ed to  have  imputed  to  him,  that  he  might  bear  our  penalty
for  us ;  and  he  died  on  our  behalf,  as  though  he  were  the
sinner.  His  righteousness  is  consequently  implied  to  all
■who  accept  of  his  redemption,  and  brings  with  it  all  the
rights  and  blessings  originally  possessed  before  sin  entered.
It  restores  us  to  life  and  to  fellowship  with  God.  This  fel-
lowship we  may  have  at  once  by  the  exercise  of  faith,  and
the  life  and  fuller  fellowship  and  joy  are  assured — in  God's
"due  time."

But  remember  that  while  justification  is  a  blessed  thing,  it
does  not  change  our  nature*:  we  are  still  human  beings.

*  The  word  nature  is  used  in  an  accommodated  sense  when  it  is  said
of  a  man  that  he  is  ill-natured.  Striiflly  speaking,  no  man  is  evil  by
nature.  Human  nature  is  "very  good,"  an  earthly  image  of  the  divine
nature.    So  every  man  is  of  a  good  naturs,  the  difHculty  being  that  this


Plan  of  the  Ages.


«33


We  are  saved  from  the  wretched  state  of  sin  and  alienation
from  God,  and  instead  of  being  human  sinners  we  are  hu-
man sons ;  and  now,  because  we  are  sons,  God  speaks  to
us  as  such.  During  the  Gospel  age  he  has  been  calling  for
the  "little  flock"  of  "joint-heirs,"  saying,  "My  son,  give
vne  thine  heart" — that  is,  give  yourself,  all  your  earthly
powers,  your  will,  your  talents,  your  all,  to  me,  even  as  Jesus
hath  set  you  an  example ;  and  I  will  make  you  a  son  on  a
higher  plane  than  the  human.  I  will  make  you  a  spiritual
son,  with  a  spirit  body  like  the  risen  Jesus — "the  ex-
press image  of  the  Father's  person."  If  you  will  give  up  all
of  the  earthly  hopes,  ambitions,  aims,  etc.,  consecrate  the
human  nature  entirely,  and  use  it  up  in  my  service,  I  will
give  you  a  higher  nature  than  the  rest  of  your  race ;  I  will
make  you  a  "partaker  of  the  divine  nature" — an  "heir  of
God  and  a  joint-heir  with  Jesus  Christ,  if  so  be  that  you
suffer  with  him,  that  you  may  be  also  glorified  together."

Those  who  rightly  value  this  prize  set  before  them  in  the
gospel  gladly  lay  aside  every  weight  and  run  with  patience
the  appointed  race,  that  they  may  win  it.  Our  works  were
not  called  for  to  secure  our  justification:  our  Lord  Jesus
did  all  the  work  that  could  be  done  to  that  end,  and  when,
by  faith,  we  accepted  of  his  finished  work,  we  were  justified,
lifted  to  plane  iV".  But  now,  if  we  would  go  further,  we
cannot  go  without  works.  True,  we  must  not  lose  our  faith,
else  we  will  thereby  lose  our  justification  ;  but  being  justi-
fied, and  continuing  in  faith,  we  are  able  (through  the  grace
given  unto  us  by  our  begetting  of  the  Spirit)  to  do  works,
to  bring  forth  fruit  acceptable  to  God.    And  God  requires

good  nature  has  become  depraved.  It  is  then  unnatural  for  a  man  to  be
evil,  brutal,  etc.,  and  natural  for  him  to  be  God-like.  It  is  in  this,  its
primary  sense,  that  we  use  the  word  nature,  above.  We  are  justified  by
Christ  to  a  full  return  to  all  the  privileges  and  blessings  of  our  human
nature — the  earthly  image  of  God.


234


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


this ;  for  it  is  the  sacrifice  we  covenanted  to  make.  God
requires  that  we  show  our  appreciation  of  the  great  prize
by  giving  all  that  we  have  and  are  for  it ;  not  to  men,  but
to  God — a  sacrifice  holy  and,  through  Christ,  acceptable  to
him — our  reasonable  service.

When  we  present  all  these  things,  we  say :  Lord,  how
wouldst  thou  have  me  deliver  this,  my  sacrifice,  my  time,
talent,  influence,  etc.,  to  thee?  Then,  examining  God's
Word  for  an  answer,  we  hear  his  voice  instructing  us  to  de-
liver our  all  to  him  as  our  Lord  Jeeus  did,  by  doing  good
unto  all  men  as  we  have  opportunity,  especially  to  the  house-
hold of  faith — serving  them  with  spiritual  or  with  natural  food,
clothing  them  in  Christ's  righteousness  or  with  the  earthly
raiment,  as  we  may  have  ability,  or  as  they  may  need.
Having  consecrated  all,  we  are  begotten  of  the  Spirit,  we
have  reached  plane  M;  and  now,  through  the  power  given
unto  us,  if  we  use  it,  we  Avill  be  able  to  perform  all  of  our
covenant,  and  to  come  off  conquerors,  and  more  than  con-
querors, through  (the  power  or  Spirit  of)  him  who  loved  us
and  bought  us  with  his  own  precious  blood.  But,  thus  walk-
ing in  the  footsteps  of  Jesus,

"  Ne'er  think  the  victory  won,
Nor  once  at  ease  sit  down.
Thine  arduous  work  will  not  be  done
Till  thou  hast  gained  thy  crown."

The  crown  will  be  won  when  we,  like  our  faithful  Brother
Paul,  have  fought  a  good  fight  and  finished  the  course,  but
not  sooner.  Until  then,  the  flame  and  incense  of  our  sacr
rifice  of  labor  and  service  must  ascend  daily — a  sacrifice
of  sweet  odor  unto  God,  acceptable  through  Jesus  Christ,
our  Lord.

Those  of  this  overcoming  class  who  "sleep"  will  be
raised  spirit  beings,  plane  L,  and  those  of  the  same  class
who  are  alive  and  remain  unto  the  coming  of  the  Lord  will


Plan  of  the  Ages.


235


be  "changed"  to  the  same  plane  of  spirit  being,  and  will
not  "sleep"  for  a  moment,  though  the  "change"  will  ne-
cessitate the  dissolution  of  the  earthen  vessel.  No  longer
weak,  earthly,  mortal,  corruptible  beings,  these  will  then  be
fully  born  of  the  Spirit — heavenly,  spiritual,  incorruptible,
immortal  beings. — i  Cor.  15  :  44,  52.

We  know  not  how  long  it  will  be  after  their  "change,"
or  perfefling  as  spirit  beings  (plane  Z),  before  they,  as  a
full  and  complete  company,  will  be  glorified  (plane  A')  with
the  Lord,  united  with  him  in  power  and  great  glory.  This
unifying  and  full  glorification  of  the  entire  body  of  Christ
with  the  Head  we  understand  to  be  the  "marriage  of  the
Lamb"  to  his  Bride,  when  she  shall  fully  enter  into  the
joys  of  her  Lord.

Look  again  at  the  chart — «,  m,  p,  q  are  four  distindl
classes  which  imitedly  represent  the  nominal  Gospel
Church  as  a  whole,  claiming  to  be  the  body  of  Christ.
Both  the  n  and  ;//  classes  are  on  the  spirit-begotten  plane,
M.  These  two  classes  have  existed  together  throughout  the
Gospel  age ;  both  covenanted  with  God  to  become  living
sacrifices ;  both  were  "accepted  in  the  beloved ' '  and  begot-
ten by  the  Spirit  as  "  (Tr^-a/z^r^j."  The  difference  be-
tween them  is  this :  n  represents  those  who  are  fulfilling
their  covenant  and  are  dead  with  Christ  to  earthly  will,  aims
and  ambitions,  while  ;//  represents  the  larger  company  of
the  spirit-begotten  children  who  have  covenanted,  but  who,
alas  !  shrink  back  from  the  performance  of  their  covenant.
The  n  class  consists  of  the  overcomers  who  will  be  the  Bride
of  Christ,  who  will  sit  with  the  Lord  in  his  throne  in  glory
— plane  K.  This  is  the  "little  flock"  to  whom  it  is  the
Father's  good  pleasure  to  give  the  Kingdom.  (Luke  12  :  32.)
Those  of  the  class  shrink  from  the  death  of  the  human
will,  but  God  still  loves  them,  and  therefore  will  bring  them
by  the  way  of  adversity  and  trouble  to  plane  Z.  the  perfedi


236


The  Plan  of  the  Aget.


spiritual  plane.  But  they  will  have  lost  the  right  to  plane
K,  the  throne  of  glory,  because  they  were  not  overcomers.
If  we  prize  our  Father's  love,  if  we  desire  our  Lord's  ap-
proval, if  we  aspire  to  be  members  of  his  body,  his  Bride,
and  to  sit  in  his  throne,  we  must  fulfil  our  covenant  of  sac-
rifice faithfully  and  willingly.

The  majority  of  the  nominal  Church  is  represented  by
se6lion  p.  Notice  that  they  are  not  on  plane  M,  but  on
plane  N.  They  are  justified  but  not  san6tified.  They  are
not  fully  consecrated  to  God,  and  not  begotten,  therefore,
as  spirit  beings.  They  are  higher  than  the  world,  however,
because  they  accept  of  Jesus  as  their  ransom  from  sin ;  but
they  have  not  accepted  the  high-calling  of  this  age  to  be-
come part  of  the  spiritual  family  of  God.  If  they  contin-
ue in  faith  and  fully  submit  to  the  righteous  laws  of  Christ's
Kingdom,  in  the  Times  of  Restitution,  they  will  finally
attain  the  likeness  of  the  perfe6l  earthly  man,  Adam.  They
will  completely  recover  all  that  was  lost  through  him.  They
will  attain  the  same  human  perfection,  mental,  moral  and
physical,  and  will  again  be  in  the  image  of  God,  as  Adam
was;  for  to  all  this  they  were  redeemed.  And  their  position  of
justification,  plane  JV,  as  those  who  have  heard  and  believed
in  the  salvation  through  Christ,  is  a  special  blessing  which
they  by  faith  enjoy  sooner  than  the  general  world  (for  all
Bhall  be  brought  to  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  Truth,  in
the  Millennial  age).  These,  however,  will  have  had  the
advantage  of  an  earlier  start  and  some  progress  in  the  right
direction.  But  class  /  fails  to  improve  the  real  benefit  of
this  faith  justification  in  the  present  time.  It  is  granted
now  for  the  special  purpose  of  enabling  some  to  make  the
acceptable  sacrifice,  and  to  become  the  n  class  as  members
of  "the  body  of  Christ."  Those  of  class  /  receive  the
favor  of  God  [justification]  "in  vain''  (2  Cor.  6:1):  they
fail  to  use  it  to  go  on  and  present  themselves  acceptable


Plan  of  the  Ages.


237


sacrifices,  during  this  time  in  which  sacrifices  are  acceptable
to  God.  Those  of  this  class,  though  not  "saints,"  not
noembers  of  the  consecrated  "body,"  are  called  "breth-
ren" by  the  Apostle.  (Rom.  12:1.)  In  the  same  sense  the
entire  race,  when  restored,  will  forever  be  brethren  of  the
Christ,  and  children  of  God,  though  of  a  different  nature.
God  is  the  Father  of  all  in  harmony  with  him,  on  every
plane  and  of  every  nature.

Another  class  connected  with  the  nominal  Church,  which
never  did  believe  in  Jesus  as  the  sacrifice  for  its  sins,  and
which  consequently  is  not  justified — not  on  plane  N—\i
represented  below  plane  N,  by  section  q.  These  are  "wolves
in  sheep's  clothing;"  yet  they  call  themselves  Christians,
and  are  recognized  as  members  of  the  nominal  Church.
They  are  not  tnily  believers  in  Christ  as  their  Redeemer ;
they  belong  to  plane  R ;  they  are  part  of  the  world,  and
are  out  of  place  in  the  Church  and  a  great  injury  to  it.  In
this  mixed  condition,  with  these  various  classes,  n,  m,pa.x\A.
g,  mingling  together  and  all  calling  themselves  Christians,
the  Church  has  existed  throughout  the  Gospel  age.  As  our
Ix)rd  foretold,  the  nominal  kingdom  of  heaven  (the  nomi-
nal Church)  is  like  a  field  sown  with  wheat  and  tares.  And
he  said  he  would  "  let  both  grow  together  until  the  harvest "
in  the  end  of  the  age.  In  the  time  of  harvest  he  will  say
tmto  the  reapers  ("the  angels" — messengers),  Gather  to-
gether the  tares  and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  bum  them,
but  gather  the  wheat  into  my  barn. — Matt.  13  :  38,  41,  49.

These  words  of  our  Lord  show  us  that  while  he  purposed
that  both  should  grow  together  during  the  age,  and  be
recognized  as  members  cf  the  nominal  Church,  he  also  pur-
posed that  there  should  come  a  time  of  separation  between
these  different  elements,  when  those  who  are  truly  the
Church,  his  saints  («),  approved  and  owned  of  God,  should
be  made  manifest. — Matt.  13 :  39.


'The  Flajt  of  the  Ages.


During  the  Gospel  age  the  good  seed  has  been  growing,
and  tares  or  counterfeits  also.  "The  good  seed  is  the  chil-
dren of  the  kingdom,"  the  spiritual  children,  classes  z^and
m,  while  "the  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  one."
All  of  class  and  many  of  class  /,  are  therefore  "tares;"
for  "no  man  can  serve  two  masters,"  and  "his  servants  you
are  to  whom  you  render  service. ' '  As  those  in  class  p  do  not
consecrate  their  service  and  talents  to  the  Lord  that  bought
them — a  reasonable  service — doubtless  they  give  much  of
their  time  and  talent  really  in  opposition  to  God,  and  hence
in  the  service  of  the  enemy.

Now  notice  on  the  chart  the  harvest  or  end  of  the  Gos-
pel age :  notice  the  two  parts  into  which  it  is  divided — •
seven  years  and  thirty-three  years,  the  exadl  parallel  of  the
harvest  of  the  Jewish  age.  This  harvest,  like  the  Jewish
one,  is  to  be  first  a  time  of  trial  and  sifting  upon  the  Church,
and  afterward  a  time  of  wrath  or  pouring  out  of  the  "seven
last  plagues"  upon  the  world,  including  the  nominal  Church.
The  Jewish  Church  was  the  "shadow"  or  pattern  on  the
fleshly  plane  of  all  that  the  Gospel  Church  enjoys  on  the
spiritual  plane.  That  which  tried  fleshly  Israel  in  the  har-
vest of  their  age  was  the  truth  then  presented  to  them.
The  truth  then  due  was  the  sickle,  and  it  separated  the
"  Israelites  indeed"  from  the  nominal  Jewish  Church  ;  and
of  the  true  wheat  there  was  but  a  fragment  compared  to  the
professors.  So  also  is  the  harvest  of  this  age.  The  har-
vest of  the  Gospel  age,  like  that  of  the  Jewish  age,  is  under
the  supervision  of  the  chief  reaper,  our  Lord  Jesus,  who
must  then  be  present.  (Rev.  14:  14.)  The  first  work  of  our
Lord  in  the  harvest  of  this  age  will  be  to  separate  the  true
from  the  false.  The  nominal  Church,  because  of  her  mixed
condition,  the  Lord  calls  "  Babylon  " — confusion  ;  and  the
harvest  is  the  time  for  separating  the  different  classes  in
the  nominal  Church,  and  for  ripening  and  perfedling  the  «


Plan  of  the  Ages.


239


class.  Wheat  will  be  separated  from  tares,  ripe  wheat
from  unripe,  etc.  Those  in  class  n  are  a  "first  fruits"  of
the  wheat,  and  after  being  separated  they  will,  in  due  time,
become  Christ's  bride,  and  be  forever  with  and  like  her  Lord.

The  separation  of  this  little  flock  from  Babylon  is  shown
by  figure  s.  She  is  on  the  way  to  become  one  with  the
Lord,  and  to  bear  his  name  and  share  his  glory.  The  glo-
rified Christ,  Head  and  body,  is  shown  by  figure  w.  Fig-
ures /,  u  and  V  represent  Babylon — the  nominal  Church —
falling,  going  to  pieces  during  "the  time  of  trouble"  in
the  "day  of  our  Lord."  Though  this  may  seem  to  be  a
dreadful  thing,  yet  it  will  actually  be  of  great  advantage  to
all  the  true  wheat.  Babylon  falls  because  she  is  not  what
she  claims  to  be.  The  Church  nominal  contains  many  hyp-
ocrites, who  have  associated  themselves  with  her  because
of  her  honorable  standing  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and
who,  by  their  conduft  are  making  Babylon  a  stench  in  the
nostrils  of  the  world.  The  Lord  always  knew  their  real
chara6ter,  but  according  to  his  purpose  he  lets  them  alone
until  the  harvest,  when  he  will  "gather  out  of  [or  from]
his  kingdom  [true  Church,  and  bind  in  bundles]  all  things
that  offend,  and  them  which  do  iniquity,  and  cast  them  into
a  furnace  of  fire  [trouble,  destructive  to  their  nominal  sys-
tem and  false  profession].  .  .  .  Then  shall  the  righteous
[the  71  class]  shine  forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their
Father.  (Matt.  13:  41-43.)  The  trouble  coming  upon  the
Church  will  be  occasioned  in  great  measure  by  the  growth
of  Infidelity  and  Spiritism,  of  various  kinds,  which  will  be
severe  trials  because  Babylon  holds  so  many  doctrines  con-
trary to  God's  Word.  As  in  the  harvest  of  the  Jewish
age  the  cross  of  Christ  was  to  the  Jew,  expelling  glory  and
power,  a  stumbling  block,  and  to  the  worldly-wise  Greek,
foolishness,  so  in  the  harvest  of  the  Gospel  age  it  will  again
be  the  stone  of  stumbling  and  rock  of  offense.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Every  one  who  has  built  upon  Christ  anything  else  than
the  gold,  silver  and  precious  stones  of  truth,  and  a  chara6ter
consistent  therewith,  will  find  himself  sorely  beset  during
the  time  of  wrath  ('*  fire  ") ;  for  all  the  wood,  hay  and  stub-
ble of  dodlrine  and  pradlice  will  be  consumed.  Those  who
have  built  properly,  and  who  consequently  possess  the  ai>
proved  charader,  are  represented  by  figure  s,  while  /  rep-
resents the  "great  company,"  begotten  of  the  Spirit,  but
who  have  built  with  wood,  hay  and  stubble — wheat,  but  not
fully  ripened  at  the  time  of  the  gathering  of  the  first
fruits  {/).  They  (/ )  lose  the  prize  of  the  throne  and  the
divine  nature,  but  will  finally  reach  birth  as  spirit  beings  of
an  order  lower  than  the  divine  nature.  Though  these  are
truly  consecrated,  they  are  overcome  by  the  worldly  spirit
to  such  an  extent  that  they  fail  to  render  their  lives  in  sac-
rifice. Even  in  "the  harvest,"  while  the  living  members
of  the  Bride  are  being  separated  from  others  by  the  truth,
the  ears  of  others,  including  class  will  be  dull  of  hear-
ing. They  will  be  slow  to  believe  and  slow  to  a<ft  in  that
time  of  separation.  They  will,  no  doubt,  be  greatly  dis-
mayed when  they  afterward  realize  that  the  Bride  has  been
completed  and  united  to  the  Lord,  and  that  they,  because
so  listless  and  overcharged,  have  lost  that  great  prize ;  but
the  beauty  of  God's  plan,  which  they  will  then  begin  to
discern  as  one  of  love,  both  for  them  and  for  all  the  world
of  mankind,  will  quite  overcome  their  grief,  and  they  will
shout  "Alleluia !  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth.
Let  us  be  glad,  and  rejoice,  and  give  honor  to  him,  for  the
marriage  of  the  Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made
herself  ready."  (Rev.  19:6,  7.)  Notice,  too,  the  abundant
provision  of  the  Lord  :  the  message  is  sent  to  them — Though
you  are  not  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb,  you  may  be  present  at
the  marriage  supper — "Blessed  are  they  which  are  called
unto  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb."  (Verse  9.)  This


Plan  of  the  Ages.


241


company  will,  in  due  time,  through  the  Lord's  chastise-
ments, come  fully  into  harmony  with  him  and  his  plan,  and
will  wash  their  robes,  that  they  may  ultimately  reach  a  posi-
tion next  to  the  Bride— on  the  spiritual  plane,  Z. —
Rev.  7  :  14,  15.

The  time  of  trouble,  as  it  will  affedl  the  world,  will  be
after  Babylon  has  begun  to  fall  and  disintegrate.  It  will
be  an  overturning  of  all  human  society  and  governments,
preparing  the  world  for  the  reign  of  righteousness.  During
the  time  of  trouble,  fleshly  Israel  (^e),  which  was  cast  off  until
the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in,  will  be  restored  to
God's  favor,  and  the  Gospel  Church,  or  spiritual  Israel,  will
be  completed  and  glorified.  During  the  Millennial  age
Israel  will  be  the  chief  nation  of  earth,  at  the  head  of  all
on  the  earthly  plane  of  being,  into  oneness  and  harmony
with  which  all  the  obedient  will  be  gradually  drawn.

Their  restoration  to  perfedl  human  nature,  as  well  as  that  of
the  world  in  general,  will  be  a  gradual  work,  requiring  all  of
the  Millennial  age  for  its  full  accomplishment.  During  that
thousand  years'  reign  of  Christ,  the  results  of  Adamic  death
will  be  gradually  swallowed  up  or  destroyed.  Its  various  stages
— sickness,  pain  and  weakness,  as  well  as  the  tomb — will
yield  obedience  to  the  Great  Restorer's  power,  until  at  the
end  of  that  age  the  great  pyramid  of  our  chart  will  be
complete.  The  Christ  {x)  will  be  the  head  of  all  things
— of  the  great  company,  of  angels,  and  of  men — next
to  the  Father;  next  in  order  or  rank  will  be  the  great
company,  spirit  beings  ),  and  next,  angels;  then  Israel
after  the  flesh  (2),  including  only  Israelites  indeed,  at  the
head  of  earthly  nations ;  then  the  world  of  men  (zc/),  re-
stored to  perfedlion  of  being,  like  the  head  of  the  human
race,  Adam,  before  he  sinned.  This  restoration  will  be  ac-
complished gradually  during  the  Millennial  age — the  "times
of  restitution."  (Adts  3:  21.)  Some,  however,  will  be
16


242


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


destroyed  from  among  the  people :  first,  all  who,  under  full
light  and  opportunity,  for  one  hundred  years  refuse  to  make
progress  toward  righteousness  and  perfe6lion  (Isa.  65:  20);
and  second,  those  who,  having  progressed  to  perfection,  in
a  final  testing  at  the  close  of  the  Millennium  prove  unfaith-
ful (Rev.  20  :  9.)  Such  die  the  second  death,  from  which
there  is  no  resurredion  or  restitution  promised.  But  one
full  individual  trial  is  provided.  But  one  ransom  will  ever
be  given.    Christ  dieth  no  more.

When  we  look  at  our  Father's  great  plan  for  the  exalta-
tion of  the  Church  and  the  blessing  through  it  of  Israel
and  all  the  families  of  the  earth  by  a  restitution  of  all  things,
it  remindsusof  the  song  of  the  angels :  "  Glory  to  God  in  the
highest ;  on  earth,  peace,  good  will  toward  men  !"  That
will  be  the  consummation  of  God's  plan — "the  gathering
together  of  all  things  in  Christ."  Who  will  then  say  that
God's  plan  has  been  a  failure?  Who  will  then  say  that  he
has  not  overruled  evil  for  good,  and  made  the  wrath  of  both
men  and  devils  to  praise  him  ?

The  figure  of  a  pyramid  not  only  serves  well  the  purpose
of  illustrating  perfe6l  beings,  but  it  continues  to  answer  the
purpose  of  illustration  in  representing  the  oneness  of  the
whole  creation,  as  in  the  fulfilment  of  God's  plan  it  will  be
o/te,  when  the  harmony  and  perfection  of  all  things  will
be  attained  under  the  headship  of  Christ,  the  Head,  not
only  of  the  Church  which  is  his  body,  but  also  of  all  things?
in  heaven  and  in  earth. — Eph.  i :  10.

Christ  Jesus  was  the  "beginning,"  "the  head,"  "the
top-stone,"  the  "chief  (upper)  corner-stone"  of  this  grand
structure,  which  as  yet  is  only  commenced ;  and  into  har-
mony with  the  lines  and  angles  of  the  top-stone  must  every
under-stone  be  built.  No  matter  how  many  kinds  of  stones
may  be  in  this  struClure,  no  matter  how  many  distindl  na-
tures there  may  be  among  God's  sons,  earthly  and  heavenly^


Plan  of  the  Ages.


243


eiiey  all,  to  be  everlastingly  acceptable  to  him,  must  be  con-
formed to  the  image  of  his  Son.  All  who  will  be  of  this
building  must  partake  of  the  spirit  of  obedience  to  God,  and
of  love  toward  him  and  all  his  creatures  (so  amply  illustrated
in  Jesus),  the  fulfilment  of  the  law — Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord
with  all  thy  heart,  mind,  soul  and  strength,  and  thy  neigh-
bor as  thyself.

In  the  process  (as  God's  Word  outlines  this  gathering  to-
gether in  one  of  all  things,  both  heavenly  and  earthly,  under
(One  head),  Christ  Jesus,  the  head,  was  first  sele6ted ;  sec-
v&ndly,  the  Church,  which  is  his  body.  Angels  and  other
spirit  classes  will  rank  next ;  then  the  worthies  of  Israel
and  the  world.  Beginning  with  the  highest,  the  ordering
anall  proceed  until  all  who  will  shall  have  been  brought
uiito  harmony  and  oneness.

One  peculiarity  is  that  this  tried,  chief,  corner  top-stone
is  laid  first  and  called  a  foundation  stone.  Thus  is  illus-
trated the  facfl  that  the  foundation  of  all  hope  toward  God
and  righteousness  is  laid,  not  on  tlie  earth,  but  in  the  heavens,
iind  those  built  under  it  and  united  to  this  heavenly  foun-
(dation  are  held  to  it  by  heavenly  attracSlions  and  laws.
And  though  this  order  is  the  very  opposite  of  an  earthly
building,  how  appropriate  that  the  stone  in  whose  likeness
icne  entire  structure  is  to  be  found  should  be  laid  first.  And
how  appropriate  also  to  find  that  our  foundation  is  laid
upward,  not  downward ;  and  that  we,  as  living  stones,  are
"'built  up  into  him  in  all  things."  Thus  the  work  will
progress  during  the  Millennial  age,  until  every  creature,  of
>every  nature,  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  will  be  praising  and
serving  God  in  conformity  with  the  lines  of  perfedl  obedi-
ence. The  universe  will  then  be  clean ;  for  in  that  day
"It  shall  come  to  pass  that  the  soul  that  will  not  hear  that
Prophet  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  the  people" — in  the
second  death. — A<5ts  3  :  22,  23.


844


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  WILDERNESS.

The  same  lesson  shown  in  the  Chart  of  the  Ages  is  here
taught  in  this  divinely  arranged  type,  the  lessons  of  which
•will  be  oiore  fully  examined  subsequently.  We  place  it
alongside,  that  the  different  planes  or  steps  to  the  Holy  of
Holies  may  be  duly  noted  or  appreciated,  as  teaching  the
same  steps  already  examined  in  detail.  Outside  the  court
of  the  tabernacle  lies  the  whole  world  in  sin,  on  the  de-
praved plane,  R.  Entering  through  the  "gate"  into  the
*'  court,"  we  become  believers  or  justified  persons,  on  plane
N.  Those  who  go  forward  in  consecration  press  to  the
door  of  the  Tabernacle,  and,  entering  in  (plane  M'),  become
priests.  They  are  strengthened  by  the  "shew  bread,"  en-
lightened by  the  "candlestick"  and  enabled  to  offer  ac-
ceptable incense  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ  at  the  "Golden
Altar."  Finally,  in  the  first  resurredlion,  they  enter  the
perfect  spiritual  condition,  or  "Most  Holy"  (plane  L),
and  are  then  associated  with  Jesus  in  the  glory  of  the  king-
dom, plane  K.

THE  BLESSED  HOPE.

••A  little  while,  earth's  fightings  will  be  over;
A  little  while,  her  tears  be  wiped  away ;
A  little  while,  the  power  of  Jehovah

Shall  turn  this  darkness  to  Millennial  Day.

••A  little  while,  the  ills  that  now  o'erwhelm  men
Shall  to  the  memories  of  the  past  belong  ;
A  little  while,  the  love  that  once  redeemed  them
Shall  change  their  weeping  into  grateful  song.

••A  little  while !    'Tis  ever  drawing  nearer —
The  brighter  dawning  of  that  glorious  day.
Praise  God,  the  light  is  hourly  growing  clearer,
Shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."


STUDY  XIII.


THE  KINGDOMS  OF  THIS  WORLD.

The  First  Dominion. — Its  Forfeiture. — Its  Redemption  and  Restoration.
—The  Typical  Kingdom  of  God. — The  Usurper. — Two  Phases  op  the
Present  Dominion. — The  Powers  that  be,  Ordained  of  God. — Nebuchad-
nezzar's View  OF  Them. — Daniel's  View  and  Interpretation. — The  King-
doms OF  this  World  viewed  from  another  Standpoint. — The  Proper  Re-
lationship of  the  Church  to  Present  Governments. — The  Divine  Right
OF  Kings  Briefly  Examined. — Claims  of  Christendom  False.— A  Better
Hope  in  the  Fifth  Universal  Empire.

TN  the  first  chapter  of  the  Divine  Revelation,  God  declares
•'•  his  purpose  concerning  his  earthly  creation  and  its
government:  "And  God  said,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  im-
age, after  our  likeness,  and  let  them  have  dominion  over
the  fish  of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over
the  cattle,  and  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  creeping
thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth.  So  God  created  man
in  his  own  image ;  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him :
male  and  female  created  he  them.  And  God  blessed  them.
And  God  said  to  them,  Be  fruitful  and  multiply,  and  fill
the  earth,  and  subdue  it ;  and  have  dominion  over  the  fish
of  the  sea,  and  over  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every
living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth."

Thus  the  dominion  of  earth  was  placed  in  the  hands  of
the  human  race  as  represented  in  the  first  man  Adam,  who
was  perfedl,  and  therefore  fully  qualified  to  be  the  lord,  ruler
or  king  of  earth.  This  commission  to  multiply,  and  fill,
and  subdue,  and  have  dominion  over  the  earth  was  not  to
Adam  alone,  but  to  all  mankind:  "Let  them  have  domin-
ion," etc.  Had  the  human  race  r  mained  perfect  and  sin-
less, this  dominion  would  nevei  have  passed  out  of  its
hands.

245


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


It  will  be  noticed  that  in  this  commission  no  man  is
given  dominion  or  authority  over  fellow-men,  but  the  whole
race  is  given  dominion  over  the  earth,  to  cultivate  and  to
make  use  of  its  products  for  the  common  good.  Not  only
its  vegetable  and  mineral  wealth  is  thus  placed  at  man's
command,  but  also  all  its  varieties  of  animal  life  are  at  his
disposal  and  for  his  service.  Had  the  race  remained  per-
fedl  and  carried  out  this  original  design  of  the  Creator,  as
it  grew  in  numbers  it  would  have  been  necessary  for  men
fto  consult  together,  and  to  systematize  their  efforts,  and  to
devise  ways  and  means  for  the  just  and  wise  distribution  of
fthe  common  blessings.  And  as,  in  the  course  of  time,  it
would  have  been  impossible,  because  of  their  vast  numbers,
to  meet  and  consult  together,  it  would  have  been  necessary
for  various  classes  of  men  to  elect  certain  of  their  number
to  represent  them,  to  voice  their  common  sentiments,  and
to  a6t  for  them.  And  if  all  men  were  perfect,  mentally,
physically,  and  morally ;  if  every  man  loved  God  and  his
regulations  supremely,  and  his  neighbor  as  himself,  there
would  have  been  no  friftion  in  such  an  arrangement.

Thus  seen,  the  original  design  of  the  Creator  for  earth's
government  was  a  Republic  in  form,  a  government  in  which
each  individual  would  share ;  in  which  every  man  would  be  a
sovereign,  amply  qualified  in  every  particular  to  exercise  the
duties  of  his  office  for  both  his  own  and  the  general  good.

This  dominion  of  earth  conferred  upon  man  had  but
one  contingency  upon  which  its  everlasting  continuance
depended;  and  that  was  that  this  divinely-conferred  ruler-
ship  be  always  exercised  in  harmony  with  the  Supreme
Ruler  of  the  universe,  whose  one  law,  briefly  stated,  is
Love.  "Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."  "Thoushalt
tove  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy
soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind;  .  .  .  and  thou  shalt  love  thy
neighbor  as  thyself." — Rom.  13 :  10;  Matt.  22  :  37-40.


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


247


Concerning  this  great  favor  conferred  upon  man,  David,
praising  God,  says:  "Thou  madest  him  a  little  lower  than
the  angels;  thou  crownedst  him  with  glory  and  honor;
thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion  over  the  works  of  thy
hands."  (Psa.  8:5,6.)  This  dominion  given  to  man-
kind in  the  person  of  Adam  was  the  first  establishment  of
the  Kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  Man  thus  exercised
dominion  as  God's  representative.  But  man's  disobedi-
ence to  the  Supreme  Ruler  forfeited  not  only  his  life,  but
;ii  o  all  his  rights  and  privileges  as  God's  representative  ruler
of  earth.  He  was  thenceforth  a  rebel,  dethroned  and  con-
demned to  death.  Then  speedily  the  kingdom  of  God  on
earth  ceased,  and  has  not  since  been  established,  except  for
a  short  time,  in  a  typical  manner,  in  Israel.  Although  in
Eden  man  lost  his  right  to  life  and  dominion,  neither  was
taken  from  him  suddenly;  and  while  the  condemned  life  lasts
man  is  permitted  to  exercise  the  dominion  of  earth  according
to  his  own  ideas  and  ability,  until  God's  due  time  for  him
whose  right  it  is  to  take  the  dominion  which  he  purchased.

Our  Lord's  death  redeemed  or  purchased  not  only  man,  but
also  all  his  original  inheritance,  including  the  dominion  of
earth.  Having  purchased  it,  the  title  is  now  in  him :  he
is  now  the  rightful  heir,  and  in  due  time,  and  shortly,  he
will  take  possession  of  his  purchase.  (Eph.  i  :  14.)  But  as
he  bought  man  not  for  the  sake  of  holding  him  as  his
slave,  but  that  he  might  restore  him  to  his  former  estate,
so  with  the  dominion  of  earth:  he  purchased  it  and  all
of  man's  original  blessings  for  the  purpose  of  restoring  them
when  man  is  again  made  capable  of  exercising  them  in  har-
mony with  the  will  of  God.  Hence  the  reign  of  Messiah
on  earth  will  not  be  everlasting.  It  will  continue  only  until,
by  his  strong  iron  rule,  he  will  have  put  down  all  rebellion
and  insubordination,  and  restored  the  fallen  race  to  the  orig-
inal perfedtion,  when  they  will  be  fully  capable  of  rightly


24S


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


exercising  the  dominion  of  earth  as  originally  designed.
When  thus  restored,  it  will  again  be  the  Kingdom  of  God
on  earth,  under  man,  God's  appointed  representative.

During  the  Jewish  age  God  organized  the  people  of  Israel
as  his  kingdom,  under  Moses  and  the  Judges — a  sort  of  Re-
public— but  it  was  typical  only.  And  the  more  despotic  rule
afterward  established,  especially  under  David  and  Solomon,
was  in  some  respe6ts  typical  of  the  kingdom  promised,
when  Messiah  should  reign.  Unlike  the  surrounding  nations,
Israel  had  Jehovah  for  their  King,  and  their  rulers  nominally
served  under  him,  as  we  learn  from  Psa.  78  :  70,  71.  This
is  quite  definitely  stated  in  2  Chron.  13:8  and  i  Chron.
29  :  23,  where  Israel  is  called  "  the  Kingdom  of  the  Lord,"
and  where  it  is  said  that  Solomon  "sat  on  the  throne  of
THE  LORD,  instead  of  David  his  father,"  who  sat  upon  or
exercised  the  rule  of  the  same  throne  for  the  forty  years
previous,  following  Saul,  the  first  king.

When  the  people  of  Israel  transgressed  against  the  Lord,  he
chastised  them  repeatedly,  until  finally  he  took  away  their
kingdom  entirely.  In  the  days  of  Zedekiah,  the  last  who
reigned  of  the  line  of  David ,  the  scepter  of  royal  power  was  re-
moved. There  the  typical  kingdom  of  God  was  overthrown.

God's  decision  relative  to  the  matter  is  expressed  in  the
words,  "Thou  profane,  wicked  prince  of  Israel,  whose  day
is  come,  when  iniquity  shall  have  an  end.  Thus  saith  the
Lord  God:  Remove  the  diadem,  and  take  off  the  crown:
this  shall  not  be  the  same.  ...  I  will  overturn,  overturn,
overturn  it ;  and  it  shall  be  no  more,  until  he  come,  whose
right  it  is;  and  I  will  give  it  him."  (Ezek.  21  :  25-27.)
In  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  the  king  of  Babylon  came
against  Israel,  took  the  people  captive  and  removed  their
king.  Though  afterward  restored  to  national  existence  by
Cyrus  thePersian, they  were  subjectsand  tributepayers  to
the  successive  empires  of  Medo-Persia,  Greece  and  Rome,


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


249


down  to  the  final  destruction  of  their  nationality,  A.  D.  70,
since  which  time  they  have  been  scattered  among  all  nations.

The  kingdom  of  Israel  is  the  only  one,  since  the  fall,
which  God  ever  recognized  as  in  any  way  representing  his
government,  laws,  etc.  There  had  been  many  nations  be-
fore theirs,  but  no  other  could  rightfully  claim  God  as  its
founder,  or  that  its  rulers  were  God's  representatives.
When  the  diadem  was  taken  from  Zedekiah  and  the  king-
dom of  Israel  was  overturned,  it  was  decreed  that  it  should
remain  overturned  until  Christ,  the  rightful  heir  of  the
world,  should  come  to  claim  it.  Thus,  inferentially,  all
other  kingdoms  in  power  until  the  re-establishment  of  God's
kingdom  are  branded  "kingdoms  of  this  world,"  under
the  "prince  of  this  world;"  and  hence  any  claims  put
forth  by  any  of  them  to  being  kingdoms  of  God  are  spuri-
ous. Nor  was  this  Kingdom  of  God  "setup"  at  the
first  advent  of  Christ.  (Luke  19  :  12.)  Then  and  since  then
God  has  been  selecting  from  the  world  those  who  shall  be
accounted  worthy  to  reign  with  Christ  as  joint-heirs  of
that  throne.  Not  until  his  second  advent  will  Christ  take
the  kingdom,  the  power  and  the  glory,  and  reign  Lord  of  all.

All  other  kingdoms  than  that  of  Israel  are  Scripturally
called  heathen  or  Gentile  kingdoms — "the  kingdoms  of
this  world,"  under  the  "prince  of  this  world" — Satan.
The  removal  of  God's  kingdom  in  the  days  of  Zedekiah
left  the  world  without  any  government  of  which  God  could
approve,  or  whose  laws  or  affairs  he  specially  supervised.
The  Gentile  governments  God  recognized  indirectly,  in
that  he  publicly  declares  his  decree  (Luke  21  :  24)  that  dur-
ing the  interregnum  the  control  of  Jerusalem  and  the
world  should  be  exercised  by  Gentile  governments.

This  interregnum,  or  intervening  period  of  time  between
the  removal  of  God's  scepter  and  government  and  the
restoration  of  the  same  in  greater  power  and  glory  ici


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Christ,  is  Scripturally  termed  "  The  Times  of  the  Gentiles."
And  these  "times"  or  years,  during  which  the  "king-
doms of  this  world"  are  permitted  to  rule,  are  fixed  and
limited,  and  the  time  for  the  re-establishment  of  God's
Kingdom  under  Messiah  is  equally  fixed  and  marked  in
Scripture.

Evil  as  these  Gentile  governments  have  been,  they  were
permitted  or  "  ordained  of  God"  for  a  wise  purpose.  (Rom.
13:  I.)  Their  imperfe6lion  and  misrule  form  a  part  of
the  general  lesson  on  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  and
prove  the  inability  of  fallen  man  to  govern  himself,  even
to  his  own  satisfaction.  God  permits  them,  in  the  main,
to  carry  out  their  own  purposes  as  they  may  be  able,  over-
niling  them  only  when  they  would  interfere  with  his  plans.
He  designs  that  eventually  all  shall  work  for  good,  and  that
finally  even  the  "wrath  of  man  shall  praise  him."  The
remainder,  that  would  work  no  good,  serve  no  purpose  or
teach  no  lesson,  he  restrains. — Psa.  76  :  10.

Man's  inability  to  establish  a  perfedl  government  is  at-
tributable to  his  own  weaknesses  in  his  fallen,  depraved
condition.  These  weaknesses,  which  of  themselves  would
thwart  human  efforts  to  produce  a  perfeft  government,  have
also  been  taken  advantage  of  by  Satan,  who  first  tempted
man  to  disloyalty  to  the  Supreme  Ruler.  Satan  has  con-
tinually taken  advantage  of  man's  weaknesses,  made  good
to  appear  evil,  and  evil  to  appear  good;  and  he  has  mis-
represented God's  charadler  and  plans  and  blinded  men
to  the  truth.  Thus  working  in  the  hearts  of  the  children
of  disobedience  (Eph.  2  :  2),  he  has  led  them  captive  at  his
will  and  made  himself  what  our  Lord  and  the  apostles  call
him — the  prince  or  ruler  of  this  world.  (John  14:30;
12:  31.)  He  is  not  the  prince  of  this  world  by  right,  but
by  usurpation;  through  fraud  and  deception  and  control
of  fallen  men.    It  is  because  he  is  a  usurper  that  he  will  be


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


summarily  deposed.  Had  he  a  real  title  as  prince  of  this
world,  he  would  not  thus  be  dealt  with.

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  dominion  of  earth,  as  at
present  exercised,  has  both  an  invisible  and  a  visible  phase.
The  former  is  the  spiritual,  the  latter  the  human  phase —
the  visible  earthly  kingdoms  measurably  under  the  control  of
a  spiritual  prince,  Satan.  It  was  because  Satan  possessed
such  control  that  he  could  offer  to  make  our  Lord  the
supreme  visible  sovereign  of  the  earth  under  his  direction.
(Matt.  4:9.)  When  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles  expire,  both
phases  of  the  present  dominion  will  terminate :  Satan  will  be
bound  and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  will  be  overthrown.

The  fallen,  blinded,  groaning  creation  has  for  centuries
plodded  along  its  weary  way,  defeated  at  every  step,  even
its  best  endeavors  proving  fruitless,  yet  ever  hoping  that
the  golden  age  dreamed  of  by  its  philosophers  was  at  hand.
It  knows  not  that  a  still  greater  deliverance  than  that
for  which  it  hopes  and  groans  is  to  come  through  the  de-
spised Nazarene  and  his  followers,  who  as  the  Sons  of  God
will  shortly  be  manifested  in  kingdom  power  for  its  de-
liverance.— Rom.  8:  22,  19.

In  order  that  his  children  should  not  be  in  darkness
relative  to  his  permission  of  present  evil  governments  and
concerning  his  ultimate  design  to  bring  in  a  better  govern-
ment when  these  kingdoms,  under  his  overruling  provi-
dence, shall  have  served  the  purpose  for  which  they  were
permitted,  God  has  given  us,  through  his  prophets,  several
grand  panoramic  views  of  the  "kingdoms  of  this  world,"
each  time  showing,  for  our  encouragement,  their  overthrow
by  the  establishment  of  his  own  righteous  and  everlasting
kingdom  under  the  Messiah,  the  Prince  of  Peace.

That  man's  present  effort  to  exercise  dominion  is  not
in  successful  defiance  of  Jehovah's  will  and  power,  but  by
^is  permission,  is  shown  by  God's  message  to  Nebuchad-


252


TJie  Plan  of  the  Ages.


nezzar,  wherein  God  gives  permission  to  rule,  until  the  time
for  the  setting  up  of  Christ's  kingdom,  to  the  four  great  em-
pires, Babylon,  Medo-Persia,  Greece  and  Rome.  (Dan.  2 :
37-43.)  This  shows  where  this  lease  of  thedominion  will  end.

As  we  now  glance  at  these  prophetic  views,  let  us  remem-
ber that  they  begin  with  Babylon  at  the  time  of  the  over-
throw of  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  the  typical  kingdom  of
the  Lord.

Nebuchadnezzar's  vision  of  earth's  governments.

Among  those  things  "written  aforetime  for  our  edifica-
tion," that  we,  who  are  commanded  to  be  subjeft  to  the
powers  that  be,  might  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the
Scriptures  have  hope  (Rom.  15  14;  13  :  i),  is  the  dream  of
Nebuchadnezzar  and  its  divine  interpretation  through  the
prophet. — Dan.  2  :  31-45.

Daniel  explained  the  dream,  saying:  "Thou,  O  King,
sawest,  and  behold  a  great  image.  This  great  image,  whose
brightness  was  excellent,  stood  before  thee;  and  the  form
thereof  was  terrible.  This  image's  head  was  of  fine  gold,
his  breast  and  his  arms  of  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs  of
brass,  his  legs  of  iron,  his  feet  part  of  iron  and  part  of
clay.  Thou  sawest  till  that  a  stone  was  cut  out  without
hands,  which  smote  the  image  upon  his  feet  that  were  of
iron  and  clay,  and  brake  them  to  pieces.

"Then  was  the  iron,  the  clay,  the  brass,  the  silver  and
the  gold  broken  to  pieces  together,  and  became  like  the  chaff
of  the  summer  threshing-floors ;  and  the  wind  carried  them
away,  that  no  place  was  found  for  them;  and  the  stone
that  smote  the  image  became  a  great  mountain  and  filled
the  whole  earth.

"This  is  the  dream,  and  we  will  tell  the  interpretation
thereof  before  the  king.  Thou,  O  king,  art  a  king  of  kings:
for  the  God  of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a  kingdom,  power,


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


and  strength,  and  glory.  [There  the  Gentile  kingdoms,
or  powers  that  be,  were  ordained  of  God.]  And  whereso-
ever the  children  of  men  dwell,  the  beasts  of  the  field  and
the  fowls  of  the  heaven  hath  he  given  into  thine  hand,
and  hath  made  thee  ruler  over  them  all.  Thou  art  this
head  of  gold.

"And  after  thee  shall  arise  another  kingdom  inferior  to
thee  [silver],  and  another  third  kingdom  of  brass,  which
shall  bear  rule  over  all  the  earth.  And  the  fourth  king-
dom shall  be  strong  as  iron :  forasmuch  as  iron  breaketh
in  pieces  and  subdueth  all  things ;  and  as  iron  that  break-
eth all  these,  shall  it  break  in  pieces  and  bruise.  And
whereas  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes,  part  of  potter's  clay
and  part  of  iron,  the  kingdom  shall  be  mixed ;  but  there
shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength  of  the  iron :  forasmuch  as
thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with  the  miry  clay.  And  as
the  toes  of  the  feet  were  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay,  so
the  kingdom  shall  be  partly  strong  and  partly  brittle."

The  student  of  history  can  readily  trace,  among  the  many
smaller  empires  of  earth  which  have  arisen,  the  four  above
described  by  Daniel.  These  are  termed  universal  em-
pires— Babylon,  first,  the  head  of  gold  (verse  38) ;  Medo-
Persia,  conqueror  of  Babylon,  second,  the  breast  of  silver;
Greece,  conqueror  of  Medo-Persia,  third,  the  belly  of
brass;  and  Rome,  fourth,  the  strong  kingdom,  the  iron
legs  and  clay-mixed  feet.  Three  of  these  empires  had
passed  away,  and  the  fourth,  the  Roman,  held  universal
sway,  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  birth,  as  we  read,  "There
went  out  a  decree  from  Caesar  Augustus  that  all  the  world
should  be  taxed." — Luke  2:1.

The  iron  empire,  Rome,  was  by  far  the  strongest,  and
endured  longer  than  its  predecessors.  In  fadl,  the  Roman
Empire  still  continues,  as  represented  in  the  nations  of  Eu-
rope.   This  division  is  represented  in  the  ten  toes  of  the


254


The  Plait  of  the  Ages.


image.  The  clay  element  blended  with  the  iron  in  the
feet  represents  the  mixture  of  church  and  state.  This
mixture  is  in  the  Scriptures  termed  "  Babylon" — confusion.
As  we  shall  presently  see,  stone  is  the  symbol  of  the  true
Kingdom  of  God,  and  Babylon  substituted  an  imitation
of  stone — clay — which  it  has  united  with  the  fragmentary
remains  of  the  [iron]  Roman  empire.  And  this  mixed  sys-
tem— church  and  state — the  Church  Nominal  wedded  to  the
kingdoms  of  this  world,  which  the  Lord  calls  Babylon,  con-
fusion, presumes  to  call  itself  Christendom — Christ's  King-
dom. Daniel  explains  : — "Whereas  thou  sawest  iron  mixed
with  miry  clay,  they  shall  mingle  themselves  with  the  seed
of  men  [church  and  world  blend — Babylon], but  they  shall  not
cleave  one  to  another,  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay."
They  cannot  thoroughly  amalgamate.  "And  in  the  days
of  these  kings  [the  kingdoms  represented  by  the  toes,  the
so-called  "Christian  kingdoms"  or  "Christendom,"]  shall
the  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom  which  shall  never  be
destroyed;  and  the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other
people,  but  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these
kingdoms;  and  it  shall  stand  forever." — Dan.  2:43,  44.

Daniel  does  not  here  state  the  time  for  the  end  of  these
Gentile  governments:  that  we  find  elsewhere;  but  every
foretold  circumstance  indicates  that  to-day  the  end  is  nigh,
even  at  the  doors.  The  Papal  system  has  long  claimed  that
it  is  the  kingdom  which  the  God  of  heaven  here  promised  to
set  up,  and  that,  in  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy,  it  did  break
in  pieces  and  consume  all  other  kingdoms.  The  truth,
however,  is  that  the  nominal  Church  merely  united  with
earthly  empires  as  the  clay  with  the  iron,  and  that  Papacy
never  was  the  true  Kingdom  of  God,  but  merely  a  counterfeit
of  it.  One  of  the  best  evidences  that  Papacy  did  not  destroy
and  consume  these  earthly  kingdoms  is  that  they  still  exist.
And  now  that  the  miry  clay  has  become  dry  and  "brittle^,"


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


it  is  losing  its  adhesive  power,  and  the  iron  and  clay  show
signs  of  dissolution,  and  will  quickly  crumble  when  smit-
ten by  the  "stone,"  the  true  Kingdom.

Continuing  his  interpretation,  Daniel  states:  "Foras-
much as  thou  sawest  that  the  stone  was  cut  out  of  the  moun-
tain without  hands,  and  that  it  brake  in  pieces  the  iron,
the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver  and  the  gold,  the  great  God
hath  made  known  to  the  king  what  shall  come  to  pass  here-
after ;  and  the  dream  is  certain  and  the  interpretation
thereof  sure." — Verse  45.

The  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands,  which
smites  and  scatters  the  Gentile  powers,  represents  the  true
Church,  the  Kingdom  of  God.  During  the  Gospel  age
this  "stone"  kingdom  is  being  formed,  "cutout,"  carved
and  shaped  for  its  future  position  and  greatness — not  by
human  hands,  but  by  the  power  or  spirit  of  the  truth,  the
invisible  power  of  Jehovah.  When  complete,  when  entire-
ly cut  out,  it  will  smite  and  destroy  the  kingdoms  of  this
world.  Not  the  people,  but  the  governments,  are  sym-
bolized by  the  image,  and  these  are  to  be  destroyed  that
the  people  may  be  delivered.  Our  Lord  Jesus  came  not
to  destroy  men's  lives,  but  to  save  them.-—  John  3:17.

The  stone,  during  its  preparation,  while  being  cut  out,
might  be  called  an  embryo  mountain,  in  view  of  its  future
destiny;  so,  too,  the  Church  could  be,  and  sometimes  is,
called  the  Kingdom  of  God.  In  fa(£l,  however,  the  stone
does  not  become  the  mountain  until  it  has  smitten  the  im-
age; and  so  the  Church,  in  the  full  sense,  will  become  the
Kingdom  to  fill  the  whole  earth  when  "  the  day  of  the
Lord,"  the  "  day  of  wrath  upon  the  nations"  or  "  time  of
trouble,"  will  be  over,  and  when  it  will  be  established  and
all  other  dominions  have  become  subservient  to  it.

Call  to  mind  now  the  promise  made  by  our  Lord  to  the
overcomers  of  the  Christian  Church;  "  To  him  that  over-


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Cometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne" — "and
he  that  overcometh  and  keepeth  my  works  unto  the  end,
to  him  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations ;  and  he  shall
rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  ;  as  the  vessels  of  a  potter  shall
they  be  broken  to  shivers,  even  as  I  received  of  my  Father."
(Rev.  3:21  ;  2:26,  27;  Psa.  2:8-12.)  When  the  iron  rod
has  accomplished  the  work  of  destrudlion,  then  will  the
hand  that  smote  be  turned  to  heal,  and  the  people  will  re-
turn to  the  Lord,  and  he  shall  heal  them  (Isa.  19:22 ;  Jer.
3:22,  23;  Hos.  6:1;  14:4;  Isa.  2:3),  giving  them  beauty
for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning  and  the  garment  of
Taise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness.

Daniel's  vision  of  earthly  governments.

Tn  Nebuchadnezzar's  vision  we  see  the  empires  of  earth,
as  viewed  from  the  world's  standpoint,  to  be  an  exhibition
of  human  glory,  grandeur  and  power ;  though  in  it  we  also
see  an  intimation  of  their  decay  and  final  destruction,  as
expressed  in  the  deterioration  from  gold  to  iron  and  clay.

The  stone  class,  the  true  Church,  during  its  seledlion  or
taking  out  of  the  mountain,  has  been  esteemed  by  the
world  as  of  no  value.  It  has  been  despised  and  rejedled
of  men.  They  see  no  beauty  in  it  that  they  should  desire
it.  The  world  loves,  admires,  praises  and  defends  the  rulers
and  governments  represented  in  this  great  image,  though
it  has  been  continually  disappointed,  deceived,  wounded
and  oppressed  by  them.  The  world  extols,  in  prose  and
verse,  the  great  and  successful  agents  of  this  image,  its
Alexanders,  Caesars,  Bonapartes  and  others,  whose  greatness
showed  itself  in  the  slaughter  of  their  fellow  men,  and
who,  in  their  lust  for  power,  made  millions  of  widows  and
orphans.  And  such  is  still  the  spirit  which  exists  in  the
"  ten  toes  "of  the  image,  as  we  see  it  exhibited  to-day  in  their
marshaled  hosts  of  more  than  twelve  millions  of  men  armed


Kingdoms  cf  this  World.


957


with  every  fiendish  device  of  modem  ingenuity,  to  slaugh-
ter one  another  at  the  command  of  "the  powers  that  be."

The  proud  are  now  called  happy ;  yea,  they  that  work
wickedness  are  set  up  in  power.  (Mai.  3:15.)  Can  we  not
see,  then,  that  the  destruction  of  this  great  image  by  the  smit-
ing of  the  stone,  and  the  establishment  of  God's  kingdom,
mean  the  liberating  of  the  oppressed  and  the  blessing  of  all?
Though  for  a  time  the  change  will  cause  disaster  and  trouble,
it  will  finally  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness.

But  now,  calling  to  mind  the  difference  of  standpoint,
let  us  look  at  the  same  four  universal  empires  of  earth  from
the  standpoint  of  God  and  those  in  harmony  with  him,
as  portrayed  in  vision  to  the  beloved  prophet  Daniel.
As  to  us  these  kingdoms  appear  inglorious  and  beastly,  so
to  him  these  four  universal  empires  were  shown  as  four  great
and  ravenous  wild  beasts.  And  to  his  view  the  coming
Kingdom  of  God  (the  stone)  was  proportionally  grander  than
as  seen  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  Daniel  says :  "I  saw  in  my
vision  by  night,  and  behold  the  four  winds  of  heaven  strove
upon  the  great  sea.  And  four  great  beasts  came  up  from
the  sea,  diverse  one  from  another.  The  first  was  like  a
lion  and  had  eagle's  wings;  .  .  .  and  behold  another  beast,
a  second,  like  a  bear;  .  .  .  and  lo  another,  like  a  leopard.
.  .  .  After  this  I  saw  in  the  night  visions,  and  behold  a
fourth  beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and  strong  exceedingly;
and  it  had  great  iron  teeth.  It  devoured  and  brake  in
pieces,  and  stamped  the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it ;  and
it  was  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that  were  before  it,  and
it  had  ten  horns." — Dan.  7  :  2-7.

The  details  relative  to  the  first  three  beasts  (Babylon  the
lion,  Medo-Persia  the  bear,  and  Greece  the  leopard),  with
their  heads,  feet,  wings,  etc. ,  all  of  which  are  symbolic,  we
pass  by,  as  of  less  importance  in  our  present  examination
than  the  details  of  the  fourth  beast,  Rome.
17


«58


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Of  the  fourth  beast,  Rome,  Daniel  says:  "After  this  3
saw  in  the  night  visions,  and  behold  a  fourth  beast,  dread-
ful and  terrible,  and  strong  exceedingly ;  .  .  .  and  it  had
ten  horns.  I  considered  the  horns,  and,  behold,  there
came  up  among  them  another  little  horn,  before  whom
there  were  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked  up  by  the  roots;
and,  behold,  in  this  horn  were  eyes,  like  the  eyes  of  man,
and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things." — Dan.  7:7,  8.

Here  the  Roman  Empire  is  shown  ;  and  the  divisions  of
its  power  are  shown  in  the  ten  horns,  a  horn  being  a  symbol
of  power.  The  little  horn  which  arose  among  these,  and
whicli  appropriated  the  power  of  three  of  them  to  itself,
and  ruled  among  the  others,  represents  the  small  beginnmg
and  gradual  rise  to  power  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  the
Papal  power  or  horn.  As  it  rose  in  influence,  three  of  the
divisions,  horns  or  powers  of  the  Roman  Empire  (the
Heruli,  the  Eastern  Exarchate  and  the  Ostrogoths)  were
plucked  out  of  the  way  to  make  room  for  its  establishment
as  a  civil  power  or  horn.  This  last  specially  notable  horn,
Papacy,  is  remarkable  for  its  eyes,  representing  intelligence,
and  for  its  mouth — its  utterances,  its  claims,  etc.

To  this  fourth  beast,  representing  Rome,  Daniel  gives  no
descriptive  name.  While  the  others  are  described  as  lion-
like, bear-like  and  leopard-like,  the  fourth  was  so  ferocious
and  hideous  that  none  of  the  beasts  of  earth  could  be  com-
pared with  it.  John  the  Revelator,  seeing  in  vision  the
same  symbolic  beast  (government),  was  also  at  a  loss  for  a
name  by  which  to  describe  it,  and  finally  gives  it  several.
Among  others,  he  called  it  "the  Devil."  (Rev.  12:9.)
He  certainly  chose  an  appropriate  name ;  for  Rome,  when
viewed  in  the  light  of  its  bloody  persecutions,  certainly  has
been  the  most  devilish  of  all  earthly  governments.  Even
in  its  change  from  Rome  Pagan  to  Rome  Papal  it  illustrated
one  of  Satan's  chief  characSleristics  ;  lor  he  also  transtbniOT


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


35$


himself  to  appear  as  an  angel  of  light  (2  Cor.  11  :  14),  as
Rome  transformed  itself  from  heathenism  and  claimed  to
be  Christian — the  Kingdom  of  Christ.*

After  giving  some  details  regarding  this  last  or  Romaiji
beast,  and  especially  of  its  peculiar  or  Papal  horn,  the
Prophet  states  that  judgment  against  this  horn  would  be
rendered,  and  it  would  begin  to  lose  its  dominion,  which
would  be  consumed  by  gradual  process  until  the  beast  should
be  destroyed.

This  beast  or  Roman  Empire  in  its  horns  or  divisions  still
exists,  and  will  be  slain  by  the  rising  of  the  masses  of  the
people,  and  the  overthrow  of  governments,  in  the  "Day
of  the  Lord,"  preparatory  to  the  recognition  of  the  heav-
enly rulership.  This  is  clearly  shown  from  other  Scrip-
tures yet  to  be  examined.  However,  the  consuming  of  the
Papal  horn  comes  first.  Its  power  and  influence  began  to
consume  when  Napoleon  took  the  Pope  prisoner  to  France.
Then,  when  neither  the  curses  of  the  Popes  nor  their  prayers
delivered  them  from  Bonaparte's  power,  it  became  evident
to  the  nations  that  the  divine  authority  and  power  claimed
by  the  Papacy  were  without  foundation.  After  that,  the
temporal  power  of  the  Papacy  waned  rapidly  until,  in  Sep-
tember, 1870,  it  lost  the  last  vestige  of  its  temporal  power  at
the  hands  of  Vi(5lor  Em.manuel.

Nevertheless,  during  all  that  time  in  which  it  was  being
"consumed,"  it  kept  uttering  its  great  swelling  words  of
blasphemy,  its  last  great  utterance  being  in  1870,  when,  but
a  few  months  before  its  overthrow,  it  made  the  declaration
of  the  infallibility  of  the  Popes.    All  this  is  noted  in  the

*The  fact  that  Rome  is  called  "the  Devil"  by  no  means  disproves  a
personal  devil :  rather  the  reverse.  It  is  because  there  are  such  beasts
as  lions,  bears  and  leopards,  with  known  characteristics,  that  govern-
ments were  likened  to  them ;  and  so,  it  is  because  there  is  a  Devil,  witSr
known  characteristics,  that  the  fourth  empire  is  likened  to  him.


26o


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


prophecy :  "  I  beheld  then  [/.  e. ,  after  the  decree  against  this
'  horn,'  after  its  consumption  had  begun]  because  of  the  voice
of  the  GREAT  WORDS  which  the  horn  spake." — Dan.  7:11.

Thus  we  are  brought  down  in  history  to  our  own  day,  and
made  to  see  that  the  thing  to  be  expe6ted,  so  far  as  the
empires  of  the  earth  are  concerned,  is  their  utter  destruc-
tion. The  next  thing  in  order  is  described  by  the  words,
"  I  beheld  even  till  the  beast  was  slain  and  his  body  destroyed
and  given  to  the  burning  flame."  Tlie  slaying  and  burn-
ing are  symbols,  as  well  as  the  beast  itself,  and  signify  the
utter  and  hopeless  destruction  of  present  organized  govern-
ment. In  verse  1 2  the  prophet  notes  a  difference  between
th,e  end  of  this  fourth  beast  and  its  predecessors.  They
three  successively  (Babylon,  Persia  and  Greece)  had  their
dotninion  taken  from  them ;  they  ceased  to  hold  the  niling
power  of  earth ;  but  their  lives  as  nations  did  not  cease
immediately.  Greece  and  Persia  still  have  some  life,  though
it  is  long  centuries  since  universal  dominion  passed  from
their  grasp.  Not  so,  however,  with  the  Roman  Empire,  the
fourth  and  last  of  these  beasts.  It  will  lose  dominion  and
life  at  once,  and  go  into  utter  destrudlion  ;  and  with  it  the
others  will  pass  away  also. — Daniel  2  :  35.

No  matter  what  may  be  the  means  or  instrumentality
used,  the  cause  of  this  fall  will  be  the  establishment  of  the
Fifth  Universal  Empire  of  earth,  the  Kingdom  of  God,
under  Christ,  whose  right  it  is  to  take  the  dominion,  Tlie
transfer  of  the  kingdom  from  the  fourth  beast,  which  for
its  appointed  time  was  "ordained  of  God,"  to  the  fifth
kingdom,  under  the  Messiah,  when  its  appointed  season  has
come,  is  described  by  the  Prophet  in  these  words:  "And
behold,  one  like  the  Son  of  man  came  with  the  clouds  of
heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they  brought
him  near  before  him.  And  there  was  given  unto  him  [the
Christ — head  and  body  complete]  dominion,  and  glory,


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


and  a  kingdom,  that  all  people,  nations  and  languages
should  serve  him.  His  dominion  is  an  everlasting  domin-
ion which  shall  not  pass  away,  and  his  kingdom  that  which
shall  not  be  destroyed. ' '  This  the  angel  interpreted  to  mean
that  "the  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the  greatness  of  the
kingdom  under  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the
people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an
everlasting  kingdom;  and  all  dominions  shall  serve  and
obey  him." — Dan.  7  :  13,  27.

Thus  seen,  the  dominion  of  earth  is  to  be  placed  in  the
hands  of  Christ  by  Jehovah  ("the  Ancient  of  days  "),  who
shall  "put  all  things  under  his  feet."  (i  Cor.  15:27.)
Thus  enthroned  over  God's  kingdom,  he  must  reign  until
he  shall  have  put  down  all  authority  and  power  in  confli6l
with  the  will  and  law  of  Jehovah.  To  the  accomplishment
of  this  great  mission,  the  overthrow  of  these  Gentile  gov-
ernments is  first  necessary;  for  the  "kingdoms  of  this
world,"  like  the  "prince  of  this  world,"  will  not  surren-
der peaceably,  but  must  be  bound  and  restrained  by  force.
And  thus  it  is  written,  "To  bind  their  kings  with  chains
and  their  nobles  with  fetters  of  iron  ;  to  execute  upon  thero
the  judgment  written  :  this  honor  have  all  his  saints."—
Psa.  149  :  8,  9.

As  we  thus  view  present  governments  from  the  standpoint
of  our  Lord  and  of  the  Prophet  Daniel,  and  realize  theii
ferocious,  destrudlive,  beastly  and  selfish  charadler,  our
hearts  long  for  the  end  of  Gentile  governments  and  joyfully
look  forward  to  that  blessed  time  when  the  overcomers  of
the  present  age  will  be  enthroned  with  their  Head,  to  rule,
bless  and  restore  the  groaning  creation.  Surely  all  of  God's
children  can  heartily  pray  with  their  Lord — "Thy  king-
dom COME,  thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."

Each  of  these  governments  represented  in  the  image  and
by  the  beasts  existed  before  it  came  into  power  as  the  uni-


i62


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


versal  empire.  So,  too,  with  the  true  Kingdom  of  God:  it
has  long  existed  separate  from  the  world,  not  attempting
fulership,  but  awaiting  its  time — the  time  appointed  by  the
Ancient  of  days.  And,  like  the  others,  it  must  receive  its
appointment  and  must  come  into  authority  or  be  "set  up"
before  it  can  exercise  its  power  in  the  smiting  and  slaying
of  the  beast  or  kingdom  preceding  it.  Hence  the  ap-
propriateness of  the  statement,  "In  the  days  of  these
kings  [while  they  still  have  power]  shall  the  God  of
heaven  set  up  [establish  in  power  and  authority]  a  king-
dom." And  after  it  is  set  up,  "it  shall  break  in  pieces  and
consume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  forever."
(Dan.  2  :  44.)  Hence,  however  we  may  look  for  it,  we  must
expedl  God's  Kingdom  to  be  inaugurated  before  the  fall  of
the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  and  that  its  power  and  smiting
will  bring  their  overthrow.

PRESENT  GOVERNMENTS  FROM  ANOTHER  STANDPOINT.

Supreme  right  and  authority  to  rule  the  world  are  and  ever
will  be  vested  in  the  Creator,  Jehovah,  no  matter  whom  he
may  permit  or  authorize  to  have  subordinate  control.  Un-
der the  imperfe6lions  and  weaknesses  resulting  from  his
disloyalty  to  the  King  of  kings,  Adam  soon  grew  weak  and
helpless.  As  a  monarch  he  began  to  lose  the  power  by  which,
at  first,  he  commanded  and  held  the  obedience  of  the  lower
animals  by  the  strength  of  his  will.  He  lost  control  of
himself  also,  so  that  when  he  would  do  good  his  weaknesses
interfered  and  evil  was  present  with  him ;  and  the  good  he
even  would  do  he  did  not  do,  and  the  evil  which  he  would
not,  he  did.

Hence,  while  making  no  attempt  to  excuse  our  rebel  race,
we  can  sympathize  with  its  vain  efforts  to  govern  itself  and
to  arrange  for  its  own  well-being.  And  something  can  be
said  of  the  success  of  the  world  in  this  direction  ;  for,  while
recognizing  the  real  character  of  these  beastly  governments^


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


comiot  though  they  have  been,  they  have  been  vastly
superior  to  none — much  better  than  lawlessness  and  anarchy.
Though  anarchy  would  probably  have  been  quite  acceptable
to  the  "prince  of  this  world,"  it  was  not  so  to  his  subjeds,
and  his  power  is  not  absolute:  it  is  limited  to  the  extent
of  his  ability  to  operate  through  mankind ;  and  his  policy
must  conform  in  great  measure  to  the  ideas,  passions  and
prejudices  of  men.  Man's  idea  was  self-government  inde-
pendent of  God ;  and  when  God  permitted  him  to  try  the
experiment,  Satan  embraced  the  opportunity  to  extend  his
influence  and  dominion.  Thus  it  was  by  wishing  to  forget
God  (Rom.  1 :  28)  that  man  exposed  himself  to  the  influ-
ence of  this  wily  and  powerful  though  unseen  foe ;  and
therefore  he  has  ever  since  been  obliged  to  work  against  Sa-
tan's machinations,  as  well  as  his  own  personal  weaknesses.

This  being  the  case,  let  us  again  glance  at  the  kingdoms
of  this  world,  viewing  them  now  as  the  effort  of  fallen
humanity  to  govern  itself  independent  of  God.  Though
individual  corruption  and  selfishness  have  turned  aside  the
course  of  justice,  so  that  full  justice  has  seldom  been  meted
out  to  any  under  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,  yet  the
ostensible  objedl  of  all  governments  ever  organized  among
men  has  been  to  promote  justice  and  the  well-being  of  all
the  people.

To  what  extent  that  object  has  been  attained  is  another
question ;  but  such  has  been  the  claim  of  all  governments,
and  such  the  objecfl  of  the  people  governed  in  submitting
to  and  supporting  them.  And  where  the  ends  of  justice
have  been  greatly  ignored,  either  the  masses  have  been
blinded  and  deceived  with  reference  to  them;  or  wars,  com-
motions and  revolutions  have  been  the  result.

The  dark  deeds  of  base  tyrants,  who  gained  positions  of
power  in  the  governments  of  the  world,  did  not  represent
the  laws  and  institutions  of  those  governments,  but  in  usurp-


264


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ing  authority  and  turning  it  to  base  ends  t?hey  gave  to  those
governments  their  beastly  charadter.  Every  government
has  had  a  majority  of  wise,  just  and  good  laws — laws  for
the  protedtion  of  life  and  property,  for  the  protedlion  of
domestic  and  commercial  interests,  for  the  punishment  of
crime,  etc.  They  have  also  had  courts  of  appeal  in  mat-
ters of  dispute,  where  justice  is  meted  out  to  some  extent,
at  least ;  and  however  imperfect  those  in  office  may  be,  the
advantage  and  necessity  for  such  institutions  is  apparent.
Poor  as  these  governments  have  been,  without  them  the
baser  element  of  society  would,  by  force  of  numbers,  have
overcome  the  juster,  better  element.

While,  therefore,  we  recognize  the  beastly  character  of
these  governments,  as  rendered  so  by  the  exaltation  to
power  of  a  majority  of  unrighteous  rulers,  through  the  in-
trigues and  deceptions  of  Satan,  operating  through  man's
weaknesses  and  depraved  tastes  and  ideas,  yet  we  recognize
them  as  the  best  efforts  of  poor,  fallen  humanity  at
governing  itself.  Century  after  century  God  has  allowed
them  to  make  the  effort,  and  to  see  the  results.  But  after
centuries  of  experiment,  the  results  are  as  far  from  satisfac-
tory to-day  as  at  any  period  of  the  world's  history.  In
fa6l,  the  dissatisfadlion  is  more  general  and  widespread  than
ever  before ;  not  because  there  is  more  oppression  and  in-
justice than  ever,  but  because,  under  God's  arrangement,
men's  eyes  are  being  opened  by  the  increase  of  knowledge.

The  various  governments  which  have  been  established
from  time  to  time  have  exhibited  the  average  ability  of  the
people  represented  by  them  to  govern  themselves.  Even
where  despotic  governments  have  existed,  the  fat5l  that  they
have  been  tolerated  by  the  masses  proved  that  as  a  people
they  were  not  capable  of  establishing  and  supporting  a  bet-
ter government,  though  many  individuals  were  always,
doubtless,  far  in  advance  of  the  average  standing.


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


265


As  we  compare  the  condition  of  the  world  to-day  with
its  condition  at  any  former  period,  we  find  a  marked  differ-
ence in  the  sentiments  of  the  masses.  The  spirit  of  inde-
pendence is  now  abroad,  and  men  are  not  so  easily  blind-
folded, deceived  and  led  by  rulers  and  politicians,  and
therefore  they  will  not  submit  to  the  yokes  of  former  days.
This  change  of  public  sentiment  has  not  been  a  gradual
one  from  the  very  beginning  of  man's  effort  to  govern  him-
self, but  clearly  marked  only  as  far  back  as  the  sixteenth
century ;  and  its  progress  has  been  most  rapid  within  the
last  fifty  years.  This  chaiige,  therefore,  is  not  the  result
of  the  experience  of  past  ages,  but  is  the  natural  result  of
the  recent  increase  and  general  diffusion  of  knowledge
among  the  masses  of  mankind.  The  preparation  for  this
general  diffusion  of  knowledge  began  with  the  invention  of
printing,  about  1440  A.  D.,  and  the  consequent  multiplica-
tion of  books  and  news  periodicals.  The  influence  of  this
invention  in  the  general  public  enlightenment  began  to  be
felt  about  the  sixteenth  century ;  and  the  progressive  steps
since  that  time  all  are  acquainted  with.  The  general  edu-
cation of  the  masses  has  become  popular,  and  inventions
and  discoveries  are  becoming  every-day  occurrences.  This
increase  of  knowledge  among  men,  which  is  of  God's  ap-
pointment, and  comes  to  pass  in  his  own  due  time,  is  one
of  the  mighty  influences  which  are  now  at  work  binding
Satan — curtailing  his  influence  and  circumscribing  his  power
in  this  "Day  of  Preparation^^  for  the  setting  up  of  God's
kingdom  in  the  earth.

The  increase  of  knowledge  in  every  dire6lion  awakens  a
feeling  of  self-respe6l  among  men,  and  a  realization  of  their
natural  and  inalienable  rights,  which  they  will  not  long  per-
mit to  be  ignored  or  despised  ;  rather,  they  will  go  to  an  op-
posite extreme.  Glance  back  along  the  centuries  and  see  how
tlie  nations  have  written  the  history  of  their  discontent  m


266


TJte  Plan  of  the  Ages.


blood.  And  the  prophets  declare  that  because  of  the  increase
of  knowledge  a  still  more  general  and  wide-spread  dissatis-
fadlion  will  finally  express  itself  in  a  world-wide  revolution,
in  the  overthrow  of  all  law  and  order;  that  anarchy  and  dis-
tress upon  all  classes  will  be  the  result ;  but  that  in  the  midst
of  this  confusion  the  God  of  heaven  will  set  up  his  King-
dom, which  will  satisfy  the  desires  of  all  nations.  Wearied
and  disheartened  with  their  own  failures,  and  finding  their
last  and  greatest  efforts  resulting  in  anarchy,  men  will  gladly
welcome  and  bow  before  the  heavenly  authority,  and  recog-
nize its  strong  and  just  government.  Thus  man's  extrem-
ity will  become  God's  opportunity,  and  "the  desire  of  all
nations  shall  come" — the  Kingdom  of  God,  in  power  and
great  glory. — Hag.  2:7.

Knowing  this  to  be  the  purpose  of  God,  neither  Jesus
nor  the  apostles  interfered  with  earthly  rulers  in  any  way.
On  the  contrary,  they  taught  the  Church  to  submit
to  these  powers,  even  though  they  often  suffered  under
their  abuse  of  power.  They  taught  the  Church  to  obey  the
laws,  and  to  respeft  those  in  authority  because  of  their
office,  even  if  they  were  not  personally  worthy  of  esteem  ;
to  pay  their  appointed  taxes,  and,  except  where  they  con-
flidted  with  God's  laws  (Ads  4 :  19 ;  5  :  29),  to  offer  no  re-
sistance to  any  established  law.  (Rom.  13:1-7;  Matt.
22:  21.)  The  Lord  Jesus  and  the  apostles  and  the  early
Church  were  all  law-abiding,  though  they  were  separate  from,
and  took  no  share  in,  the  governments  of  this  world.

Though  the  powers  that  be,  the  governments  of  this
world,  were  ordained  or  arranged  for  by  God,  that  mankind
might  gain  a  needed  experience  under  them,  yet  the  Church,
the  consecrated  ones  who  aspire  to  office  in  the  coming
Kingdom  of  God,  should  neither  covet  the  honors  and  the
emoluments  of  office  in  thekingdomsof  this  world,  norshould
they  oppose  these  powers.   They  are  fellow  citizens  and  heirs


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


267


of  the  heavenly  kingdom  (Eph.  2  :  19),  and  as  such  should
claim  only  such  rights  and  privileges  under  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  as  are  accorded  to  aliens.  Their  mission  is
not  to  help  the  world  to  improve  its  present  condition,  nor
to  have  anything  to  do  with  its  affairs  at  present.  To  at-
tempt to  do  so  would  be  but  a  waste  of  effort ;  for  the
•world's  course  and  its  termination  are  both  clearly  defined
in  the  Scriptures  and  are  fully  under  the  control  of  him
who  in  his  own  time  will  give  us  the  kingdom.  The  influ-
ence of  the  true  Church  is  now  and  always  has  been  small
• — so  small  as  to  count  pracStically  nothing  politically;  but
however  great  it  might  appear,  we  should  follow  the  exam-
ple and  teaching  of  our  Lord  and  the  apostles.  Knowing
that  the  purpose  of  God  is  to  let  the  world  fully  test  its  own
ability  to  govern  itself,  the  true  Church  should  not,  while
in  it,  be  of  the  world.  The  saints  may  influence  the
world  only  by  their  separateness  from  it,  by  letting  their
//■^^/ shine;  and  thus  through  their  lives  the  spirit  of  truth
REPROVES  the  world.  Thus — as  peaceable,  orderly  obeyers
and  commenders  of  every  righteous  law,  reprovers  of  law-
lessness and  sin,  and  pointers  forward  to  the  promised  King-
dom of  God  and  the  blessings  to  be  expedted  under  it,  and
not  by  the  method  commonly  adopted  of  mingling  in  pol-
itics and  scheming  with  the  world  for  power,  and  thus  being
drawn  into  wars  and  sins  and  the  general  degradation —
in  glorious  chastity  should  the  prospedtive  Bride  of  the
Prince  of  Peace  be  a  power  for  good,  as  her  Lord's  repre-
sentative in  the  world.

The  Church  of  God  should  give  its  entire  attention  and
effort  to  preaching  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  to  the  ad-
vancement of  the  interests  of  that  Kingdom  according  to
the  plan  laid  down  in  the  Scriptures.  If  this  is  faithfully
done,  there  will  be  no  time  nor  disposition  to  dabble  in  the
politics  of  present  governments.    The  Lord  had  no  time  for


s68


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


it ;  the  apostles  had  no  time  for  it ;  nor  have  any  of  the
saints  who  are  following  their  example.

The  early  Church,  shortly  after  the  death  of  the  apostles,
fell  a  prey  to  this  very  temptation.  The  preaching  of  the
coming  Kingdom  of  God,  which  would  displace  all  earthly
kingdoms,  and  of  the  crucified  Christ  as  the  heir  of  that
Kingdom,  was  unpopular,  and  brought  with  it  persecution,
scorn  and  contempt.  But  some  thought  to  improve  on
God's  plan,  and,  instead  of  suffering,  to  get  the  Church
into  a  position  of  favor  with  the  world.  By  a  combination
with  earthly  powers  they  succeeded.  As  a  result  Papacy
was  developed,  and  in  time  became  the  mistress  and  queen
of  nations. — Rev.  17  :  3-5  ;  18:7.

By  this  policy  everything  was  changed  :  instead  of  suf-
fering, came  honor ;  instead  of  humility,  came  pride ;  in-
stead of  truth,  came  error ;  and  instead  of  being  perse-
cuted, she  became  the  persecutor  of  all  who  condemned  her
new  and  illegal  honors.  Soon  she  began  to  invent  new
theories  and  sophistries  to  justify  her  course,  first  deceiving
herself,  and  then  the  nations,  into  the  belief  that  the  prom-
ised millennial  reign  of  Christ  had  come,  and  that  Christ
the  King  was  represented  by  her  popes,  who  reigned  over
the  kings  of  the  earth  as  his  vicegerents.  Her  claims  were
successful  in  deceiving  the  whole  world.  "  She  made  all
nations  drunk''*  with  her  erroneous  dodlrines  (Rev.  17  :  2),
intimidating  them  by  teaching  that  eternal  torment  awaited
all  who  resisted  her  claims.  Soon  the  kings  of  Europe  were
crowned  or  deposed  by  her  edi<5t,  and  under  her  supposed
authority.

Thus  it  comes  that  the  kingdoms  of  Europe  to-day  claim
to  be  Christian  kingdoms,  and  announce  that  their  sover-
eigns reign  "by  the  grace  of  God,"  /.  e.,  through  appoint-
ment of  either  Papacy  or  some  of  the  Protestant  se<5ls.
For  though  the  Reformers  abandoned  many  of  Papacy's


Kingdoms  of  this  World.


269


claims  to  ecclesiastical  jurisdidlion,  etc.,  they  held  to  this
honor  which  the  kings  of  earth  had  come  to  attach  to
Christianity.  And  thus  the  Reformers  fell  into  the  same
error,  and  exercised  the  authority  of  monarchs  in  appoint-
ing and  sandlioning  governments  and  kings,  and  denomi-
nating such  "Christian  kingdoms,"  or  kingdoms  of  Christ.
So  we  hear  much  to-day  of  that  strange  enigma,  "The
Christian  World'' — an  enigma  indeed,  when  viewed  in  the
light  of  the  true  principles  of  the  Gospel.  Our  Lord  said
of  his  disciples,  "They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am
not  of  the  world."  And  Paul  exhorts  us,  saying,  "Be  not
conformed  to  this  world." — John  17  :  16  ;  Rom.  12:2.

God  never  approved  of  calling  these  kingdoms  by  the
name  of  Christ.  Deceived  by  the  Church  nominal,  these
nations  are  sailing  under  false  colors,  claiming  to  be  what
they  are  not.  Their  only  title,  aside  from  the  vote  of  the
people,  is  in  God's  limited  grant,  spoken  to  Nebuchadnez-
zar— until  he  come  whose  right  the  dominion  is.

The  claim  that  these  imperfedl  kingdoms,  with  their  im-
perfe6t  laws  and  often  selfish  and  vicious  rulers,  are  the
"kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  his  Anointed  "  is  a  gross  libel
upon  the  true  Kingdom  of  Christ,  before  which  they  must
shortly  fall,  and  upon  its  "  Prince  of  Peace"  and  righteous
rulers. — Isa.  32  :  J.

Another  serious  injury  resulting  from  that  error  is  that  the
attention  of  the  children  of  God  has  thereby  been  attracted
away  from  the  promised  heavenly  kingdom ;  and  they  have
been  led  to  an  improper  recognition  of  and  intimacy  with
earthly  kingdoms,  and  to  almost  fruitless  attempts  to  en-
graft upon  these  wild,  worldly  stocks  the  graces  and  morals
of  Christianity,  to  the  negleft  of  the  gospel  concerning
the  true  Kingdom  and  the  hopes  centering  in  it.  Under
this  deception,  some  are  at  present  very  solicitous  that  the
name  of  God  should  be  incorporated  into  the  Constitution


270


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


of  the  United  States,  that  thereby  this  may  become  a
Christian  nation.  The  Reformed  Presbyterians  have  for
years  refused  to  vote  or  hold  office  under  this  government,
because  it  is  not  Christ's  Kingdom.  Thus  they  recognize
the  impropriety  of  Christians  sharing  in  any  other.  We
have  great  sympathy  with  this  sentiment,  but  not  with  the
conckision,  that  if  God's  ;/^^w^■were  mentioned  in  the  Con-
stitution, that  fafl  would  transform  this  government  from
a  kingdom  of  this  world  to  a  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  give
them  liberty  to  vote  and  to  hold  office  under  it.  O,  how
foolish  !  How  great  the  deception  by  which  the  "  Mother
of  harlots"  has  made  all  nations  drunk  (Rev.  17  :  2);  for
in  a  similar  manner  it  is  claimed  that  the  kingdoms  of
Europe  were  transferred  from  Satan  to  Christ,  and  became
"Christian  nations."

Let  it  be  seen  that  the  best  and  the  worst  of  earth's  na-
tions are  but  "kingdoms  of  this  world,"  whose  lease  of
power  from  God  is  now  about  expired,  that  they  may  give
place  to  their  ordained  successor,  the  Kingdom  of  Messiah,
the  Fifth  Universal  Empire  of  earth  (Dan.  2:44;  7:  14,
17,  27) — this  view  will  do  much  to  establish  truth  and  to
overthrow  error.

But  as  it  is,  the  adlions  of  Papacy  in  this  regard,  sanc-
tioned by  the  Protestant  Reformers,  go  unquestioned  among
Christian  people.  And  since  they  should  uphold  the  King-
dom of  Christ,  they  feel  themselves  bound  to  champion  the
present  falling  kingdoms  of  so-called  Christendom,  whose
time  is  fast  expiring;  and  thus  their  sympathies  are  often
forced  to  the  side  of  oppression,  rather  than  to  the  side  of
right  and  freedom — to  the  side  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world,
and  the  prince  of  this  world,  rather  than  to  the  side  of  the
coming  true  Kingdom  of  Christ. — Rev.  17:  14;  19:  n-19.

The  world  is  fast  coming  to  realize  that  the  "  kingdoms
of  this  world ' '  are  not  Christlike,  and  that  their  claim  to


Kiu'^doiHs  of  ihis  IVorld.


be  of  Christ's  appointment  is  not  unquestionable.  Men
are  beginning  to  use  their  reasoning  powers  on  this  and
similar  questions ;  and  they  will  aft  out  their  conviflions
so  much  more  violently,  as  they  come  to  realize  that  a  de-
ception has  been  pradliced  upon  them  in  the  name  of  the
God  of  Justice  and  the  Prince  of  Peace.  In  fa6t,  the  tend-
ency with  many  is  to  conclude  that  Christianity  itself  is
an  imposition  without  foundation,  and  that,  leagued  with
civil  rulers,  its  aim  is  merely  to  hold  in  check,  the  liberties  of
the  masses.

O  that  men  were  wise,  that  they  would  apply  their  hearts
to  understand  the  work  and  plan  of  the  Lord !  Then
would  the  present  kingdoms  melt  down  gradually — reform
would  swiftly  follow  reform,  and  liberty  follow  liberty,  and
justice  and  truth  would  prevail  until  righteousness  would
be  established  in  the  earth.  But  they  will  not  do  this,  nor
can  they  in  their  present  fallen  state ;  and  so,  armed  with
selfishness,  each  will  strive  for  mastery,  and  the  kingdoms
of  this  world  will  pass  away  with  a  great  time  of  trouble,
such  as  was  not  since  there  Avas  a  nation.  Of  those  who
will  be  vainly  trying  to  hold  to  a  dominion  which  has  passed
away,  when  the  dominion  is  given  to  him  whose  right  it  is,
the  Lord  speaks,  urging  that  they  are  fighting  against  him
— a  confli<ft  in  which  they  are  sure  to  fail.    He  says: —

"  Why  do  the  nations  tumultuously  assemble,  and  the
people  meditate  a  vain  thing?  The  kings  of  the  earth  set
themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel  together  against  the
Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed,  saying,  Let  us  break  their
bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us.  He
that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh  :  the  Lord  shall  have
them  in  derision.  Then  shall  he  speak  unto  them  in  his
wrath,  and  vex  them  in  his  sore  displeasure  [saying],  I  have
anointed  my  h'ng  upon  my  holy  hill  of  Zion.  ...  Be  wise
now,  therefore,  O  ye  kings :  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the


The  Plan  of  the  J^es.


earth.  Serve  the  Lord  with  fear  and  rejoice  with  trem-
bling. Kiss  [make  friends  with]  the  Son  [God's  Anointed]
lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  in  the  way  j  for  his  wrath
aiay  soon  be  kindled.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  take  ref
age  in  him." — Psa.  2  :  1-6,  10-12.


THE  KINGDOM  NEAR.


•  Watchman,  tell  us  of  the  night —

What  its  signs  of  promise  are.
Traveler,  o'er  yon  mountain's  height,

See  that  glory -beaming  star !
Watchman,  does  its  beauteous  ray

Aught  of  hope  or  joy  foretell  ?
Traveler,  yes,  it  brings  the  day —

Promised  day  of  Israel.

••Watchman,  tell  us  of  the  night-
Higher  yet  that  star  ascends.

Traveler,  blessedness  and  light.

Peace  and  truth  its  course  portends.

Watchman,  will  its  beams  alone
Gild  the  spot  that  gave  theni  birth?

Traveler,  ages  are  its  own ;
.See,  its  glory  fills  the  earth.

Watchman,  tell  us,  does  the  morning

Of  fair  Zion's  glory  dawn  ?
Have  the  signs  that  mark  its  coming

Yet  upon  thy  pathway  shone?
Traveler,  yes:  arise!  look  roimd  theel

Light  is  breaking  in  the  skies !
Gird  thy  bridal  robes  around  thee  1

Morning  dawns  1  arise  I  arise  I  **


STUDY  XIV.


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.


/■OHINBNCB  OF   THE    SUBJECT. — ThB    CHARACTER   OF   THE  KINGDOM.— 'TbS

Kingdom  During  the  Gospel  Age. — False  Views  Corrected  by  Paul.—
Results  of  False  Ideas  of  the  Kingdom.— Two  Phases  op  the  Kingdom
OF  God. — The  Spiritual  Phase  and  its  Work. — The  Earthly  Phase
ANiJ  ITS  Work. — Their  Harmonious  Operation. — The  Glory  of  the
£arthly  Phase  — The  Glory  of  the  Heavenly  Phase —The  Covenant
Root  from  which  These  Branches  Grow. — The  Earthly  Phase  of  the
Kingdom,  Israelitish.— The  Lost  Tribes. — The  Heavenly  Jerusalem. —
Israel  a  Typical  People. — Israel's  Loss  and  Recovery. — ^The  Elect
Classes. — The  Heirs  of  the  Kingdom. — The  Iron  Rule.— An  Illustra-
riON  of  the  Object  of  the  Millennial  Reign. — The  Kingdom  Deliverei»
TO  the  Father. — God's  Original  Design  Fully  Accomplished.


NY  who  have  not  carefully  examined  this  subjedl,  with


concordance  and  Bible  in  hand,  will  be  surprised,  on
doing  so,  to  find  its  prominence  in  the  Scriptures.  The
Old  Testament  abounds  with  promises  and  prophecies  in
which  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  its  King,  Messiah,  figure
as  the  very  centre.  It  was  the  hope  of  every  Israelite
(Luke  3:15)  that  as  a  people  God  would  exalt  their  nation
under  Messiah  ;  and  when  the  Lord  came  to  them,  it  was  as
their  King,  to  establish  the  long  promised  Kingdom  of  God
upon  the  earth.

John,  the  forerunner  and  herald  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  opened
his  mission  with  the  announcement,  "Repent  ye;  for  the
Kingdom  of  Heaven  is  at  hand."  (Matt.  3 :  2.)  The  Lord
commenced  his  ministry  with  the  same  announcement  ex-
adlly  (Matt.  4 :  17);  and  the  apostles  were  sent  forth  to
preach  the  same  message.  (Matt.  10:  7;  Luke  9:  2.)  Notonly
was  the  kingdom  the  topic  with  which  the  Lord  began  hi»
public  ministry,  but  it  was  really  the  main  topic  of  all  bis


273


274


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


preaching  (Luke  8  :  i ;  4:  43  ;  19  :  11),  other  subjects  be-
ing mentioned  merely  in  connedlion  with  or  in  explana-
tion of  this  one  subjedl.  The  majority  of  his  parables  were
either  illustrations  of  the  kingdom  from  various  standpoints,
and  in  different  features,  or  else  served  to  point  out  entire
consecration  to  God  as  essential  to  a  share  in  the  kingdom,
and  to  corredt  the  Jewish  misapprehension  that  they  were
sure  of  the  kingdom  because  natural  children  of  Abraham,
and  hence  natural  heirs  to  the  promises.

Our  Lord  Jesus  in  his  talks  with  his  followers  strengthened
and  encouraged  their  expedtations  of  a  coming  kingdom,
saying  to  them,  "I  appoint  unto  you  a  kingdom  as  my  Fath-
er hath  appointed  unto  me,  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at  my
table  in  my  kingdom,  and  sit  on  thrones,  judging  [ruling]
the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  (Luke  22  :  29,  30.)  And, again,
"Fear  not,  little  flock;  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to
give  you  the  kingdom. ' '  (Luke  12:32.)  And  when,  instead
of  being  crowned  and  enthroned,  their  recognized  king  was
crucified,  his  disciples  were  sorely  disappointed.  As  two
of  them  expressed  it  to  the  supposed  stranger  on  their  way
to  Emmaus  after  his  resurredlion,  they  " /r«j/<?^  that
it  had  been  he  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel" — de-
livering them  from  the  Roman  yoke,  and  making  of  Israel
the  Kingdom  of  God  in  power  and  glory.  But  they  were
sadly  disappointed  by  the  changes  of  the  few  days  previous.
Then  Jesus  opened  their  understanding  by  showing  them
from  the  Scriptures  that  his  sacrifice  was  needful  first  of  all
before  the  kingdom  could  be  established. — Luke  24:  21,
25-27.

God  could  have  given  to  Jesus  the  dominion  of  earth  with-
out redeeming  man;  for  "The  Most  High  ruleth  over  the
kingdom  of  men,  and  giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  pleaseth. "
(Dan.  4 :  32.)  But  God  had  a  grander  design  than  could
have  been  accomplished  by  such  a  plan.    Such  a  kingdom


The  Kingdom  of  God.


275


could  have  brought  blessings  which,  however  good,  could
have  been  of  only  a  temporary  charadler,  since  all  of  man-
kind were  under  condemnation  to  death.  To  make  the
blessings  of  his  kingdom  everlasting  and  complete,  the  race
had  first  to  be  ransomed  from  death  and  thus  legally  released
from  the  condemnation  which  passed  upon  all  in  Adam.

That  in  explaining  the  prophecies  Jesus  revived  the  dis-
ciples' hope  of  a  coming  kingdom  is  evident  from  the  fadt
that  afterward,  as  he  was  leaving  them,  they  inquired,  "Lord,
■wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  the  kingdom  to  Israel?"  His
answer,  though  not  explicit,  did  not  contradicSl  their  hopes.
He  said,  "It  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  and  seasons
■which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power." — Adts  i :  6,  7.

True,  the  disciples  at  first,  in  common  with  the  entire
Jewish  nation,  had  an  imperfedl  conception  of  the  King-
dom of  God  in  supposing  it  to  be  exclusively  an  earthly
kingdom,  even  as  many  to-day  err  in  an  opposite  dire6tion
in  supposing  it  to  be  exclusively  a  heavenly  kingdom.  And
many  of  the  parables  and  dark  sayings  of  our  Lord  Jesus  were
intended  in  due  time  to  correct  these  misconceptions.  But
he  always  held  forth  the  idea  of  a  kingdom,  a  government,
to  be  established  in  the  earth  and  to  rule  among  men.  And
he  not  only  inspired  in  them  a  hope  for  a  share  in  the  king-
dom, but  he  also  taught  them  to  pray  for  its  establishment
■ — "Thy  kingdom  come ;  thy  will  be  done  on  earth  as  it
is  in  heaven."

To  the  worldly-wise  among  the  Jews,  our  Lord  seemed
an  impostor  and  fanatic;  and  they  considered  his  disciples
mere  dupes.  His  wisdom  and  tadl,  and  his  miracles,  they
could  not  well  gainsay,  nor  reasonably  account  for ;  yet,  from
their  standpoint  of  unbelief,  his  claim  that  he  was  the  heir
of  the  world,  and  would  establish  the  promised  kingdom
which  should  rule  the  world,  and  that  his  followers,  all  of
them  from  the  humbler  walks  of  life,  would  be  joint-rulers


276


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


with  him  in  that  kingdom,  seemed  too  absurd  for  consider-
ation. Rome,  with  its  disciplined  warriors,  its  able  gener-
als and  immense  wealth,  was  the  master  of  the  world,  and
was  daily  growing  more  powerful.  Who,  then,  was  this
Nazarene?  and  who  were  these  fishermen,  without  money
or  influence,  and  with  but  a  meager  following  among  the
common  people  ?  Who  were  these  that  they  should  talk
about  establishing  the  kingdom  long  promised  to  be  the
grandest  and  mightiest  earth  had  ever  known?

The  Pharisees,  hoping  to  expose  the  supposed  weakness  of
our  Lord's  claims,  and  thereby  to  undeceive  his  followers,
demanded  of  him — When  will  this  kingdom  which  you
preach  begin  to  make  its  appeara7ice  ? — when  will  your  sol-
diers arrive  ? — when  will  this  Kingdom  of  God  appear  ?  (Luke
17:  20-30.)  Our  Lord's  answer  would  have  given  them
a  new  thought  had  they  not  been  prejudiced  against  him
and  blinded  by  their  own  supposed  wisdom.  He  answered
that  his  kingdom  would  never  appear  in  the  manner  in
which  they  expected  it.  The  kingdom  which  he  preached,
and  in  which  he  invited  his  followers  to  joint-heirship,  was
an  invisible  kingdom,  and  they  must  not  expedl  to  see  it.
"He  answered  them,  and  said.  The  Kingdom  of  God  com-
eth  not  with  observation  [outward  manifestation  ] ;  neither
shall  they  say,  Lo  here !  or,  lo  there !  for  the  Kingdom  of
God  is  [to  be]  in  your  midst."*  In  a  word,  he  showed
that  when  his  kingdom  should  come,  it  would  be  every-
where present  and  everywhere  powerful,  yet  nowhere  visible.

*  The  Diaglott  and  Rotherham's  translation  render  this  "  among  you,"
•which  is  synonymous  with  "in  your  midst."  It  certainly  would  agree
with  no  theory  to  insist  that  the  kingdom  which  Jesus  claimed  to  be
about  to  establish  would  be  within  the  hearts  of  the  Pharisees,  whom
he  styled  hypocrites  and  whited  sepulchres.  But  this  kingdom,  when
established,  will  be  "in  (he  midst  of"  or  "  all  classes/ ruling

and  judging  ail.


The  Kingdom  of  God.


277


Thus  he  gave  them  an  idea  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  which
he  preached;  but  they  were  unprepared  and  received  it
not.  There  was  a  measure  of  truth  in  the  Jewish  expedla-
tion  concerning  the  promised  kingdom,  which  will  in  due
time  be  realized,  as  will  be  shown ;  but  our  Lord's  refer-
ence here  is  to  that  spiritual  phase  of  the  kingdom,  which
will  be  invisible.  And  as  this  phase  of  the  kingdom  will
be  first  set  up,  its  presence  will  be  unseen,  and  for  a  time
unrecognized.  The  privilege  of  heirship  in  this  spiritual
phase  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  was  the  only  offer  then  be-
ing made,  and  has  been  the  one  hope  of  our  high  calling
during  the  entire  Gospel  age,  which  then  began.  Hence  Je-
sus referred  to  it  exclusively.  (Luke  16  :  16.)  This  will  be
more  clearly  seen  as  we  proceed.

It  was  probably  because  of  this  adverse  public  sentiment,
especially  among  the  Pharisees,  that  Nicodemus  came  to
Jesus  by  night,  being  anxious  to  solve  the  mystery,  yet  ap-
parently ashamed  to  acknowledge  publicly  that  such  claims
had  any  weight  upon  his  mind.  The  conversation  between
the  Lord  and  Nicodemus  (John  3),  though  but  partially  re-
corded, gives  a  somewhat  further  insight  into  the  character
of  the  Kingdom  of  God.  Evidently  the  main  points  of  the
conversation  are  mentioned  that  from  these  we  may  readi-
ly gather  the  drift  of  the  whole,  which  we  may  reasonably
paraphrase  as  follows :

NTcodemus. — "Rabbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher
come  from  God ;  for  no  man  can  do  these  miracles  that
thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him."  Yet  some  of  your
statements  seem  very  inconsistent  to  me,  and  I  come  to
ask  an  explanation.  For  instance,  you  and  your  disciples
go  about  proclaiming,  "The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at
hand ;"  but  you  have  neither  an  army,  nor  wealth,  nor  influ-
ence, and  to  all  appearance  this  claim  is  untrue;  and  in
this  you  seem  to  be  deceiving  the  people.    The  Pharisees


278


The  Plan  of  ihe  Ages.


generally  regard  you  as  an  impostor,  but  I  am  sure  there
must  be  some  truth  in  your  teachings,  "for  no  man  can  do
these  miracles  that  thou  doest,  except  God  be  with  him."
The  obje6t  of  my  visit  is  to  inquire  of  what  sort,  when  and
whence  is  this  kingdom  you  proclaim?  and  when  and
how  is  it  to  be  established?

Jesus. — Your  request  to  have  a  full  understanding  con-
cerning the  kingdom  of  heaven  cannot  now  be  answered  to
your  satisfadlion ;  not  that  I  do  not  know  about  it  fully,
but  that  in  your  present  condition  you  could  not  under-
stand or  appreciate  it,  if  I  would  fully  explain.  "Except  a
man  be  begotten  *  from  above,  he  cannot  see  [Greek,  eidoti,  \
know,  or  be  acquainted  with]  the  kingdom  of  God."

Even  my  disciples  have  as  yet  very  indistinft  ideas  of  the
charadter  of  the  kingdom  they  are  proclaiming.    I  cannot

*  The  Greek  word  gcnnao  and  its  derivatives,  sometimes  translated
begotten  and  sometimes  horn,  really  contains  both  ideas,  and  should  be
translated  by  either  one  of  these  two  English  words,  according  to  the
sense  of  the  passage  in  which  it  occurs.  The  two  ideas,  begetting  and
birth,  are  always  in  the  word,  so  that  if  the  one  is  stated,  the  other  is
always  implied,  as  birth  is  the  natural  consequence  of  begetting,  and  be-
getting the  natural  antecedent  to  birth.  When  the  active  agent  with
which  gennao  is  associated  is  a  male,  it  should  be  translated  begotten  ;
when  a  female,  born.  Thus  in  I  John  2:  29;  3:9;  4:7;  5:1,  18,
gennao  should  be  begotten,  because  God  (masculine)  is  the  atflive  agent.

Sometimes,  however,  the  translation  is  dependent  on  the  nature  of  the
whether  masculine  or  feminine.  Thus  used  in  conjuncflion  with  ek,
signifying  from  or  out  of,  it  should  be  translated  born.  So  in  John
3  :  5.  6,  gennao  should  be  translated  born,  as  indicated  by  the  word  ek
— "out  of  water,"  "  flesh,"  "out  of  spirit."

t  This  same  Greek  word  is  translated  consider  in  Acfls  15:6.  "  The
apostles  and  elders  came  together  for  to  consider  [know  or  understand]
this  matter."  The  same  word  is  rendered  behold  in  Rom.  H  :  22.  "Be-
hold  [consider,  understand],  therefore,  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God;"
•Iso  in  I  John  3 : 1  — "  Behold  [consider,  know,  understand]  what  man-
ner of  love  the  Father  hath  bestowed  upon  us."


The  Kingdom  of  God.


279


tell  them,  for  the  same  reason  that  I  cannot  tell  you ;  and
they  could  not  understand,  for  the  same  reason.  But,  Nico-
demus,  one  peculiarity  of  God's  dealings  is  that  he  requires
obedience  to  the  light  already  possessed  before  more  light
is  given;  and  in  the  seleflion  of  those  who  shall  be  ac-
counted worthy  to  share  the  kingdom,  a  manifestation  of
faith  is  required.  They  must  be  such  as  are  willing  to  fol-
low God's  leading,  step  by  step,  often  seeing  only  the  one
advance  step  clearly.    They  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight.

Nicodemus. — But  I  do  not  understand  you.  What  do
you  mean?  "How  can  a  man  be  begotten  when  he  is  old?
can  he  enter  a  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb,  and  be
born?"  Or  do  you  mean  that  the  repentance  preached
by  "John  the  Immerser,"  and  signified  by  baptism  in
water,  is  somehow  a  symbolic  birth?  I  notice  that  your
disciples  preach  and  baptize  similarly.  Is  this  the  new
birth  necessary  to  those  who  would  see  or  enter  your
Kingdom?

Jesus. — Our  nation  is  a  consecrated  nation,  a  covenant
people.  They  were  all  baptized  into  Moses  in  the  sea  and
in  the  cloud  when  they  left  Egypt.  God  accepted  them
in  Moses,  the  mediator  of  their  covenant,  at  Sinai ;  but  they
have  forgotten  their  covenant,  some  are  openly  living  as
publicans  and  sinners,  and  many  others  are  self-righteous
hypocrites;  hence  John's  preaching  and  that  of  my  disciples
is  repentance — a  return  to  God  and  to  a  recognition  of  the
covenant  made;  and  the  baptism  of  John  signifies  this  re-
pentance and  reformation  of  heart  and  life,  and  not  the  new
birth.  But  unless  you  have  more  than  this  you  will  never
see  the  Kingdom.  Except  in  addition  to  the  reformation
symbolized  by  John's  baptism  you  receive  a  begetting  and
birth  of  the  spirit,  you  cannot  see  my  Kingdom.  Repent-
ance will  bring  you  back  to  a  justified  condition;  in  that
condition  you  will  be  able  readily  to  recognize  me  as  Mes-


38o


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


siali,  the  antitype  of  Moses;  and  thus  consecrating  to  me
you  will  be  begottett  of  the  Father  to  a  new  life  and  the  di-
vine nature,  which,  if  it  develop  and  become  quickened,
will  insure  your  being  borji  a  new  creature,  a  spirit  being,
in  the  first  resurredtion ;  and  as  such  you  shall  not  only  see
but  share  the  Kingdom.

The  change  to  be  wrought  by  this  new  birth  of  the  Spirit
is  truly  great,  Nicodemus;  for  that  which  is  born  of  the
flesh  is  flesh,  but  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit.
Wonder  not,  then,  at  my  first  statement,  that  you  must  be
begoitc7i  from  above  ere  you  can  understand,  know  and  ap-
preciate the  things  of  which  you  inquire.  "Marvel  not
that  I  said  unto  thee,  Ye  must  be  born  again."  The
difference  between  your  present  condition,  born  of  the
flesh,  and  the  condition  of  those  born  of  the  Spirit,  who
shall  enter  into  or  constitute  the  Kingdom  I  am  preaching,
is  very  great.  Let  me  give  you  an  illustration  by  which
you  will  gain  some  idea  of  the  beings  who,  when  born  of
the  Spirit,  will  constitute  this  Kingdom The  wind
bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound  there-
of, but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it  go-

eth  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."    As  the

wind  blows  here  and  there,  you  cannot  see  it,  though  it  ex-
erts an  influence  all  about  you.  You  know  not  whence  it
comes  nor  where  it  goes.  This  is  as  good  an  illustration
as  I  can  give  you  of  those  born  of  the  Spirit  in  the  resur-
redion,  those  who  will  "enter  into"  or  constitute  the
Kingdom  which  I  am  now  preaching.  They  will  all  be  as
invisible  as  the  wind,  and  men,  not  born  of  the  Spirit,  will
neither  know  whence  they  come  nor  whither  they  go.

Nicodemus.— How  can  this  be?— invisible  beings!

Jesus.— "Art  thou  a  master  in  Israel,  and  knowest  not
these  things? '  '—that  spirit  beings  can  be  present,  yet  invis-
ible?   Have  you,  who  attempt  to  teach  others,  never  read


The  Kingdom  of  God.


281


about  Elisha  and  his  servant,  or  about  Balaam's  ass?  and
the  many  instances  in  the  Scriptures  which  illustrate  this
principle,  that  spirit  beings  can  be  present  among  men,  yet
invisible  ?  Furthermore,  you  are  of  the  Pharisees,  who  pro-
fessedly believe  in  angels  as  spirit  beings.  But  this  illus-
trates what  I  told  you  at  first :  Except  a  man  be  begotten
from  above,  he  cannot  see  [know,  become  acquainted  with,
or  understand  as  reasonable]  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  the
various  things  connecftcd  with  it.

If  you  would  enter  into  and  become  a  joint-heir  with  me
of  that  kingdom  which  I  am  announcing,  you  must  follow
the  light,  step  by  step.  As  you  do  so,  more  light  will  come,
and  this  as  rapidly  as  you  will  be  prepared  for  it.  I  have
been  preaching  these  things  now  due  which  you  can  under-
stand, and  performing  miracles,  and  you  acknowledge  me
to  be  a  teacher  come  from  God,  but  you  have  not  a6ted  out
your  faith  and  openly  become  my  disciple  and  follower.
You  must  not  expedl  to  see  more,  until  you  live  up  to  all
you  do  see ;  then  God  will  give  you  more  light  and  evi-
dence for  the  next  step.  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee,
we  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have  seen,
and  ye  [Pharisees]  receive  not  our  witness.  If  I  have  told
you  earthly  things,  and  ye  believe  not,  how  shall  ye  believe
if  I  tell  you  of  heavenly  things  ?' '  It  would  be  useless  for
me  to  attempt  to  tell  you  of  heavenly  things,  for  you  would
not  be  convinced  and  my  preaching  would  seem  the  more
foolish  to  you.  If  what  I  have  taught,  which  has  been  of
an  earthly  charadler,  or  illustrated  by  earthly  things,  which
you  could  and  do  understand,  has  not  brought  conviftion
enough  to  your  mind  to  lead  you  openly  to  become  my  dis-
ciple  and  follower,  it  would  be  no  more  convincing  to  you
if  I  were  to  tell  you  of  heavenly  things,  of  which  you  know
nothing  ;  for  no  man  has  ever  ascended  into  heaven,  hence
none  could  corroborate  my  testimony.    I.  who  descended


282


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


from  heaven,  alone  understand  heavenly  things.  "  No
man  hath  ascended  up  to  heaven,  but  he  that  came  down
from  heaven,  even  the  Son  of  man."*  A  knowledge  of
the  heavenly  things  can  be  received  only  after  the  begetting
of  the  Spirit ;  and  the  heavenly  things  themselves,  when
born  of  the  spirit,  spirit  beings.

Thus  it  required  patience  on  the  Lord's  part,  in  declar-
ing the  nature  of  the  kingdom  to  those  whose  prejudices
and  education  hindered  their  seeing  anything  except  dis-
torted views  of  the  earthly  phase  of  it.  Nevertheless  the
sele6lion  of  a  proper  class  to  share  Messiah's  kingdom  pro-
ceeded, though  but  a  few  were  selected  from  Israel,  to  whom
exclasively  it  was  offered  for  seven  years.  As  God  had
foreseen,  through  their  unreadiness  for  it,  and  their  failure
to  grasp  and  comply  with  the  conditions  presented,  the
privilege  of  sharing  in  Messiah's  kingdom  passed  from  them
as  a  people,  only  a  remnant  of  whom  received  it,  and  came
to  the  Gentiles  to  take  out  of  them  also  "a  people  for  his
name."  And  among  these  also  only  a  remnant,  a  "little
flock,"  appreciate  the  privilege  and  are  counted  worthy
of  joint-heirship  in  his  kingdom  and  glory.

Serious  has  been  the  error  introduced  into  the  nominal
Christian  Church,  which  misinterprets  this  promised  king-
dom to  mean  merely  the  Church  nominal  in  its  present  con-
dition, and  its  work  merely  a  work  of  grace  in  the  hearts
of  believers ;  and  to  such  an  extreme  has  this  error  been
carried  that  the  present  unholy  alliance  and  reign  of  the
Church  nominal  with  the  world  is  believed  by  many  to  be
the  reign  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth.  True,
there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  Church  is  now  the  Kingdom
of  God,  and  a  work  of  grace  is  now  going  on  in  the  hearts
of  believers  ;  but  to  consider  this  all,  and  to  deny  a  veritable

*The  words  "  w/izV/i  is  in  heaven"  (verse  1 3)  are  not  found  in  the
most  ancient  and  reliable  MSS.


The  Kingdom  of  God.


283


ftiture  Kingdom  of  God  yet  to  be  established  under  the
whole  heavens,  in  which  the  will  of  God  will  be  done  as  it
is  in  heaven,  is  to  make  void  and  meaningless  the  strongest
Ind  most  pointed  promises  recorded  by  our  Lord  and  the
ipostles  and  prophets,  for  our  encouragement  and  help  in
overcoming  the  world.

In  the  parables  of  our  Lord,  the  Church  is  frequently
called  the  kingdom ;  and  the  Apostle  speaks  of  it  as  the  king-
dom over  which  Christ  now  reigns,  saying  that  God  hath
translated  us  out  of  the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  king-
dom of  his  dear  Son.  We  who  accept  of  Christ  now  rec-
ognize his  purchased  right  of  dominion,  and  render  him
grateful  and  voluntary  obedience  before  he  forcibly  estab-
lishes it  in  the  world.  We  recognize  the  difference  between
the  laws  of  righteousness,  which  he  will  enforce,  and  the
kingdom  of  darkness  supported  by  the  usurper,  at  present
the  prince  of  this  world.  Faith  in  God's  promises  thus
changes  our  allegiance,  and  we  reckon  ourselves  subjedts  of
the  new  prince,  and,  by  his  favor,  joint-heirs  with  him  in
that  kingdom  yet  to  be  set  up  in  power  and  great  glory.

But  this  faft  by  no  means  disannuls  the  promises  that
ultimately  Christ's  kingdom  shall  be  "from  sea  to  sea,  and
from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth"  (Psa.  72  :  8);  that
all  nations  shall  serve  and  obey  him ;  and  that  unto  him
■every  knee  shall  bow,  of  things  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth.
(Dan.  7:27;  Phil.  2  :  10.)  Rather,  on  the  contrary,  the  se-
ledlion  now  of  the  "  little  flock  "  confirms  those  promises.

When  the  parables  of  our  Lord  are  carefully  examined,
it  will  be  found  that  they  clearly  teach  that  the  coming  or
setting  up  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  power  is  future ;  and,
as  a  matter  of  course,  not  until  the  King  comes.  Thus  the
parable  of  the  young  nobleman  going  into  a  far  country  to
receive  a  kingdom  and  to  return,  etc.  (Luke  19:  11-15),
clearly  locates  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  at  the  re-


a84


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ton  of  Christ.  And  the  message  sent  by  the  Lord  to  the
Church  long  years  afterward  was,  "Be  thou  faithful  unto
death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life."  (Rev.  2  :  10.)
From  this  it  is  evident  that  the  kings  who  will  reign  with
him  will  not  be  crowned  nor  reign  as  kings  in  this  life.

The  Church  at  present,  therefore,  is  not  the  Kingdom  of
God  set  up  in  power  and  glory,  but  in  its  incipient,  em-
bryo condition.  And  so,  indeed,  all  the  expressions  of  the
New  Testament  with  reference  to  it  teach.  The  kingdom
of  heaven  now  suffers  violence  at  the  hands  of  the  world  ;
the  King  was  maltreated  and  crucified  ;  and  whosoever  will
follow  in  his  footsteps  shall  suffer  persecution  and  violence
in  some  form.  This,  it  will  be  observed,  is  true  only  of
the  real  Church,  and  not  of  the  nominal  one.  But  the
promise  is  held  out  that  if  now  we  (the  Church,  the  em-
bryo kingdom)  suffer  with  Christ,  we  also,  in  due  time,
when  he  takes  to  himself  his  great  power  and  reigns,  shall
be  glorified  and  shall  reign  with  him.

James  (2  :  5),  in  harmony  with  our  Lord's  teaching,  tells
us  that  God  has  chosen  the  poor  and  despised  according
to  this  world's  standards,  not  to  reign  now,  but  as  heirs
of  the  kingdom  which  he  hath  promised.''''  The  Lord  says,
"  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the
Kingdom  of  God."  (Mark  10:23.)  It  is  evident  that  he
does  not  mean  the  nominal  Church,  which  is  now  reigning
with  the  world ;  for  the  rich  are  pressed  into  it.  Peter  ex-
horts the  heirs  of  the  kingdom  to  patience,  perseverance,
virtue  and  faith,  saying :  "  Brethren,  give  diligence  to  make
your  calling  and  eledlion  sure ;  for  if  ye  do  these  things
ye  shall  never  fall ;  for  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered
unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our
Lord  and  Savior,  Jesus  Christ." — 2 Peter  i  :  10,  ii.

Paul's  statement  in  Rom.  14:  17  is  supposed  by  some
to  refer  to  a  Jigurative  kingdom ;  but  when  examined  in  the


The  Kingdom  of  God.


285


light  of  the  context,  it  is  evident  that  the  passage  means
simply  this :  We,  brethren,  translated  now  into  the  king-
dom of  God's  dear  Son,  have  certain  liberties  as  to  our
food,  etc. ,  which  we  had  not  as  Jews  under  the  law  (verse
14);  yet  let  us  rather  not  use  this  liberty  if  it  causo  breth-
ren who  do  not  yet  realize  it  to  stumble  and  violate  their
consciences.  Let  us  not,  by  our  liberty  as  to  our  food,  ruin
our  brother  for  whom  Christ  died ;  but  let  us  remember  that
the  privileges  of  the  kingdom,  both  now  and  in  the  future,
consist  of  much  greater  blessings  than  liberty  as  to  food ;
namely,  in  our  liberty  as  to  right-doing,  our  peace  toward
God  through  Christ,  and  our  joy  in  participating  in  the
Holy  Spirit  of  God.  These  liberties  of  the  kingdom  (now
and  ever)  are  so  great  that  the  minor  liberty  as  to  food  may
well  be  sacrificed,  for  the  present,  for  our  brother's  good.

Thus,  no  matter  from  what  Scripture  standpoint  we  look,
the  idea  that  the  kingdom  promises  are  mythical  decep-
tions, or  that  our  present  conditions  fulfil  these  promises,
is  contradidted.

With  the  early  Church,  the  promises  of  kingdom  honor
and  joint-heirship  with  the  Master  were  strong  incentives
to  faithfulness  under  present  trials  and  persecutions,  which
they  had  been  forewarned  to  expedt ;  and  in  all  the  words
of  comfort  and  encouragement  in  the  Apocalypse,  given  to
the  seven  churches,  none  shine  out  more  clearly  and  forcibly
than  those  which  declare,  "To  him  that  overcometh  will  I
grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I  also  overcame
and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in  his  throne  and,  "  To
him  that  overcometh  will  I  give  power  over  the  nations."

These  are  promises  which  could  not  reasonably  be  mis-
construed to  apply  to  a  present  work  of  grace  in  the  heart,
nor  yet  to  a  reign  over  the  nations  in  the  present  life  ;  since
they  who  would  overcome  must  do  so  by  death  in  the  ser-
vice, and  thus  gain  the  kingdom  honors. — Rev.  20 :  6.


286


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


But  human  nature  seeks  to  avoid  suffering  and  is  ever
ready  to  grasp  honor  and  power ;  hence  we  find  that  even
in  the  apostles'  day  some  in  the  Church  were  disposed  to
appropriate  the  promises  of  future  honor  and  power  to  the
present  Hfe,  and  were  beginning  to  a<5l  as  though  they
thought  the  time  had  already  come  for  the  world  to  honor
and  even  to  obey  the  Church.  The  Apostle  Paul  writes^
correcting  this  error,  knowing  that  such  ideas  would  have
an  injurious  effeft  upon  the  Church  by  cultivating  pride
and  leading  away  from  sacrifice.  He  says  to  them,  iron-
ically, "Now  ye  are  full,  now  ye  are  rich  ;  ye  have  reigned
as  kings  without  us."  And  then  he  adds,  earnestly,  "I
would  to  God  ye  did  reign,  that  we  [persecuted  apostles}
also  might  reign  with  you."  (i  Cor.  4:8.)  They  were  en-
joying their  Christianity  by  trying  to  get  out  of  it  and  with
it  as  much  honor  as  possible  ;  and  the  Apostle  well  knew
that  if  they  were  faithful  as  followers  of  the  Lord  they  would
be  in  no  such  condition.  Hence  he  reminds  them  that  if
indeed  the  long-looked -for  reign  had  begun,  he  also  would
be  reigning  no  less  than  they,  and  of  the  fa6l  that  he  by
faithfulness  was  a  sufferer  for  the  truth's  sake,  which  was
a  proof  that  their  reign  was  premature,  and  a  snare  rather
than  a  glory.  Then,  with  a  touch  of  irony,  he  adds,  "We
[apostles  and  faithful  servants]  are  fools  for  Christ's  sake,
but  ye  are  wise  in  Christ ;  we  are  weak,  but  ye  are  strong ;
ye  are  honorable,  but  we  are  despised."  I  do  not  write
these  things  merely  to  shame  you :  I  have  a  better  and  a
nobler  objedt — to  warn  you  ;  for  the  path  of  present  honor
leads  not  to  the  glory  and  honor  to  be  revealed  ;  but  present
suffering  and  self-denial  are  the  narrow  path  to  glory,  honor,
immortality  and  joint-heirship  in  the  kingdom.  Where-
fore, I  beseech  you,  be  ye  followers  of  me.  Suffer  and  be
reviled  and  persecuted  now,  that  you  may  share  with  me
the  crown  of  life,  which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  will


The  Kingaom  of  God.


give  me  at  that  day  ;  and  not  to  me  only,  but  unto  all  those
that  love  his  appearing. — i  Cor.  4  :  10-17 ;  2  Tim.  4.:  8.

But,  after  a  great  deal  of  persecution  had  been  faithfully
endured  by  the  early  Church,  theories  began  to  spread  to
the  effe<ft  that  the  mission  of  the  Church  was  to  conquer
the  world,  establish  the  kingdom  of  heaven  on  earth  and
reign  over  the  nations  before  the  Lord's  second  advent.  This
laid  the  foundation  for  worldly  intrigue,  pomp  and  pride,
ostentatious  show  and  ceremony  in  the  Church,  which  was
designed  to  impress,  captivate  and  overawe  the  world,  and
which  led  step  by  step  to  the  great  claims  of  Papacy  that  as
God's  kingdom  on  earth  it  had  a  right  to  command  the  re-
spe(£l  and  obedience  to  its  laws  and  officers  of  every  kindred,
nation  and  people.  Under  this  false  claim  (and  they  seem-
ingly deceived  themselves  as  well  as  others)  Papacy  for  a
time  crowned  and  uncrowned  the  kings  of  Europe,  and  still
claims  the  authority  which  it  is  now  unable  to  enforce.

The  same  idea  through  Papacy  has  come  down  to  Protest-
antism, which  also  claims,  though  more  vaguely,  that  some-
how the  reign  of  the  Church  is  in  progress ;  and  like  the
Corinthians  its  adherents  are  "full"  and  "rich,"  and  reign
"as  kings,"  as  graphically  described  by  our  Lord.  (Rev.
3  :  17,  18.)  Thus  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  merely  nom-
inal members  of  the  Church — those  not  really  converted,
not  really  wheat,  but  tares,  mere  imitations  of  the  wheat —
far  outnumber  the  true  disciples  of  Christ.  And  these  are
much  opposed  to  every  real  sacrifice  and  self-denial,  do  not
suffer  persecution  for  righteousness'  [truth's]  sake,  and  at
most  hold  to  only  a  form  of  fastings,  etc. ,  instead.  They  are
really  reigning  with  the  world  and  are  not  in  the  line  of
preparation  for  sharing  in  the  real  kingdom  which  is  to  be
set  up  by  our  Lord  at  his  second  presence.

To  any  careful  observer,  there  is  a  manifest  incongruity
between  this  view  and  the  teaching  of  Jesus  and  the  apostles.


388


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


They  taught  that  there  can  be  no  kingdom  until  the  King
comes.  (Rev.  20  :  6 ;  3:21;  2  Tim.  2  :  12.)  Consequently
the  kingdom  of  heaven  must  suffer  violence  U7itil  that  time,
when  it  shall  be  set  up  in  glory  and  power.

TWO  PHASES  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

While  it  is  true,  as  stated  by  our  Lord,  that  the  Kingdom
of  God  Cometh  not — does  not  make  its  first  appearance —
with  outward  show,  in  due  time  it  is  to  be  made  manifest
to  all  by  outward,  visible  and  unmistakable  signs.  When
fully  set  up,  the  Kingdom  of  God  will  be  of  two  parts,  a
spiritual  or  heavenly  phase  and  an  earthly  or  human  phase.
The  spiritual  will  always  be  invisible  to  men,  as  those  com-
posing it  will  be  of  the  divine,  spiritual  nature,  which  no
man  hath  seen  nor  can  see  (i  Tim.  6:  16;  John  i  :  18);
yet  its  presence  and  power  will  be  mightily  manifested,
chiefly  through  its  human  representatives,  who  will  consti-
tute the  earthly  phase  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.

Those  who  will  constitute  the  spiritual  phase  of  the  king-
dom are  the  overcoming  saints  of  the  Gospel  age — the
Christ,  head  and  body — glorified.  Their  resurredlion  and
exaltation  to  power  precedes  that  of  all  others,  because
through  this  class  all  others  are  to  be  blessed.  (Heb.  1 1  :  39,
40.)  Theirs  is  the  first  resurrection.  (Rev.  20:  5*.)  The
great  work  before  this  glorious  anointed  company — the

*  In  this  verse  the  words  "  But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  again
until  the  thousand  years  were  finished"  are  spurious.  They  are  not
found  in  the  oldest  and  most  reUable  Greek  MSS.,  the  Sinaitic,  Vatican
Nos.  1209  and  1 160,  nor  the  Syriac  MS.  We  must  remember  that  many
passages  found  in  the  modem  copies  are  additions  which  do  not  prop-
erly belong  to  the  Bible.  Since  commanded  not  to  add  to  the  Word  of
God,  it  is  our  duty  to  repudiate  such  additions  as  soon  as  their  spurious
character  is  established.  The  words  indicated  probably  crept  into  the
text  by  accident,  in  the  fifth  century;  for  no  MS.  of  earlier  date  (either
Greek  or  Syriac)  contains  this  clause.  It  was  probably  at  first  merely  a
marginal  comment  made  by  a  reader,  expressive  of  bis  thought  upon  the


The  Kingdom  of  God.


289


Christ — necessitates  their  exaltation  to  the  divine  nature :
no  other  than  divine  power  could  accomplish  it.  Theirs
is  a  work  pertaining  not  only  to  this  world,  but  to  all  things
in  heaven  and  in  earth — among  spiritual  as  well  as  among
human  beings. — Matt.  28:18;  Col.  1:20;  Eph.  1:10;
Phil.  2  :  10 ;  i  Cor.  6  :  3.

The  work  of  the  earthly  phase  of  the  Kingdom  of  God
will  be  confined  to  this  world  and  to  humanity.  And  those
so  highly  honored  as  to  have  a  share  in  it  will  be  the  most
text,  and  copied  into  the  body  of  the  text  by  some  subsequent  transcriber
who  failed  to  distinguish  between  the  text  and  the  comment.

However,  the  repudiation  of  this  clause  is  not  essential  to  the  "  Plan  "
as  herein  set  forth ;  for  the  rest  of  the  dead — the  world  at  large — will
not  live  again  in  the  full  sense,  in  the  perfedt  sense  that  Adam  lived  be-
fore he  sinned  and  came  under  the  sentence  "  dying  thou  shalt  die."
Perfe<f\  life  without  weakness  or  dying  is  the  only  sense  in  which  God
recognizes  the  word  life.  From  his  standpoint  all  the  world  has  al-
ready lost  life,  is  dying,  and  might  now  be  more  properly  described  as
dead  than  as  alive. — 2  Cor.  5  :  14;  Matt.  8  :  22.

The  word  resurrection  (Greek,  anasiasis)  signifies  raising  up.  As  re-
lated to  man,  it  signifies  raising  up  man  to  that  condition  from  which
he  fell,  to  full  perfecflion  of  manhood — the  thing  lost  through  Adam.
The  perfedion  from  which  our  race  fell  is  the  perfeiflion  to  which  they
■will  gradually  rise,  during  the  Millennial  age  of  restitution  or  resurrec-
tion (raising  up).  Tbe  Millennial  age  is  not  only  the  age  of  trial,  but
also  the  age  of  blessing,  and  through  resurre(flion  or  restitution  to  life
all  that  was  lost  is  to  be  restored  to  all  who,  when  they  know  and  have
opportunity,  gladly  obey.  The  process  of  resurrecflion  will  be  a  gradual
one,  requiring  the  entire  age  for  its  full  accomplishment ;  though  the
mere  awakening  to  a  measure  of  life  and  consciousness,  as  at  present  en-
joyed, will  of  course  be  a  momentary  work.  Consequently  it  will  not
be  until  the  thousand  years  are  finished  that  the  race  will  have  fully
attained  the  complete  measiu-e  of  life  lost  in  Adam.  And  since  any-
thing short  of  perfedl  life  is  a  condition  of  partial  death,  it  follows  that,
although  the  above  words  are  no  part  of  the  inspired  record,  it  would
be  stri(flly  true  to  say  that  the  rest  of  the  dead  will  not  live  again  (will
not  regain  the  fulness  of  life  lost)  until  the  thousand  years  of  restitution
and  blessing  are  complete.
19


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


exalted  and  honored  of  God  among  men.  These  are  the
class  referred  to  in  Chapter  VIII.  (page  145),  whose  judg-
ment day  was  previous  to  the  Gospel  age.  Having  been
tried  and  found  faithful,  in  the  awakening  they  will  not  be
brought  forth  to  judgment  again,  but  will  at  once  receive
the  reward  of  their  faithfulness — an  instantaneous  resurrec-
tion to  perfe6lion  as  men.  (Others  than  these  and  the  spir-
itual class  will  be  gradually  raised  to  perfedlion  during  that
Millennial  age.)  Thus  this  class  will  be  ready  at  once
for  the  great  work  before  it  as  the  human  agents  of  the
Christ  in  restoring  and  blessing  the  remainder  of  mankind.
As  the  spiritual  nature  is  necessary  to  the  accomplishment
of  the  work  of  Christ,  so  perfedt  human  nature  is  appro-
priate for  the  future  accomplishment  of  the  work  to  be  done
among  men.  These  will  minister  among  and  be  seen  of
men,  while  the  glory  of  their  perfedlion  will  be  a  constant
example  and  an  incentive  to  other  men  to  strive  to  attain
the  same  perfedlion.  And  that  these  ancient  worthies  will
be  in  the  human  phase  of  the  kingdom  and  seen  of  man-
kind is  fully  attested  by  Jesus'  words  to  the  unbelieving
Jews  who  were  rejedling  him.  He  said,  "  Ye  shall  see
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  and  all  the  prophets,  in  the
Kingdom  of  God."  It  should  be  noticed  also,  that  the
Master  does  not  mention  that  he  or  the  apostles  will  be  vis-
ible with  Abraham.  As  a  matter  of  fafl,  men  will  see  and
mingle  with  the  earthly  phase  of  the  kingdom,  but  not  with
the  spiritual ;  and  some  will,  no  doubt,  be  sorely  vexed  to
find  that  they  rejedled  so  great  an  honor.

We  are  not  given  explicit  information  as  to  the  exadl
manner  in  which  these  two  phases  of  the  heavenly  kingdom
will  harmoniously  operate ;  but  we  have  an  illustration  of
the  manner  in  which  they  may  operate,  in  God's  dealings
with  Israel  through  their  representatives,  Moses,  Aaron,
Joshua,  the  prophets,  etc. — though  the  coming  manifesta-


The  Kingdom  of  God.


tions  of  divine  power  will  far  exceed  those  of  that  typical
age ;  for  the  work  of  the  coming  age  comprises  the  awaken-
ing of  all  the  dead  and  the  restoration  of  the  obedient  to
perfedtion.  This  work  will  necessitate  the  establishment  of
a  perfect  government  among  men,  with  perfect  men  in  posi-
tions of  control,  that  they  may  rightly  order  the  affairs  of
state.  It  will  necessitate  the  appointment  of  proper  edu-
cational facilities  of  every  charadler,  as  well  as  philan-
thropic measures  of  various  kinds.  And  this  noble  work
of  thus  elevating  the  race  by  sure  and  steady  steps  (under
the  diredlion  of  the  unseen  spiritual  members  of  the  same
kingdom)  is  the  high  honor  to  which  the  ancient  worthies
are  appointed,  and  for  which  they  will  come  forth  prepared
soon  after  the  final  wreck  of  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
and  the  binding  of  Satan,  their  prince.  And  as  the  divinely
honored  representatives  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  they  will
soon  receive  the  honor  and  co-operation  of  all  men.

To  gain  a  place  in  the  earthly  phase  of  the  kingdom  of
God  will  be  to  find  the  gratification  of  every  desire  and
ambition  of  the  perfedl  human  heart.  It  will  be  a  glorious
and  satisfying  portion  from  the  first  entrance  ixito  it.  and
yet  the  glory  will  accumulate  as  time  advances  and  the
blessed  work  progresses.  And  when,  at  the  end  of  a  thou-
sand years,  the  great  work  of  restitution  is  accomplished  by
the  Christ  (in  great  measure  through  the  agency  of  these
noble  human  co-workers);  when  the  whole  human  race  (ex-
cept the  incorrigible — Matt.  25:46;  Rev.  20:9)  stands
approved,  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing,  in
the  presence  of  Jehovah,  these  who  were  instrumental  in
the  work  will  shine  among  their  fellow-men  and  before
God  and  Christ  and  the  angels,  as  "the  stars  forever  and
ever."  (Dan.  12:  3.)  Their  work  and  labor  of  love  will
never  be  forgotten  by  their  grateful  fellow-men.  They  will
be  held  in  everlasting  remembrance. — Psa.  112:6.


292


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


But  great  as  will  be  the  accumulating  glory  of  those  per-
fedl  men  who  will  constitute  the  earthly  phase  of  the  king-
dom, the  glory  of  the  heavenly  will  be  the  glory  that  ex-
celleth.  While  the  former  will  shine  as  the  stars  for-
ever, the  latter  will  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firma-
ment— as  the  sun.  (Dan.  12:3.)  The  honors  of  heaven  as
well  as  of  earth  shall  be  laid  at  the  feet  of  the  Christ.  The
human  mind  can  approximate,  but  cannot  clearly  conceive,
the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  the  Christ  through  the  countless
ages  of  eternity. — Rom.  8:18;  Eph.  2  :  7-12.

It  is  through  these  two  phases  of  the  kingdom  that  the
promise  to  Abraham  is  to  be  verified — "In  thee  and  in  thy
seed  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed."  "Thy
seed  shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea,  and  as  the  stars  of
heaven" — an  earthly  and  a  heavenly  seed,  both  God's  in-
struments of  blessing  to  the  world.  Both  phases  of  the
promises  were  clearly  seen  and  intended  by  God  from  the
beginning,  but  only  the  earthly  was  seen  by  Abraham.
And  though  God  selected  from  the  natural  seed  the  chief
of  the  spiritual  class  (the  apostles  and  others),  and  proffered
the  chief  blessing,  the  spiritual,  to  all  of  that  nation  living
in  the  due  time  for  that  heavenly  call,  this  was  just  so  much
beyond  what  Abraham  ever  saw  in  the  covenant — favoi
upon  favor.

Paul  (Rom.  11:17)  speaks  of  the  Abrahamic  covenant
as  a  root  out  of  which  fleshly  Israel  grew  naturally,  but  into
which  the  Gentile  believers  were  grafted  when  the  natural
branches  were  cut  off  because  of  unbelief.  This  proves
tlie  double  fulfilment  of  the  promise  in  the  development  of
the  two  seeds,  earthly  (human)  and  heavenly  (spiritual),
which  will  constitute  the  two  phases  of  the  kingdom.  This
root-covenant  bears  these  two  distindl  kinds  of  branches,
each  of  which  in  the  resurrection  will  bear  its  own  distincSlt
kind  of  perfedl  fruitage — the  human  and  spiritual  classes  m


The  Kingdom  of  God.


293


kingdom  power.  In  order  of  development  it  was  first  the
natural  (earthly),  afterward  the  heavenly  rulers ;  but  in  order
of  grandeur  of  position  and  time  of  instalment,  it  will  be
first  the  spiritual,  afterward  the  natural ;  and  so  there  are
last  which  shall  be  first,  and  first  which  shall  be  last. — Matt.
19  :  30  ;  Luke  16  :  16.

The  promise  made  to  Abraham,  to  which  Stephen  refers
(A(5ls  7:5),  and  in  which  Israel  trusted,  was  earthly :  it
related  to  the  land.  God  "promised  that  he  would  give
it  to  him  for  a  possession,"  said  Stephen.  And  God  said
to  Abraham,  "Lift  up  now  thine  eyes,  and  look  from  the
place  where  thou  art,  northward  and  southward  and  east-
ward and  westward ;  for  all  the  land  which  thou  seest,  to
thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed  forever.  And  I  will
make  thy  seed  as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  so  that  if  a  man  can
number  the  dust  of  the  earth,  then  shall  thy  seed  be  num-
bered. Arise,  walk  through  the  land,  in  the  length  of  it
and  in  the  breadth  of  it;  for  I  will  give  it  unto  thee."
(Gen.  13:14-17.)  Stephen  shows  that  this  promise
yet  be  fulfilled ;  for  he  declares  that  God  gave  Abraham
"none  inheritance  in  it  [in  the  land],  no,  not  so  much  as
to  set  his  foot  on."

The  Apostle,  writing  of  this  same  class  of  ancient  wor-
thies— Abraham  among  others — agrees  with  Stephen's  state-
ment that  the  promise  to  Abraham  has  not  yet  been  fulfilled ;
and  he  goes  further  and  shows  that  those  earthly  promises
cannot  and  will  not  be  fulfilled  until  the  still  higher  heav-
enly promises  concerning  the  Christ  (Head  and  body)  are
fulfilled.  He  says  of  them :  These  all  died  in  faith,  not
[/.  e.,  without]  having  received  [the  fulfilment  of]  the
promise,  God  having  provided  some  better  thing  for  us  [the
Christ],  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect.
(Heb.  II  :  13,  39,  40.)  Thus  is  shown  again  that  the  Re-
deemer and  Restorer  is  spiritual,  having  given  up  the  human


294


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


a  sacrifice  for  all,  and  that  from  this  spiritual  class  when  highly
exalted  all  blessings  must  proceed,  whoever  may  be  hon-
ored as  its  instruments  or  agents. — Rom.  12:1;  Gal.  3:29.

The  earthly  phase  of  the  kingdom  is  thus  seen  to  be
Israelitish ;  and  around  this  fadl  cluster  those  many  proph-
ecies which  relate  to  the  prominence  of  that  nation  in  God's
plan  for  the  future  blessing  of  the  world,  when  their  taber-
nacle, fallen  in  the  dust,  shall  be  restored,  and  Jerusalem
shall  be  a  praise  in  the  whole  earth.  We  find  statements
by  both  prophets  and  apostles  which  clearly  indicate  that
in  the  times  of  restitution  Israel  as  a  nation  will  be  the  first
among  the  nations  to  come  into  harmony  with  the  new  order
of  things ;  that  the  earthly  Jerusalem  will  be  rebuilt  upon
her  old  heaps ;  and  that  their  polity  will  be  restored  as  in
the  beginning  under  princes  or  judges.  (Isa.  i  :  26 ;  Psa.
45  :  16  ;  Jer.  30  :  18.)  And  what  could  be  more  reasonably
expedled  than  that  Israel  should  first  of  all  rejoice  to  recog-
nize the  prophets  and  patriarchs  ?  and  that  their  acquaint-
ance with  and  long  discipline  under  the  law  should  have
prepared  them  for  tra6lability  and  obedience  under  the
authority  of  the  kingdom?  And  while  Israel  will  be  the
first  of  the  nations  to  be  recognized  and  blessed,  it  is  writ-
ten also  of  Israel  that  "The  Lord  shall  save  the  tents  of
Judah  first."

We  do  not  deem  it  of  importance  to  enter  into  a  discus-
sion as  to  where  the  "  lost  tribes ' '  of  Israel  are  to  be  sought.
It  may  or  may  not  be  true,  as  some  claim,  that  those  "lost
tribes"  are  traceable  to  certain  civilized  nations  of  the
present  day.  But  though  some  of  the  suggested  proofs  are
not  unreasonable,  yet,  as  a  whole,  it  is  largely  inference
and  guess-work.  But  should  it  yet  be  clearly  demonstrated
that  some  of  the  civilized  nations  are  descendants  of  the
lost  tribes,  it  would  prove  no  advantage  to  them  under  the
"heavenly"  "high  calling,"  which,  since  their  national  re-


TJie  Kingdom  of  God.


295


je(n:ion,  knows  no  difference  between  Jew  and  Greek,  bond
and  free.  Should  such  evidence  ever  become  clear  (which
as  yet  it  is  not),  it  would  be  in  perfect  harmony  with  the
prophecies  and  promises  relating  to  that  nation  yet  await-
ing fulfilment  in  and  under  the  earthly  phase  of  the  kingdom.

Natural  attachment,  as  well  as  a  still  surviving  measure  of
trust  in  the  long  unfulfilled  promises,  and  all  their  natural
prejudices,  will  be  favorable  to  Israel's  general  and  speedy
acceptance  of  the  new  rulers ;  while  their  habits  of  measur-
able obedience  to  the  law  will  also  be  favorable  to  their
speedy  harmony  with  the  principles  of  the  new  government.

As  Jerusalem  was  the  seat  of  empire  under  the  typical
Kingdom  of  God,  it  will  again  occupy  the  same  position,
and  be  "the  city  of  the  Great  King."  (Psa.  48 :  2;  Matt.
5  :  35.)  A  city  is  a  symbol  of  a  kingdom  or  dominion,  and
so  God's  Kingdom  is  symbolized  by  the  New  Jerusalem,  the
new  dominion  coming  from  heaven  to  earth.  At  first  it
will  consist  of  only  the  spiritual  class,  the  Bride  of  Christ,
which,  as  seen  by  John,  will  gradually  come  down  to  earth ;
that  is,  it  will  gradually  come  into  power  as  the  present  em-
pires break  in  pieces,  during  the  Day  of  the  Lord.  In  due
time,  however,  the  earthly  phase  of  this  city  or  government
will  be  established,  parts  or  members  of  which  will  be  the
ancient  worthies.  There  will  not  be  two  cities  (govern-
ments), but  one  city,  one  heavenly  government,  the  one  for
which  Abraham  looked,  "a  city  which  hath  foundations"
— a  government  established  in  righteousness,  being  founded
upon  the  sure  rock  foundation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ
the  Redeemer,  the  value  of  man's  ransom  which  he  gave,
and  the  firmness  of  divine  justice,  which  can  no  more  con-
demn the  redeemed  than  it  could  previously  excuse  the
guilty. — Rom.  8:  31-34;  i  Cor.  3:11.

Glorious  City  of  Peace  !  whose  walls  signify  salvation,
protedlion  and  blessing  to  all  who  enter  it,  whose  founda-


296


TTie  Plan  of  the  Ages.


tions  laid  in  justice  can  never  be  moved,  and  whose  builder
and  designer  is  God  !  It  is  in  the  light  which  will  shine
from  this  glorious  city  (kingdom)  of  God  that  the  nations
(people)  will  walk  on  the  highway  of  holiness,  up  to  per-
fedtion  and  to  full  harmony  with  God. — Rev.  21 :  24.  *

When  mankind  reaches  perfeftion  at  the  close  of  the
Millennial  age,  as  already  shown,  they  will  be  admitted  into
membership  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  and  given  the  entire
control  of  earth  as  at  first  designed — each  man  a  sovereign,
a  king.  This  is  clearly  shown  in  the  symbolic  proph-
ecy of  John  (Rev.  21 :  24-26);  for  in  vision  he  not  only
saw  the  people  walk  in  the  light  of  it,  but  he  saw  the  kings
enter  it  in  glory ;  yet  none  could  enter  who  would  defile  it.
None  can  become  identified  with  that  city  (kingdom)  who
has  not  first  been  thoroughly  tested ;  none  who  would  work,
or  love  to  work,  deceit  and  unrighteousness;  only  those
whom  the  Lamb  will  write  as  worthy  of  life  everlasting,
and  to  whom  he  will  say,  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,
inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you."

It  should  be  remembered,  then,  that  though  undoubtedly
the  literal  city  of  Jerusalem  will  be  rebuilt,  and  though
probably  it  will  become  the  capital  of  the  world,  yet  many
prophecies  which  mention  Jerusalem  and  its  future  glories
refer,  under  that  as  a  symbol,  to  the  Kingdom  of  God  to  be
established  in  great  splendor.

Concerning  the  future  glory  of  the  earthly  phase  of  the
kingdom  as  represented  in  Jerusalem,  the  prophets  speak
in  glowing  terms,  saying:  "Break  forth  into  joy,  sing  to-
gether, ye  waste  places  of  Jerusalem ;  for  the  Lord  hath
comforted  his  people,  he  hath  redeemed  Jerusalem. "  "  Be-
hold, I  create  Jerusalem  a  rejoicing,  and  her  people  a  joy."

*  The  following  words  are  omitted  from  this  verse  by  the  most  authen-
tic ancient  nwnuscripts,  viz.,  "  of  them  which  are  saved"  also  "and  hon-
or."   The  latter  words  are  also  lacking  from  verse  26.


The  Kingdom  of  God.


297


"  Rejoice  ye  with  Jerusalem  and  be  glad  with  her,  .  .  .  that
ye  may  be  delighted  with  the  abundance  of  her  glory ;  for
saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  I  will  extend  peace  to  her  like  a
river,  and  the  glory  of  the  Gentiles  like  a  flowing  stream."
"At  that  time  they  shall  call  Jerusalem  the  throne  of  the
Lord,  and  all  nations  shall  be  gathered  unto  it."  "And
many  people  shall  go  and  say.  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up
to  the  mountain  [kingdom]  of  the  Lord,  to  the  house  of
the  God  of  Jacob ;  and  he,  will  teach  us  of  his  ways,  and
we  will  walk  in  his  paths ;  for  out  of  Zion  [the  spiritual
phase]  shall  go  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from
Jerusalem  " — the  earthly  phase. — Isa.  52:9]  65  :  18  ;  66  :
10-12;  Jer.  3:  17;  Isa.  2:  3.

When  considering  the  many  precious  promises  of  future
blessing  made  to  Israel,  and  expe6ling  an  accurate  fulfil-
ment of  them  to  that  people,  it  is  proper  that  we  should
remember  that  as  a  people  they  are  typical,  as  well  as  a<5tual.
In  one  aspeft  they  are  typical  of  the  whole  world  of  man-
kind; and  their  Law  Covenant,  of  obedience  and  life,  was
typical  of  the  New  Covenant  to  be  established  with  the
world  during  the  Millennial  and  future  ages.

The  blood  of  atonement  under  their  typical  covenant,
and  the  priesthood  which  applied  it  to  that  nation,  typified
the  blood  of  the  New  Covenant  and  the  Royal  Priesthood
which  will,  during  the  Millennium,  apply  its  cleansings
and  blessings  to  the  whole  world.  Thus  their  priesthood
typified  the  Christ,  and  that  nation  typified  all  for  whom
the  real  sacrifice  was  made,  and  to  whom  the  real  blessings
will  come — "every  man,"  "the  whole  world."

Then  let  us  remember  that  though  the  future  blessings,
like  the  past,  will  be  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Gen-
tile, it  will  be  in  the  matter  of  time  only  that  the  Jews  wiU
have  the  precedence  to  divine  favor ;  and  this  we  have  shown
would  be  a  natural  consequence  of  their  training  under  the


298


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Law,  which  in  due  time  will  serve  its  purpose  to  bring  them
to  Christ.  Though  it  brought  only  a  remnant  of  them  at
the  first  advent,  it  will  bring  them  as  a  people  at  the  second
advent,  and  as  a  people  they  will  be  a  first-fruit  among  the
nations.  Ultimately  every  blessing  promised  to  Israel,  ex-
cept those  pertaining  to  the  eledled  classes,  will  have,  not
only  its  aiTtual  fulfilment  in  that  people,  but  also  its  anti-
typical  fulfilment  in  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Under
that  government  "God  will  render  to  every  man  according
to  his  deeds — glory,  honor,  and  peace  to  every  man  that
worketh  good,  to  the  Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Gentile;  for
there  is  no  respedl  of  persons  with  God." — Rom.  2 :  6, 10, 11.

The  Apostle  Paul  calls  our  attention  specially  to  the  sure-
ness  of  God's  promises  to  Israel  in  the  future,  and  shows
what  favors  they  lost  by  unbelief,  and  what  favors  are  still
sure.  He  says  that  it  was  because  of  pride,  hardness  of
heart  and  unbelief  that  Israel  as  a  people  had  not  obtained
that  for  which  they  sought — the  chief  place  in  divine  favor
and  service.  Paul's  reference  here  is  not  to  all  the  genera-
tions of  Israel,  from  Abraham  down,  but  to  those  genera-
tions living  at  the  time  of  the  first  advent ;  and  his  words
would  apply  to  all  their  generations  which  have  lived  during
the  Gospel  age,  the  age  wherein  the  chief  favor  has  been
offered — the  high  calling  to  the  divine  nature  and  joint-
heirship  with  Jesus.  This  favor  Israel  as  a  people  has  failed
to  recognize  and  lay  hold  of.  And  though  God  visited  the
Gentiles  and  called  many  of  them  through  the  gospel,  they,
like  fleshly  Israel,  will  fail  to  obtain  the  heavenly  prize.
Nevertheless,  a  class,  a  remnant,  a  little  flock  from  among
all  the  called  ones,  heeds  the  call,  and,  by  obedience  and  self-
sacrifice,  makes  its  calling  and  eleftion  sure.  Thus  what
Israel  as  a  people  failed  to  obtain,  and  what  the  nominal
Christian  Church  also  fails  to  obtain,  is  given  to  the  eledl
or  sele<Sled  class,  the  faithful  "body  of  Christ" — eledt  or


The  Kingdom  of  God.


299


chosen  (according  to  the  fore-knowledge  of  God)  through
sandlification  of  the  spirit  and  belief  of  the  truth. — 2  Thes.
2:13;  I  Pet.  I  :  2.

But  though,  through  the  rejecftion  of  Messiah,  Israel  did
lose  all  this  special  favor,  yet  Paul  shows  that  this  did  not
prove  them  entirely  cut  off  from  favor;  for  they  still  had  the
same  privilege  of  being  grafted  into  Christ  and  the  spirit-
ual favors  which  the  rest  of  mankind  enjoyed,  if,  during
the  time  that  call  was  being  made,  they  accepted  in  faith ;
for,  argues  Paul,  God  is  as  able  to  graft  them  in  again  as  to
graft  in  wild  branches,  and  as  willing,  if  they  continue  not
in  unbelief. — Rom.  11  :  23,  24.

Moreover,  Paul  argues  that  though  Israel  lost  the  chief
blessing,  "which  heseeketh  for,"  the  chief  place  in  God's
kingdom,  yet  it  remains  that  great  promises  are  still  due
to  be  fulfilled  toward  that  people ;  for,  he  reasons,  God's
gifts,  callings,  covenants  and  promises  are  not  to  be  turned
aside  unfulfilled.  God  knew  the  end  from  the  beginning ;
he  knew  that  Israel  would  rejeft  Messiah  ;  and  his  unequiv-
ocal promises  to  them  in  view  of  this  knowledge  give  us
assurance  that  Israel  is  yet  to  be  used  of  the  Lord  in  service,
as  his  agency  in  blessing  the  world,  though  "  Israel  hath  not
obtained  that  which  he  seeketh  for ' ' — the  chief  favor.  Paul
then  proceeds  to  show  that  God's  covenant  promises  to
Israel  were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  leave  it  open  and  indefi-
nite whether  as  a  people  they  would  be  the  heavenly  or  the
earthly  seed — whether  they  would  inherit  and  fulfil  the
higher  or  the  lower  service  mentioned  in  the  promises.
God  kept  secret  the  higher  spiritual  favor  until  due  time,  and
the  promises  made  to  them  mentioned  the  earthly  favor  only,
though  he  favored  them  by  the  first  offer  of  the  spiritual
favors  also,  and  so  offered  them  more  than  he  had  ever  prom-
ised. In  a  word,  the  heavenly  promises  were  hidden  in  the
earthly.    These  promises,  says  Paul,  cannot  fail,  and  tb«


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


offering  of  the  hidden  favor  first,  and  Israel's  blind  rejec-
ttion  of  it,  in  no  way  invalidates  or  disannuls  the  other
feature  of  the  promise.  Hence  he  declares  that  though
Israel  as  a  nation  is  cast  off  from  favor  during  the  time  the
Bride  of  Christ  is  being  selefted  from  both  Jews  and  Gen-
tiles, yet  the  time  will  come  when,  the  Deliverer  (Christ,
Head  and  body)  being  complete,  divine  favor  will  return
to  fleshly  Israel,  and  the  glorious  Deliverer  will  turn  away
ungodliness  from  Jacob,*  and  so  all  Israel  will  be  saved
[recovered  to  favor],  as  it  is  written  by  the  prophet.  The
Apostle's  words  are  : —

"Brethren,  that  you  may  not  be  conceited  with  your-
selves, I  wish  you  not  to  be  ignorant  of  this  secret,  that
hardness  in  some  measure  has  happened  to  Israel  until  the
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  may  come  in  [until  the  full  number
selected  from  the  Gentiles  has  been  completed].  And  then
all  Israel  will  be  saved,  as  it  has  been  written,  'The  Deliv-
erer [Christ,  Head  and  body]  shall  come  out  of  Zion  and
shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob. '  And  '  This  is  the
covenant  Avith  them  from  me,  when  I  shall  take  away  their
sins.'  In  relation  to  the  Glad  Tidings,  indeed,  they  are
enemies  on  your  account  j  but  in  regard  to  the  eledlion  they
are  [still]  beloved  on  account  of  the  fathers,  because  the
gracious  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  not  things  to  be  re-
pented of.  Besides,  as  you  [Gentiles]  were  once  disobedient
to  God,  but  have  now  obtained  mercy  by  their  disobedi-
ence ;  so  also,  now,  these  have  disobeyed  so  that  they  may
obtain  mercy  through  your  mercy  [at  the  hands  of  the  glori-
fied Church].  For  God  shut  up  together  all,  for  disobedi-
ence, that  he  might  have  mercy  on  all.  [Compare  Rom.
5:  17-19.]  O  the  depth  of  the  riches  and  wisdom  aud
knowledge  of  God." — Rom.  11 :  25-33.


*  Spiritual  Israel  is  never  called  "Jacob."


The  Kingdom  of  God.


30»


HEIRS  OF  THE  KINGDOM.

"Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  [literally  mountain,  sym"
bol  of  kingdom]  of  Jehovah?  or  who  shall  stand  in  his  holy
place  [temple]?  He  that  hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure
heart." — Psa.  24:  3,  4.

The  city  of  Jerusalem  was  built  upon  a  mountain  top —
a  double  top ;  for  it  was  separated  by  the  valley  Tyropoeou
into  two  parts.  Still  it  was  one  city,  surrounded  by  one  wall,
with  bridges  connedting  the  two  divisions.  On  one  of  these
mountain  tops  the  Temple  was  built.  This  might  be  under-
stood to  symbolize  the  union  of  the  kingly  and  the  priestly
qualities  in  the  glorified  Church;  or,  the  one  Kingdom  of
God  with  its  two  phases — the  spiritual  temple,  not  of  earthly
origin,  but  of  a  new,  heavenly  or  spiritual  nature  (Heb.
9:11),  separate  from,  yet  united  with,  the  earthly  phase.

David  appears  to  refer  to  the  two  places.  It  was  an
honor  to  be  of  the  city  at  all,  and  a  still  greater  honor  to
ascend  into  the  holy  temple,  into  the  sacred  precinds  oJ
which  only  the  priests  were  permitted  to  enter.  And  David
shows  that  purity  of  life  and  honesty  of  heart  are  necessary
to  any  who  would  attain  either  honor.  They  that  would  be
of  the  Royal  Priesthood  are  exhorted  to  purity,  even  as  the
high  priest  of  our  profession  is  pure,  if  they  would  be  ac-
counted worthy  of  joint-heirship  with  him.  And  he  that
hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure.
This,  as  already  shown,  is  a  purity  of  intent,  reckoned  to  us
as  absolute  or  adual  purity,  Christ's  imputed  purity  sup-
plying our  unavoidable  deficiency,  and  compensating  for
our  unavoidable  weaknesses,  while  we  walk  after  the  spirit
and  not  after  the  flesh.

But  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  purity,  sincerity  and  en-
tire consecration  to  God  are  essential  to  all  those  who  would
enter  the  Kingdom  of  God  in  either  phase.  It  was  thusi
with  those  ancient  worthies  who  will  inherit  the  earthly


302


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


phase  of  the  kingdom  under  Christ.  They  loved  righteous-
ness and  hated  iniquity,  and  were  deeply  grieved  and  peni-
tent when  overtaken  by  a  fault,  or  stumbled  by  a  weakness
or  besetment.  So,  too,  it  has  been  with  the  faithful  of  the
Gospel  age ;  and  so  it  will  be  with  all  in  the  Millennial  age,
when  the  spirit  of  God,  the  spirit  of  truth,  is  poured  upon
all  flesh.  The  overcomers  of  that  age  will  also  need  to
strive  for  purity  of  heart  and  life,  if  they  would  have  a  right
under  God's  arrangement  to  enter  into  the  city — the  king-
dom prepared  for  them  from  the  foundation  of  the  world
— the  original  dominion  restored.

THE  IRON  RULE.

Many  erroneously  suppose  that  when  Christ's  Millennial
Kingdom  is  inaugurated  every  one  will  be  pleased  with  its
ruling.  But  not  so.  Its  regulations  will  be  far  more  exa6t-
ing  than  those  of  any  previous  government,  and  the  liber-
ties of  the  people  will  be  restri£led  to  a  'degree  that  will  be
galling  indeed  to  many  now  clamoring  for  an  increase  of
liberty.  Liberty  to  deceive,  to  misrepresent,  to  overreach
and  to  defraud  others,  will  be  entirely  cut  off.  Liberty  to
abuse  themselves  or  others  in  food  or  in  drink,  or  in  any  way
to  corrupt  good  manners,  will  be  totally  denied  to  all.
Liberty  or  license  to  do  wrong  of  any  sort  will  not  be
granted  to  any.  The  only  liberty  that  will  be  granted  to
any  will  be  the  true  and  glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God
— liberty  to  do  good  to  themselves  and  others  in  any  and
in  every  way ;  but  nothing  will  be  allowed  to  injure  or
destroy  in  all  that  Holy  Kingdom.  (Isa.  11:9;  Rom.
8:  21.)  That  rule  will  consequently  be  felt  by  many  to  be
a  severe  one,  breaking  up  all  their  former  habits  and  cus-
toms, as  well  as  breaking  up  present  institutions  founded
upon  these  false  habits  and  false  ideas  of  liberty.  Because
of  its  firmness  and  vigor,  it  is  symbolically  called  an  iron


The  Kingdom  of  God.


rule — "  He  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron."  (Compare
Rev.  2:26,27;  Psa.  2:8-12  and  49 :  14.)  Thus  will  be  ful-
filled the  statement,  "  Judgment  will  I  lay  to  the  line  and
righteousness  to  the  plummet.  And  the  hail  [righteous  judg-
ment] shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of  lies,  and  the  waters
[truth]  shall  overflow  the  hiding  place,"  and  every  hidden
thing  shall  be  revealed. — Isa.  28  :  17  ;  Matt.  10  :  26.

Many  will  feel  rebellious  against  that  perfe6t  and  equita-
ble rule  because  accustomed  in  the  past,  under  the  rule  of
the  present  prince,  to  lord  it  over  their  fellow  mortals,  and
to  live  wholly  at  the  expense  of  others  without  rendering
compensating  service.  And  many  and  severe  will  be  the
stripes  which  a  present  life  of  self-indulgence  and  gratifica-
tion will  naturally  demand  and  receive  under  that  reign,
before  such  will  learn  the  lessons  of  that  kingdom — equity,
justice,  righteousness.  (Psa.  89 :  32 ;  Luke  12 :  47,  48.)  The
lesson  on  this  subjedl  comes  first  to  the  living  generation,
and  is  near  at  hand. — James  5.

But,  blessed  thought !  when  the  Prince  of  Life  has  put  in
force  the  laws  of  righteousness  and  equity  with  an  iron
rule,  the  masses  of  mankind  will  learn  that  "  Righteousness
exalteth  a  nation,  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people."
They  will  learn  that  God's  plan  and  laws  are  best  in  the
end  for  all  concerned,  and  ultimately  they  will  learn  to  love
righteousness  and  hate  iniquity.  (Psa.  45  :  7;  Heb.  i  :  9.)
All  who  under  that  reign  have  not  learned  to  love  the
right  will  be  counted  unworthy  of  lasting  life  and  will  be
cut  off  from  among  the  people. — Adls  3  :  23  ;  Rev.  20  :  9;
Psa.  11  :  5-7.

THE  KINGDOM  EVERLASTING.

"  Jehovah  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth  in  that  day."
(Zech.  14:  9.)  The  kingdom  which  Jehovah  will  estab-
lish in  the  hands  of  Christ  during  the  Millennium  will  be
Jehovah's  kingdom,  but  it  will  be  under  the  diredl  control


TTie  Plan  of  the  Ages.


of  Christ,  as  his  vicegerent,  in  much  the  same  manner  as  the
Southern  States  were  dealt  with  after  the  Rebellion  by  the
United  States  government.  The  Southern  States  for  a  while
were  not  permitted  to  govern  themselves  by  ele6l  ing  their  own
officers,  lest  they  should  not  conform  to  the  Constitutional
laws  of  the  Union ;  but  governors,  with  full  power  to  a6l,
were  placed  in  control  for  the  purpose  of  reconstrudling
those  state  governments  and  bringing  them  back  into  full
harmony  with  the  central  government.  Thus  the  special
reign  of  Christ  over  the  affairs  of  earth  is  for  a  limited  time
and  for  a  particular  purpose,  and  it  will  terminate  with  the
accomplishment  of  that  purpose.  Man,  through  rebellion,
forfeited  his  God-given  rights — among  others,  self-govern-
ment in  harmony  with  Jehovah's  laws.  God,  through
Christ,  redeems  all  those  rights,  and  secures  the  right  for
man  not  only  to  return  personally  to  his  former  estate,  but
also  to  return  to  his  former  office  as  king  of  earth.  But
to  bring  man  back,  as  God  designs,  in  the  way  best  suited
to  impress  the  lesson  of  present  experience — namely,  by  re-
quiring him  to  put  forth  effort  toward  his  own  recovery —
will  require  a  strong,  a  perfedl  government.  And  this
honor  of  completing  man's  recovery,  the  right  to  which  he
died  to  secure,  is  conferred  upon  Christ;  and  "he  must
reign  until  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet" — until
none  exist  who  do  not  recognize,  honor  and  obey  him.
Then,  having  accomplished  his  mission  as  regards  the  re-
construftion  or  restitution  of  mankind,  he  will  deliver  up
the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father,  and  mankind  will
deal  diredlly,  as  at  first,  with  Jehovah — the  mediation  of
the  man  Christ  Jesus  having  accomplished  fully  and  com-
pletely the  grand  work  of  reconciliation. — i  Cor.  15  :  25-28.

The  kingdom,  when  delivered  up  to  the  Father,  will  still
be  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and  the  laws  will  always  be  the
same.    All  mankind,  then  perfedlly  restored,  will  be  capa-


The  Kingdom  of  God.


305


ble  of  rendering  perfect  obedience,  in  letter  as  well  as  in
spirit ;  while  now,  the  spirit  of  obedience  or  endeavor  to
observe  God's  law  is  all  of  which  men  are  capable.  The
full  letter  of  that  perfedl  law  would  condemn  them  at  once
to  death.  (2  Cor.  3:6.)  Our  acceptableness  now  is  only
through  Christ's  ransom.

Until  adlually  perfe6l,  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into
the  hands  of  the  living  God."  (Heb.  10  :  31.)  Now,  and
until  adlually  perfedl,  none  could  stand  before  the  law  of
exadl  justice:  all  need  the  mercy  provided  freely  under
Christ's  merit  and  sacrifice.  But  when  Christ  delivers
up  the  kingdom  to  the  Father,  he  will  present  them  fault-
less before  him,  fit  and  able  to  enjoy  everlasting  blessed-
ness under  Jehovah's  perfeifl  law.  All  fearfulness  will  then
be  gone,  and  Jehovah  and  his  restored  creatures  will  be  in
pcrfed  harmony,  as  at  first.

When,  in  the  end  of  the  Millennial  age,  Christ  delivers
up  the  dominion  of  earth  to  the  Father,  he  does  so  by  de-
livering it  to  mankind  as  the  Father's  representatives,  who
were  designed  from  the  first  to  have  this  honor,  (i  Cor.
15  :  24;  Matt.  25  :  34.)  Thus  the  Kingdom  of  God  lasts
forever.  And  so  we  read  in  our  Lord's  words:  Then  shall
the  King  say  to  them  on  his  right  hand  [those  who,  during
the  Millennial  reign,  will  have  attained  the  position  of  favor
by  harmony  and  obedience].  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Fa-
ther [you  whom  my  Father  designs  thus  to  bless],  inherit
the  kingdom  prepared  FOR  vou  from  the  foundation  of  the
world.

This  kingdom  and  honor  prepared  for  man  should  not
be  confounded  with  that  still  higher  kingdom  and  honor
prepared  for  the  Christ,  which  were  "ordained  before  the
world  unto  our  glory"  (i  Cor.  2  :  7),  and  to  which  we  were
chosen  in  Christ  before  the  foundaticn  of  the  world.  And
though  the  special  intervention  and  reign  of  the  Christ  over
20


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


earth  will  close,  as  foreshown,  we  must  not  conclude  that
Christ's  glory  and  dominion  and  power  will  then  cease.
Nay,  Christ  is  associated  forever  with  all  the  divine  glory
and  power  at  the  right  hand  of  Jehovah's  favor;  and  his
Bride  and  joint-heir  will  forever  share  his  increasing  glory.
What  wondrous  works  in  other  worlds  await  the  power
of  this  highly  exalted  agent  of  Jehovah,  we  will  not  here
surmise,  further  than  to  suggest  the  infinitude  and  aftivity
of  divine  power,  and  the  boundlessness  of  the  universe.

Truly,  then,  in  whatever  phase  of  the  kingdom  our  inter-
est centers,  it  is  "the  desire  of  all  nations;"  for  under  it
all  will  be  blessed.  Hence,  all  may  earnestly  long  for  that
time;  and  all  may  well  pray,  "Thy  Kingdom  come,  thy
will  be  done  on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  It  is  for  this  that
ignorantly  the  whole  creation  has  long  been  groaning  and
waiting — waiting  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Sons  of  God,
the  kingdom  which  will  crush  out  evil  and  bless  and  heaj
all  nations. — Rom,  8:193  16 :  20.


STUDY  XV.


THE  DAY  OF  JEHOVAH.

The  "Day op  Jehovah,"  the  "  Day  of  Vengeance,"  the  "  Day  op  Wrath.^
— A  Time  of  Great  Trouble. — Its  Cause. — The  Bible's  Testimony  Rbgard-
INC  it. — Its  Fire  and  Storm,  Its  Shaking  and  Melting,  Shown  to  be  Sym-
bolic.— David's  Testimony. — The  Rbvelator's  Testimony. — The  Present
Situation  AND  the  Future  Outlook  as  Viewed  by  the  Opposing  Parties,
Capitalists  and  Wage-Workers. — A  Remedy  Which  Will  Not  Succeed. —
The  Veil  Lifted  and  Light  Admitted  Just  in  Due  Time. — The  Proof  of
This. — The  Condition  of  the  Saints  During  the  Trouble,  akd  Their
Proper  Attitude  Toward  It.

'PHE  "  Day  of  Jehovah"  is  the  name  of  that  period  of  time
in  which  God's  kingdom,  under  Christ,  is  to  be  gradu-
ally "set  up"  in  the  earth,  while  the  kingdoms  of  this  world
are  passing  away  and  Satan's  power  and  influence  over  men
are  being  bound.  It  is  everywhere  described  as  a  dark  day
of  intense  trouble  and  distress  and  perplexity  upon  man-
kind. And  what  wonder  that  a  revolution  of  such  propor-
tions, and  necessitating  such  great  changes,  should  cause
trouble.  Small  revolutions  have  caused  trouble  in  every
age ;  and  this,  so  much  greater  than  any  previous  revolu-
tion, is  to  be  a  time  of  trouble  such  as  never  was  since
there  was  a  nation — no,  nor  ever  shall  be. — Dan.  12:1;
Matt.  24  :  21,  22.

It  is  called  the  "  Day  of  Jehovah ' '  because,  though  Christ,
with  royal  title  and  power,  will  be  present  as  Jehovah's
representative,  taking  charge  of  all  the  affairs  during  this
day  of  trouble,  it  is  more  as  the  General  of  Jehovah,  subdu-
ing all  things,  than  as  the  Prince  of  Peace,  blessing  all.
Meantime,  as  false  and  imperfedl  views  and  systems  fall,
the  standard  of  the  new  King  will  rise,  and  eventually  he
307


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


shall  be  recognized  and  owned  by  all  as  King  of  kings.
Thus  it  is  presented  by  the  prophets  as  Jehovah's  work
to  set  up  Christ's  dominion  :  "  /  will  give  thee  the  Gentiles
for  thine  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth
for  thy  possession."  (Psa.  2:8.)  "In  the  days  of  these
kings  shall  the  God  of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom."  (Dan.
2  :  44.)  The  Ancient  of  days  did  sit,  and  there  was  brought
before  him  one  like  unto  a  son  of  man,  and  there  was  given
him  a  dominion,  that  all  kingdoms  should  serve  and  obey
him.  (Dan.  7:  9,  13,  14,  22,  27.)  Added  to  these  is  Paul's
statement  that,  when  Christ  shall  accomplish  the  objedl  of
his  reign,  "then  shall  the  Son  also  himself  be  subjedl
unto  him  [the  Father]  that  put  all  things  under  him."
— I  Cor.  15  :  28.

This  period  is  called  the  "Day  of  Vengeance  of  our
God,"  and  a  "Day  of  Wrath."  (Isa.  61 :  2;  63  :  1-4;  Psa.
110:5.)  And  yet  the  mind  that  grasps  only  the  idea  of
anger,  or  supposes  divine  malice,  seriously  errs.  God  has
established  certain  laws,  in  harmony  with  which  he  operates,
and  those  who  from  any  cause  come  into  conflidt  with  these
reap  the  penalty  or  wrath  of  their  own  course.  God's  coun-
sel to  mankind  has  been  continually  rejedted,  except  by
the  few ;  and,  as  we  have  shown,  he  permitted  them  to  have
their  own  way  and  to  drop  him  and  his  counsels  from  their
hearts.  (Rom.  i  :  28.)  He  then  confined  his  special  care
to  Abraham  and  his  seed,  who  professed  to  desire  his  way
and  his  service.  Their  hardness  of  heart  as  a  people,  and
the  insincerity  of  their  hearts  toward  God,  not  only  natur-
ally prevented  them  from  receiving  Messiah,  but  just  as
naturally  prepared  them  for  and  led  them  into  the  trouble
which  terminated  their  national  existence.

And  so  the  light  borne  in  the  world  during  the  Gospel
age  by  the  true  Church  of  Christ  (the  class  whose  names  are
written  in  heaven)  has  borne  witness  to  the  civilized  world


The  Day  of  Jehovah^


309


of  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong,  good  and  evil,
and  of  a  coming  time  in  which  the  one  will  be  rewarded
and  the  other  punished.  (John  16 :  8-11  ;  A<5ls  24:  25.)
This  would  have  had  a  wide  influence  upon  men  had  they
heeded  the  Lord's  instrudlion,  but,  wilful  as  ever,  they  have
profited  little  by  the  advice  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the
trouble  of  the  Day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  consequence
of  the  negledt.  Again,  it  may  be  said  to  be  the  wrath  of
God  inasmuch  as  it  comes  through  disregard  of  his  coun-
sels, and  as  a  reward  of  unrighteousness.  Nevertheless,
viewed  in  another  light,  the  trouble  coming  upon  the  world
Is  the  natural  or  legitimate  result  of  sin,  which  God  fore-
saw, and  against  which  his  counsels  would  have  protedled
them,  had  they  been  followed.

While  God's  message  to  the  Church  has  been,  "Present
your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice"  (Rom.  12:  i),  his  message
to  the  world  has  been,  "Keep  thy  tongue  from  evil,  and  thy
lips  from  speaking  guile  ;  depart  from  evil  and  do  good ;
seek  peace  and  pursue  it."  (Psa.  34:  13,14.)  Few  have
heeded  either  message.  Only  a  little  flock  sacrificed  ;  and
as  for  the  world,  though  it  nailed  up  the  motto,  "Honesty
is  the  best  policy,"  it  has  negle6ted  in  general  to  pradlice
it.  It  heeded  rather  the  voice  of  avarice — Get  all  you  can
of  riches  and  honor  and  power  in  this  world,  no  matter  what
the  method  by  which  you  obtain  it,  and  no  matter  who  loses
by  your  gain.  In  a  word,  the  trouble  of  this  Day  of  the
iLord  would  not  come,  could  not  come,  if  the  principles  oi
God's  law  were  observed  to  any  considerable  extent.  That
law  briefly  summed  up  is — Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy
God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  (Matt.
22  :  37-39.)  It  is  because  the  depraved  or  carnal  mind  is
opposed  to  this  law  of  God,  and  is  not  subjedl  to  it,  that,
as  a  natural  consequence,  the  trouble  will  come,  as  reaping
after  sowing.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


The  carnal  or  depraved  mind,  so  far  from  loving  its
neighbor  as  itself,  has  always  been  selfish  and  grasping —
often  leading  even  to  violence  and  mnrder  to  get  for  self
the  things  possessed  by  others.  However  exercised,  the
selfish  principle  is  always  the  same,  except  as  governed  by
circumstances  of  birth,  education  and  surroundings.  It
has  been  the  same  in  every  age  of  the  world,  and  will  be,
until,  by  the  force  of  the  iron  rule  of  Messiah,  not  might
nor  greed,  but  love,  will  decide  what  is  right,  and  enforce
it,  until  all  may  have  opportunity  to  learn  the  superior  bene-
fits of  the  rule  of  righteousness  and  love  as  compared  with
that  of  selfishness  and  might ;  until,  under  the  influence  of
the  sunlight  of  truth  and  righteousness,  the  selfish,  stony
heart  of  man  will  become  once  more  as  when  God  pro-
nounced it  "very  good" — a  heart  of  flesh. — Ezek.  36  :  26.

Looking  back,  we  can  see  without  difficulty  how  the
change  from  Godlike  love  and  kindness  to  hard  selfishness
came  about.  The  circumstances  tending  to  promote  selfish-
ness were  encountered  as  soon  as  man,  through  disobedi-
ence, lost  the  divine  favor  and  was  exiled  from  his  Eden
home,  where  his  every  want  had  been  bountifully  supplied.
As  our  condemned  parents  went  forth  and  began  the  battle
of  life,  seeking  to  prolong  existence  to  its  farthest  limit,
they  were  met  at  once  with  thorns  and  briers  and  thistles
and  sterile  ground ;  and  the  contending  with  these  pro-
duced weariness  and  the  sweat  of  face  which  the  Lord  had
declared.  Gradually  the  mental  and  moral  qualities  began
to  dwarf  from  lack  of  exercise,  while  the  lower  qualities
retained  fuller  scope  from  constant  exercise.  Sustenance
became  the  principal  aim  and  interest  of  life ;  and  its  cost
in  labor  became  the  standard  by  which  all  other  interests
were  estimated,  and  Mammon  became  master  of  men.
Can  we  wonder  that  under  such  circumstances  mankind  be-
came selfish,  greedy  and  grasping,  each  striving  for  most— =


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


3"


first  of  the  necessities,  and  secondly  of  the  honors  and  luxu-
ries bestowed  by  Mammon  ?  It  is  but  the  natural  tendency
of  which  Satan  has  taken  great  advantage.

During  past  ages,  under  various  influences  (among  others,
ignorance,  race  prejudices,  and  national  pride),  the  great
wealth  of  the  world  has  generally  been  in  the  hands  of  the
few — the  rulers — to  whom  the  masses  rendered  slavish  obe-
dience as  to  their  national  representatives,  in  whose  wealth
they  felt  a  pride  and  an  interest  as  their  own  representa-
tively. But  as  the  time  drew  near  in  which  Jehovah  de-
signed to  bless  the  world  through  a  Restitution  at  the  hands
of  Messiah,  he  began  to  lift  up  the  vail  of  ignorance  and
superstition,  through  modern  facilities  and  inventions ;  and
with  these  came  the  general  elevation  of  the  people  and
the  decreasing  power  of  earthly  rulers.  No  longer  is  the
■wealth  of  the  world  in  the  hands  of  its  kings,  but  chiefly
among  the  people.

Though  wealth  brings  many  evils,  it  also  brings  some  bless-
ings :  the  wealthy  obtain  better  educations — but  thus  they
are  lifted  intelledtually  above  the  poorer  people  and  become
more  or  less  associated  with  royalty.  Hence  an  aristocracy
exists  vv'hich  has  both  money  and  education  to  back  it,  and
to  assist  in  its  avaricious  struggle  to  get  all  it  can  and  to
keep  self  in  the  front  rank  at  any  cost.

But,  as  intelligence  spreads,  as  the  people  take  advantage
of  educational  facilities,  now  so  abundant,  they  begin  to
think  for  themselves ;  and  with  the  self-esteem  and  selfish-
ness in  them  led  on  by  a  little  learning — sometimes  a  dan-
gerous thing — they  fancy  that  they  see  ways  and  means  by
which  the  interests  and  circumstances  of  all  men,  and  espe-
cially their  own,  can  be  promoted  at  the  cost  of  the  fewer
numbers  in  whose  hands  the  wealth  now  lies.  Many  of
these,  doubtless,  honestly  believe  that  the  conflidling  inter-
ests of  Mammon's  worshipers  (themselves  on  one  side,  and


3"


T^e  Plan  cf  the  Ages.


the  wealthy  on  the  other)  could  be  easily  and  fairly  adjusted;
and  no  doubt  they  feel  that  were  they  wealthy  they  would
be  very  benevolent,  and  quite  willing  to  love  their  neighbors
as  themselves.  But  they  evidently  deceive  themselves ;  for
in  their  present  condition  very  few  indeed  manifest  such  a
spirit,  and  he  that  would  not  be  faithful  in  the  use  of  a  little
of  this  world's  goods  would  not  be  faithful  if  he  had  greater
riches.  In  fail,  circumstances  prove  this;  for  some  of  the
hardest  hearted  and  most  selfish  among  the  wealthy  are
those  who  have  risen  suddenly  from  the  humble  walks  of  life.

On  the  contrary,  while  by  no  means  excusing  but  re-
proving covetousness  and  grasping  selfishness  on  the  part  of
all  classes,  it  is  but  proper  to  notice  that  the  provision  made
for  the  sick  and  helpless  and  poor,  in  the  way  of  asylums,
hospitals,  poor-houses,  public  libraries,  schools  and  various
other  enterprises  for  the  good  and  comfort  of  the  masses,
rather  than  of  the  wealthy,  is  maintained  mainly  by  taxes
and  donations  from  the  rich.  These  institutions  almost
always  owe  their  existence  to  the  kind  hearted  and  benevo-
lent among  the  rich,  and  are  matters  which  the  poorer  classes
have  neither  the  time,  nor  generally  the  necessary  education
or  interest,  to  bring  into  successful  operation.

Nevertheless,  to-day  sees  a  growing  opposition  between
the  wealthy  and  laboring  classes — a  growing  bitterness
on  the  part  of  labor,  and  a  growing  feeling  among  the
•wealthy  that  nothing  but  the  strong  arm  of  the  law  will
prote6l  what  they  believe  to  be  their  rights.  Hence,  the
wealthy  are  drawn  closer  to  the  governments;  and  the  wage-
working  masses,  beginning  to  think  that  laws  and  govern-
ments were  designed  to  aid  the  wealthy  and  to  restrain  the
poor,  are  drawn  toward  Communism  and  Anarchy,  think'
ing  that  their  interests  would  best  be  served  thereby,  and
not  realizing  that  the  worst  government,  and  the  most  ex-
pensive, is  vastly  better  than  no  government  at  alL


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


313


Many  scriptures  clearly  show  that  this  will  be  the  char-
acter of  the  trouble  under  which  present  civil,  social  and
religious  systems  will  pass  away ;  that  this  is  the  way  in
which  increase  of  knowledge  and  liberty  will  result,  be-
cause of  man's  imperfedlion,  mental,  moral  and  physical.
These  scriptures  will  be  referred  to  in  due  course ;  but  here
we  can  only  call  attention  to  a  few  of  the  many,  advising
our  readers  meanwhile  that  in  many  of  the  prophecies  of
the  Old  Testament  in  which  Egypt,  Babylon  and  Israel
figure  so  largely,  not  only  was  there  a  literal  fulfilment  in-
tended, but  also  a  secondary  and  larger  one.  Thus,  for
instance,  the  predictions  regarding  the  fall  of  Babylon,  etc.,
must  be  considered  extravagant  beyond  measure,  did  we  not
recognize  a  symbolic  and  antitypical  as  well  as  a  literal
Babylon.  The  book  of  Revelation  contains  predi(5lions
recorded  long  after  literal  Babylon  was  in  ruins,  and  hence
evidently  applicable  only  to  symbolic  Babylon ;  yet  the
close  resemblance  of  the  words  of  the  prophets,  apparently
diredlly  addressed  to  literal  Babylon,  are  thus  shown  to  be-
long in  an  especial  sense  to  symbolic  Babylon.  In  this
larger  fulfilment,  Egypt  represents  the  world ;  Babylon
represents  the  nominal  Church,  called  Christendom ;  while,
as  already  shown,  Israel  often  represents  the  whole  world
in  its  justified  condition,  as  it  will  be — its  glorious  Royal
Priesthood,  its  holy  Levites  and  its  believing  and  worship-
ing people,  justified  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Atonement,  and
brought  into  a  condition  of  reconciliation  with  God.  To
Israel  the  blessings  are  promised,  to  Egypt  the  plagues,  and
to  strong  Babylon  a  wonderful,  complete  and  everlasting  over-
throw, "  as  a  great  millstone  cast  into  the  sea  "  (Rev.  18:  21),
never  to  be  recovered,  but  to  be  held  in  everlasting  odium.

The  Apostle  James  points  out  this  day  of  trouble,  and
tells  of  its  being  the  result  of  differences  between  capital
and  labor.    He  says:  "Come  now,  ye  wealthy !  wail  ye.


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


howling  at  your  hardships  that  are  coming  upon  you.  Youi
wealth  has  rotted  [lost  its  value],  and  your  garments  have
become  moth-eaten :  your  gold  and  silver  have  become  rusted
out,  and  their  rust  for  a  witness  to  you  shall  be,  and  shall
eat  your  flesh  as  fire.  Ye  treasured  it  up  in  the  last  days.
Behold  !  the  wages  of  the  workers  who  cut  down  your
fields — that  which  has  been  kept  back  by  reason  of  you
[of  your  hoarding]  is  crying  out ;  and  the  outcries  of  those
who  reaped,  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  the  whole  people
have  entered."  (Jas.  5  :  1-4.)  He  adds  that  the  class  com-
ing into  trouble  has  been  used  to  luxury,  obtained  largely
at  the  cost  of  others,  among  whom  were  some  of  the  right-
eous, and  out  of  them,  because  they  resisted  not,  the  very
life  had  been  crushed.  The  Apostle  urges  the  "brethren  "
to  bear  patiently  whatever  their  part  may  be,  looking  be-
yond, and  expecting  deliverance  through  the  Lord.  This
very  condition  of  things  can  now  be  seen  approaching ;
and  in  the  world,  among  those  who  are  awake,  "men's
hearts  are  failing  them  for  looking  after  the  things  that  are
coming  on  the  earth. "  All  know  that  the  constant  ten-
dency of  our  times  is  toward  lower  wages  for  labor,  unless
where  the  prices  are  artificially  sustained  or  advanced  by
labor  combinations,  strikes,  etc. ;  and  with  the  present  senti-
ment of  the  masses,  all  can  see  that  it  is  but  a  question  of
time  when  the  lowest  point  of  endurance  will  be  reached,
and  a  revolt  will  surely  result.  This  will  alarm  capital,
which  will  be  withdrawn  from  business  and  manufadluring
channels  and  hoarded  in  vaults  and  treasuries,  to  eat  itself
up  with  charges  for  its  prote6tion  in  idleness,  to  the  great
annoyance  of  its  owners.  This  in  turn  will  certainly  pro-
duce bankruptcy,  financial  panic  and  business  prostration,
because  all  business  of  magnitude  is  now  conducted  largely
on  credit.  The  natural  result  of  all  this  will  be  to  throw
out  of  employment  tens  of  thousands  who  are  dependent


7%e  Day  of  Jehovah.


on  their  wages  for  daily  bread,  and  to  fill  the  world  with
tramps  and  persons  whose  necessities  will  defy  all  law.
Then  it  will  be  as  described  by  the  prophet  (Ezek.  7:10-
19),  when  the  buyer  need  not  rejoice,  nor  the  seller  mourn  ;
for  trouble  will  be  upon  the  entire  multitude  and  there  will
be  no  security  of  property.  Then  all  hands  will  be  feeble
and  helpless  to  turn  aside  the  trouble.  They  will  cast
their  silver  in  the  streets,  and  their  gold  will  be  removed.
Their  silver  and  their  gold  will  not  be  able  to  deliver  them
in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath.

It  should  not  be  forgotten  that  though  the  last  forty  years
of  the  existence  of  Israel  as  a  nation  was  a  day  of  trouble,
a  "day  of  vengeance"  upon  that  people,  ending  in  the
complete  overthrow  of  their  nation,  yet  their  day  of  wrath
was  but  a  shadow  or  type  of  a  still  greater  and  more  exten-
sive trouble  upon  nominal  Christendom,  even  as  their  past
history  as  a  people  during  their  age  of  favor  was  typical  of
the  Gospel  age,  as  will  be  conclusively  shown  hereafter.
All  then  will  see  why  these  prophecies  concerning  the  Day
of  the  Lord  should  be,  and  are,  addressed  to  Israel  and
Jerusalem  more  or  less  diredlly,  though  the  conne6tions
show  clearly  that  all  mankind  is  included  in  the  complete
fulfilments.

Take  another  prophetic  testimony  (Zeph.  i :  7-9,  14-18).
"The  Lord  hath  prepared  a  slaughter,  he  hath  bid  his
guests.  [Compare  Rev.  19  :  17.]  And  it  shall  come  to  pass
in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  slaughter  that  I  will  punish  the
princes  and  the  king's  children,  and  all  such  as  are  clothed
in  imported  clothing.  And  I  will  inflict  punishment  [also]
on  all  those  [marauders]  who  leap  over  the  threshold  on  that
day,  who  fill  their  masters'  houses  with  violence  and  deceit.
[This  shows  not  only  that  there  will  be  a  great  overthrow
of  wealth  and  power  in  this  time  of  trouble,  but  that  those
who  will  for  the  time  be  the  instruments  of  heaven  in  break-


TTie  Plan  of  the  Ages.


ing  down  present  systems  will  also  be  punished  for  their
equally  unjust  and  unrighteous  course;  for  the  coming
trouble  will  involve  all  classes,  and  bring  distress  upon  all
the  multitude.]

"  Nigh  is  the  great  Day  of  the  Lord :  it  is  nigh.  Nearer
and  louder  comes  the  uproar  of  the  Day  of  the  Lord.
There  the  mighty  shall  shriek  bitterly  !  That  day  is  a  day
of  wrath,  a  day  of  distress  and  anxiety,  a  day  of  wasting
and  desolation,  a  day  of  darkness  and  obscurity  [uncertainty
and  foreboding,  as  well  as  present  distress],  a  day  of  clouds
[trouble]  and  tempestuous  gloom,  a  day  of  the  trumpet  [the
seventh  symbolic  trumpet,  which  sounds  throughout  this  day
of  trouble — also  called  the  trump  of  God,  because  connected
■with  the  events  of  this  Day  of  the  Lord]  and  shouting
against  the  fenced  cities  and  the  high  battlements  [clamor-
ous and  conflidling  denunciations  of  strong  and  well-in-
trenched governments].  And  I  will  bring  distress  upon
men,  and  they  shall  walk  about  as  blind  men  [groping  in
uncertainty,  not  knowing  what  course  to  pursue],  because
they  have  sinned  against  Jehovah.  Their  blood  shall  be
poured  out  as  the  dust,  and  their  flesh  shall  be  as  dung.
Neither  their  silver  nor  their  gold  shall  be  able  to  deliver
them  in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  wrath  [though  previously
wealth  could  furnish  ease  and  every  luxury],  but  the  whole
land  shall  be  devoured  by  the  fire  of  his  zeal ;  for  destruc-
tion, yea,  quite  sudden,  will  he  prepare  for  all  them  [the
wealthy]  that  dwell  in  the  land."  This  destruftion  will
destroy  many  of  the  wealthy  in  the  sense  that  they  will
cease  to  be  wealthy,  though  doubtless  it  will  also  involve  the
loss  of  many  lives  of  all  classes.

We  shall  not  attempt  to  follow  the  prophets  in  their  de-
tails, from  various  standpoints,  of  the  trouble  of  that  day,
but  shall  follow  briefly  the  thought  last  suggested  by  the
prophet  above,  namely,  the  devouring  of  the  whole  eartL-


The  Day  of  Jehovah.  317


with  the  FiRE  of  God's  zeal.  This  prophet  refers  to  the
same  fire,  etc.,  again  (Zeph.  3:  8,  9),  saying:  "Wait  ye
upon  me,  saith  Jehovah,  until  the  day  that  I  rise  up  to  the  prey ;
for  my  decision  is  to  gather  the  nations  [peoples],  to  draw
together  the  kingdoms,  to  pour  upon  them  [the  kingdoms]
my  indignation,  even  all  my  fierce  anger.  [The  gathering
of  the  peoples  of  all  nations  in  common  interest  in  opposi-
tion to  present  governments  is  growing ;  and  the  result  will
be  a  uniting  of  the  kingdoms  for  common  safety,  so  that
the  trouble  will  be  upon  all  kingdoms,  and  all  will  fall.]
For  all  the  earth  shall  be  devoured  with  the  fire  of  my
zeal.  Yea  \then,  after  this  destrudlion  of  kingdoms,  after
this  destrudtion  of  the  present  social  order  in  the  fire  of
trouble],  then  will  I  turn  unto  the  people  a  pure  language
[the  pure  Word — uncontaminated  by  human  tradition],  that
they  may  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  to  serve  him
with  one  accord."

This  fire  of  God's  zeal  is  a  symbol,  and  a  forcible  one,
representing  the  intensity  of  the  trouble  and  the  destruc-
tion which  will  envelop  the  whole  earth.  That  it  is  not  a
literal  fire,  as  some  suppose,  is  evident  from  the  fadl  that
the  people  remain  after  it,  and  are  blessed.  That  the  peo-
ple who  remain  are  not  saints,  as  some  would  suggest,  is
evident  from  the  facfl  that  they  are  then  turned  to  serve  the
Lord,  whereas  the  saints  are  turned  (converted)  already.*

*\Ve  mention  this  as  an  offset  to  the  argument  of  some  who  regard
the  fire  as  literal,  and  who  claim  that  the  literal  earth  is  to  be  melted,
etc.  These,  to  fit  their  theory,  claim  that  "  the  people"  here  mentioned,
are  the  saints,  who,  after  the  earth  has  melted  and  cooled  off,  will  re-
turn to  earth  and  build  houses  and  inhabit  them,  plant  vineyards  and
eat  the  fruit  of  them,  and  long  enjoy  the  work  of  their  hands.  They
consider  the  present  few  years  as  a  training  or  preparation  for  inherit-
ing, and  forget  that  it  would  be  completely  lost  in  the  aifrj'a/ experiences
of  the  thousand  or  more  years  of  waiting  for  the  earth  to  cool  off — ac-
cording to  their  theory.    This  is  a  serious  mistake,  and  results  from  too


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


Throughout  the  Scriptures,  earth,  when  used  symtx))-
ically,  represents  society ;  ?nountains  represent  kingdoms ;
heavens,  the  powers  of  spiritual  control ;  seas,  the  restless,
turbulent,  dissatisfied  masses  of  the  world.  Ftre  repre-
sents the  destrudlion  of  whatever  is  burned — tares,  dross,
earth  (social  organization),  or  whatever  it  may  be.  And
when  brimstone  is  added  to  Jire  in  the  symbol,  it  intensifies
the  thought  of  destrudlion  ;  for  nothing  is  more  deadly  to
all  forms  of  life  than  the  fumes  of  sulphur.

With  this  thought  in  mind,  if  we  turn  to  Peter's  sym-
bolic prophecy  of  the  Day  of  Wrath,  we  find  it  in  perfe6l
accord  with  the  above  testimony  of  the  prophets.  He  says :
"  The  world  that  was,  being  overflowed  with  water,  perished.
[Not  the  literal  earth  and  literal  heavens  ceased  there,  but
that  dispensation  or  arrangement  of  things,  existing  before
the  flood,  passed  away.]  But  the  heavens  and  the  earth
which  are  now  [the  present  dispensation]  by  the  same  word
[of  divine  authority]  are  kept  in  store,  reserved  unto  fire."
The  fadl  that  the  water  was  literal  leads  some  to  believe  that
the  fire  also  must  be  literal,  but  this  by  no  means  follows.
The  temple  of  God  once  was  of  literal  stones,  but  that
does  not  set  aside  the  ia.€t  that  the  Church,  which  is  the  true
temple,  is  built  up  a  spiritual  building,  a  holy  temple,  not
of  earthly  material.  Noah's  ark  was  literal,  too,  but  it
typified  Christ  and  the  power  in  him  which  will  replenish
and  reorganize  society.

"The  Day  of  the  Lord  will  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night
[unobservedly],  in  the  which  the  heavens  [present  powers
of  the  air,  of  which  Satan  is  the  chief  or  prince]  shall  pass
away  with  a  great  [hissing]  noise,  and  the  elements  shall

literal  an  interpretation  of  the  figures,  parables,  symbols  and  dark  say-
ings of  our  Lord  and  the  apostles  and  prophets.  Following  up  the  same
error,  these  claim  that  there  will  be  no  mountains  and  seas  after  this
fire,  failing  to  see  that  all  these,  as  well  as  the  fire,  are  symbols.


The  Day  of  Jehovah.  319


melt  with  fervent  heat ;  the  earth  [social  organization]  also,
and  the  works  that  are  therein  [pride,  rank,  aristocracy,
royalty],  shall  be  burned  up.  The  heavens  being  on  fire
shall  be  dissolved  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  fervent
heat.  Nevertheless  we,  according  to  his  promise,  look  for
new  heavens  [the  new  spiritual  power — Christ's  kingdom]
and  a  new  earth ' '  [earthly  society  organized  on  a  new  basis
— on  the  basis  of  love  and  justice,  rather  than  of  might  and
oppression]. — 2  Peter  3  :  6,  7,  10-13.

It  should  be  remembered  that  some  of  the  apostles  were
prophets  as  well — notably  Peter,  John  and  Paul.  And
while  as  apostles  they  were  God's  mouthpieces  to  expound
the  utterances  of  preceding  prophets  for  the  benefit  of  the
Church,  they  were  also  used  of  God  as  prophets  to  predidl
things  to  come,  which,  as  they  become  due  to  be  fulfilled,
become  meat  in  due  season  for  the  household  of  faith,  to
dispense  which,  God  in  his  own  time  raises  up  suitable  ser-
vants or  expounders.  (See  our  Lord's  statement  of  this
fail — Matt.  24:45,46).  The  apostles  as  prophets  were
moved  upon  to  write  things  which,  not  being  due  in  their
day,  they  could  but  imperfe6tly  appreciate,  even  as  it  was
with  the  Old  Testament  prophets  ( I  Pet.  i  :  12,  13),  though,
like  them,  their  words  were  specially  guided  and  direded
so  that  they  have  a  depth  of  meaning  of  which  they  were
not  aware  when  using  them.  Thus  emphatically  the  Church
is  ever  guided  and  fed  by  God  himself,  whoever  may  be  his
mouthpieces  or  channels  of  communication.  A  realization
of  this  must  lead  to  greater  confidence  and  trust  in  God's
Word,  notwithstanding  the  imperfedlions  of  some  of  his
mouthpieces.

The  Prophet  Malachi  (4:  i)  tells  of  this  Day  of  the
Lord  under  the  same  symbol.  He  says:  "  The  day  cometh
that  shall  burn  as  an  oven  ;  and  all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all
that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble ;  and  the  day  that  cometh


320  The  Plan  of  ihe  Ages.

shall  burn  them  up  .  .  .  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither
root  nor  branch. ' '  Pride,  and  every  other  cause  from  which
haughtiness  and  oppression  could  again  spring  forth,  will  be
entirely  consumed  by  the  great  trouble  of  the  Day  of  the
Lord  and  by  the  after  disciplines  of  the  Millennial  age, —
the  last  of  which  is  described  in  Rev.  20 :  9.

But,  while  pride  (in  all  its  forms  sinful  and  detestible)  is
to  be  utterly  rooted  out,  and  all  the  proud  and  wicked  are
to  be  utterly  destroyed,  it  does  not  follow  that  there  is  no
hope  for  a  reformation  in  this  class.  No,  thank  God  :  while
this  fireof  God's  just  indignation  will  be  burning,  the  Judge
will  grant  opportunity  for  pulling  some  out  of  the  consuming
fire  (Jude  23);  and  those  only  who  refuse  the  aid  will
perish  with  their  pride ;  because  they  have  made  it  part  of
their  chara6ler,  and  refuse  to  reform.

The  same  prophet  gives  another  description  of  this  day
(Mal.3 : 1-3), in  which  again, under  the  figure  of  fire,  he  shows
how  the  Lord's  children  will  be  purified  and  blessed  and
brought  nigh  to  him  by  having  the  dross  of  error  destroyed:
— "  The  Messenger  of  the  Covenant,  whom  ye  delight  in  :
behold,  he  shall  come,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  But  who  may
abide  the  day  of  his  coming  ?  and  who  shall  stand  [the  test]
when  he  appeareth  ?  for  he  is  as  a  refiner's  fire :  .  .  .  and  he
shall  sit  as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver :  and  he  shall  purify
the  sons  of  Levi  [typical  of  believers,  of  whom  the  chief  are
the  Royal  Priesthood]  and  purge  them  as  gold  and  silver, that
they  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteousness."

Paul  refers  to  this  same  fire,  and  this  refining  process
afiFe6ling  behevers  in  the  Day  of  the  Lord(i  Cor.  3:12-15),
and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  leave  it  beyond  all  question
that  the  symbolic  fire  will  destroy  every  error,  and  thus
effe6l  purification  of  faith.  After  declaring  that  he  refers
only  to  those  building  their  faith  upon  the  only  recognized
foundation,  Christ  Jesus'  finished  work  of  redemption,  he


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


321


says  :  "  Now  if  any  man  build  [character]  upon  this  founda-
tion, gold,  silver,  precious  stones  [divine  truths  and  cor-
responding charader,  or]  wood,  hay,  stubble  [traditional
errors  and  corresponding  unstable  charadters],  every  man's
work  shall  be  made  manifest ;  for  the  day  shall  declare
it,  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire  ;  and  so  every  one's
work  [2  Pet.  i  :5-ii],  whatever  it  is,  the  same  fire  will  prove."
Surely  even  the  most  prejudiced  will  concede  that  the  fire
which  tries  a  spiritual  work  is  not  literal  fire;  fire  is  an  ap-
propriate symbol  to  represent  the  utter  destrudtion  of  condi-
tions represented  here  by  wood,  hay  and  stubble.  This  fire
will  be  powerless  to  destroy  the  faith-and-charadter  structure
built  with  the  gold,  silver  and  precious  stones  of  divine  truth,
and  founded  upon  the  rock  of  Christ's  ransom-sacrifice.

The  Apostle  shows  this,  saying:  "If  any  man's  work
abide  which  he  hath  built  thereupon  [upon  Christ]  he  shall
receive  a  reward.  [His  reward  will  be  in  proportion  to
his  faithfulness  in  building,  making  use  of  the  truth  in  the
development  of  true  character — putting  on  the  whole  armor
of  God.]  If  any  man's  work  shall  be  consumed,  he  shall
suffer  loss  [loss  of  the  reward,  because  of  unfaithfulness],  but
he  himself  shall  be  preserved  so  as  through  a  fire" — singed,
scorched  and  alarmed.  All  who  build  on  the  rock  founda-
tion of  Christ's  ransom  are  sure:  none  that  trust  in  his
righteousness  as  their  covering  will  ever  be  utterly  con-
founded. But  those  who  wilfully  reject  him  and  his  work,
c.fter  coming  to  a  clear,  full  knowledge  thereof,  will  be
subject  to  the  second  death. — Heb.  6:4-8;  10:26-31.

In  yet  another  way  is  this  trouble  of  the  Day  of  the  Lord
symbolically  described.  The  Apostle  shows  (Heb.  12:26-
29)  that  the  inauguration  of  the  Law  Covenant  at  Sinai
was  typical  of  the  introduction  of  the  New  Covenant  to
the  world  at  the  opening  of  the  Millennial  age,  or  reign
of  Christ's  kingdom.  He  says  that  in  the  type  God's
21-A


02


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


yoice  shook  the  literal  earth,  but  now  he  hath  promised,  tay-
ing,  "Yet  once  for  all  [finally],  I  will  shake  not  only  the
earth,  but  the  heaven  also."  Concerning  this  the  Apostle
explains,  saying,  "Now  this  [statement],  Yet  once  for  ally
denotes  the  removal  of  the  things  shaken,  because  they  are
fabricated  [false,  made  up,  not  the  true],  so  that  the  un-
shaken things  [true,  righteous  things,  only]  may  remain.
Wherefore,  seeing  that  we  are  to  receive  a  kingdom  which
cannot  be  shaken,  let  us  hold  fast  the  favor  through  which
we  may  serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  piety  j
for  [as  it  is  written],  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  Thus
we  see  this  apostle  uses  a  storm  to  symbolize  the  trouble  of
this  Day  of  the  Lord,  which  he  and  others  elsewhere  refer
to  under  the  symbol  of  fire.  The  same  events  are  here  noted
that  are  described  under  the  fire  symbol,  namely,  the  sweep-
ing away  of  all  falsities,  both  from  believers  and  from  the
world — errors  regarding  God's  plan  and  character  and  Word,
and  also  errors  as  to  social  and  civil  affairs  in  the  world.
It  will  be  good  indeed  for  all  to  be  rid  of  these  fabrications,
which  came  to  man  largely  through  his  own  depraved  de-
sires, as  well  as  by  the  cunning  craftiness  of  Satan,  the  wily
foe  of  righteousness ;  but  it  will  be  at  great  cost  to  all  con-
cerned that  they  will  be  swept  away.  It  will  be  a  terribly
hot  fire,  a  fearful  storm,  a  dark  night  of  trouble,  which  will
precede  the  glorious  brightness  of  that  Kingdom  of  Right-
eousness which  can  never  be  shaken,  that  Millennial  day  in
which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  will  sjiine  forth  in  splendor
and  power,  blessing  and  healing  the  sick  and  dying  but  re-
deemed world. — Compare  Mai.  4:  2  and  Matt.  13 :  43.

David,  the  prophet  through  whose  Psalms  God  was  pleased
to  foretell  so  much  concerning  our  Lord  at  his  first  ad-
vent, gives  some  vivid  descriptions  of  this  Day  of  Trouble
by  which  his  glorious  reign  will  be  introduced ;  and  he
uses  these  various  symbols — fire,  storm  and  darkness —


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


alternately  and  interchangeably,  in  his  descriptions.  Thus,
for  instance,  he  says  (Psa.  50:3):  "Our  God  shall  comep
and  shall  not  keep  silence :  a  fire  shall  devour  before  hira,
and  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous  round  about  him."  It
Psa.  97 : 2-6 :  "  Clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  hira  %
righteousness  and  justice  are  the  support  of  his  throne.  A
fire  goeth  before  him  and  burneth  up  his  enemies  round
about.  His  lightnings  give  light  to  the  world ;  the  earth
seeth  it  and  trembleth.  The  mountains  melt  away  like  wax
at  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  at  the  presence  of  the  Lord
of  the  whole  earth.  The  [new]  heavens  [then]  tell  of  his
righteousness,  and  all  the  people  see  his  glory. ' '  Psa.  46 : 6 :
"  The  peoples  raged,  the  kingdoms  were  moved  :  he  uttered
his  voice,  the  earth  melted."  Again  (Psa.  110:2-6),  "Rule
thou  in  the  midst  of  thine  enemies.  .  .  .  The  Lord  at  thy
right  hand  shall  crush  kings  in  the  day  of  his  wrath.  He
will  judge  among  the  nations — there  shall  be  a  fulness  of
corpses.  He  crusheth  the  heads  [rulers]  over  many  coun-
tries." Again  (46:1-5),  "  God  is  our  protection;  .  .  .
therefore  we  will  not  fear  when  the  earth  [society]  is  trans=
formed,  and  when  the  mountains  [kingdoms]  are  swept
into  the  midst  of  the  sea  [swallowed  up  by  the  turbulent
masses],  when  the  waters  thereof  roar  and  are  troubled  [in-
furiated], when  the  mountains  shake  with  the  swellings  there-
of. ..  .  God  will  help  her  [the  Bride,  the  faithful  "  little
flock"]  at  the  dawning  of  the  morning."  And  in  the  same
Psalm,  verses  6-10,  the  same  story  is  re-stated  in  other  syn-
bols : — "  The  peoples  rage,  kingdoms  are  displaced  :  he  let-
teth  his  voice  be  heard,  the  earth  [society]  melteth.  Jehovai-n
of  hosts  is  with  us,  a  Tower  for  us  is  the  God  of  Jacob."
Then,  viewing  the  results  of  that  time  of  trouble  from  be-
yond it,  he  adds  :  "  Come  ye,  behold  the  deeds  of  the  Lord
— what  desolations  he  hath  made  in  the  earth.  .  .  .  Desist
[from  your  former  ways,  O  people]  and  know  [come  to  th%


324


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


knowledge]  that  I  am  God.  I  will  be  exalted  among  the
peoples,  I  will  be  exalted  in  the  earth."  The  "  new  earth  "
or  new  order  and  arrangement  of  society  will  exalt  God
and  his  law,  as  over  and  controlling  all.

Another  testimony  in  proof  of  the  fadl  that  the  Day  of
the  Lord  will  be  a  great  day  of  trouble  and  of  destni6lion
to  every  form  of  evil  ( yet  7wi  a  time  of  literal  burning  of
the  earth)  is  furnished  in  the  last  symbolic  prophecy  of  the
Bible.  Referring  to  this  time  when  the  Lord  will  take  his
great  power  to  reign,  the  stortn  and  fire  are  thus  described
•  —"And  the  nations  were  enraged  and  thy  wrath  came."
(Rev.  II :  17,  18.)  And  again,  "And  out  of  his  mouth
proceeded  a  two-edged  broadsword,  that  with  it  he  should
smite  the  nations  :  and  he  shall  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron  :
and  he  treadeth  the  winepress  of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath
of  Almighty  God.  .  .  .  And  I  saw  the  beast  [symbolic],
and  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  their  armies,  gathered  to-
gether to  make  war  against  him  that  sat  on  the  horse,  and
against  his  army.  And  the  beast  was  taken,  and  with  him
the  false  prophet.  .  .  .  These  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake  of
fire  burning  with  brimstone." — Rev.  19  :  15,  19.

We  cannot  here  digress  to  examine  these  symbols —
"beast,"  "false  prophet,"  "image,"  "lake  of  fire,"
"horse,"  etc.,  etc.  For  this  the  reader  is  referred  to  a
succeeding  volume.  Now  we  would  have  you  notice  that
the  great  symbolic  battle,  and  the  harvesting  of  the  vine
of  the  earth  here  described  as  closing  the  present  age
and  opening  up  the  Millennial  age  ( Rev.  20 :  1-3),  are
but  other  symbols  covering  the  same  great  and  troublous
events  elsewhere  symbolically  called  fire,  storm,  shaking,
etc.  In  connection  with  the  battle  and  winepress  figures  of
Revelation,  note  the  striking  harmony  of  Joel  2  :  9-16  and
Isa.  13  :  i-ii,  in  describing  the  same  events  by  similar  fig-
ures.   The  variety  of  symbolic  figures  used  helps  us  to  ap-


TJie  Day  of  Jehovah.


325


preciate  more  fully  all  the  features  of  that  great  and  nota-
ble Day  of  the  Lord.

THE  PRESENT  SITUATION.

We  here  leave  the  prophetic  statements  regarding  that
day,  to  mark  more  particularly  the  present  aspedl  of  affairs
in  the  world,  as  we  now  see  them  shaping  themselves  for
the  rapidly  approaching  conflifl — a  conflidt  which,  when
its  terrible  climax  is  reached,  must  necessarily  be  a  short
one,  else  the  race  would  be  exterminated.  The  two  rival
parties  to  this  battle  are  already  visible.  Wealth,  arrogance
and  pride  are  on  one  side,  and  widely-prevailing  poverty,
ignorance,  bigotry  and  a  keen  sense  of  injustice  are  on  the
other.  Both,  impelled  by  selfish  motives,  are  now  organ-
izing their  forces  all  over  the  civilized  world.  With  our
eyes  anointed  with  truth,  wherever  we  look  we  can  see  that
the  sea  and  the  waves  are  already  roaring  and  lashing  and
foaming  out  against  the  mountains,  as  represented  in  the
threats  and  attempts  of  anarchists  and  discontents  whose
numbers  are  constantly  increasing.  We  can  see,  too,  that
the  friction  between  the  various  fadlions  or  elements  of
society  is  rapidly  getting  to  the  point  described  by  the
prophets,  when  the  earth  (society)  will  be  on  fire,  and  the
elements  will  melt  and  disintegrate  with  the  mutually  gen-
erated heat.

It  is  of  course  difficult  for  people,  on  whichever  side  of
this  controversy  they  may  be,  to  see  contrary  to  their  own
interests,  habits  and  education.  The  wealthy  feel  that  they
have  a  right  to  more  than  their  proportional  share  of  this
world's  goods ;  a  right  to  purchase  labor  and  every  com-
modity as  low  as  they  can  ;  a  right  to  the  fruit  of  their
efforts ;  and  a  right  to  use  their  intelligence  so  to  run  their
business  as  to  make  profit  for  themselves  and  to  increase
their  hoarded  wealth,  no  matter  who  else  may  be  compelled
by  force  of  circumstances  to  drag  through  life  with  few  of


326


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


its  comforts,  even  if  with  all  of  its  necessities.  They  reason
thus  :  It  is  the  inevitable  ;  the  law  of  supply  and  demand
must  govern  ;  ^rich  and  poor  have  always  been  in  the  world  ;
and  if  the  wealth  were  evenly  divided  in  the  morning,  some
would,  through  dissipation  or  improvidence,  be  poor  before
night,  while  others,  more  careful  and  prudent,  would  be
rich.  Besides,  they  will  argue  with  effedl,  Can  it  be
expefted  that  men  of  greater  brain  power  will  undertake
vast  enterprises,  employing  thousands  of  men,  with  the
risks  of  large  losses,  unless  there  be  hopes  of  gain  and
some  advantage  ?

The  artisan  and  the  laborer,  on  the  contrary,  will  say :
We  see  that  while  labor  enjoys  many  advantages  to-day
above  any  other  day,  while  it  is  better  paid,  and  can  there-
fore procure  greater  comforts,  yet  it  is  in  this  enjoying  only
its  right,  from  which  it  has  long  been  debarred  to  some
extent ;  and  it  is  thus  properly  deriving  a  share  of  the  ad-
vantages of  the  inventions,  discoveries,  increasing  knowl-
edge, etc. ,  of  our  time.  We  recognize  labor  as  honorable,
and  that,  when  accompanied  with  good  sense,  education,
honesty  and  principle,  it  is  as  honorable,  and  has  as  many
rights,  as  any  profession.  And,  on  the  contrary,  we  esteem
idleness  a  discredit  and  disgrace  to  all  men,  whatever  their
talent  or  occupation  in  life.  All,  to  be  valued  and  appreci-
ated, should  be  useful  to  others  in  some  respedt.  But  though
realizing  our  present  improvement  and  advancement,  in-
tellectually, socially  and  financially,  we  realize  this  to  be
more  the  result  of  circumstances  than  of  human  design  on
the  part  of  either  ourselves  or  our  employers.  We  see  our
improved  condition,  and  that  of  all  men,  to  be  the  result
of  the  great  increase  of  intelligence,  invention,  etc.,  of  the
past  fifty  years  particularly.  These  came  up  so  rapidly  that
labor  as  well  as  capital  got  a  lift  from  the  tidal  wave,  and
was  carried  to  a  higher  level  j  and  if  we  could  see  a  pros-


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


327


pedl  that  the  flood  tide  would  continue  to  rise,  and  to  ben-
efit all,  we  would  feel  satisfied ;  but  we  are  anxious  and
restless  now  because  we  see  that  this  is  not  the  case.  We
see  that  the  flood  tide  is  beginning  to  turn,  and  that  where-
as many  have  been  lifted  high  in  wealth  by  it,  and  are
firmly  and  securely  fixed  upon  the  shore  of  ease,  luxury  and
opulence,  yet  the  masses  are  not  thus  settled  and  secured,
but  are  in  danger  of  being  carried  as  low  as  ever,  or  lower,
by  the  under  current  of  the  now  ebbing  tide.  Hence  it  is
that  we  are  disposed  to  grasp  hold  of  something  to  insure
our  present  state  and  our  further  advancement  before  it  is
too  late.

To  state  the  matter  in  other  words,  we  (artisans  and  la-
borers) see  that  while  all  mankind  has  largely  shared  the
blessings  of  the  day,  yet  those  who  by  reason  of  greater
talent  for  business,  or  by  inheritance,  or  by  fraud  and
dishonesty,  have  become  possessors  of  tens  of  thousands
and  millions  of  dollars,  have  not  only  this  advantage  over
all  others,  but,  aided  by  the  mechanical  inventions,  etc.,
they  are  in  a  position  to  continue  the  ratio  of  their  increase
in  wealth,  in  proportion  to  the  decrease  in  the  wage-workers'
salaries.  We  see  that  unless  we  take  some  steps  toward  the
prote6tion  of  the  increasing  number  of  artisans  against  the
increasing  power  of  monopoly,  combined  with  labor-saving
machinery,  etc.,  the  cold-blooded  law  of  supply  and  de-
mand will  swallow  us  up  completely.  It  is  against  this
impending  disaster,  rather  than  against  present  conditions,
that  we  organize  and  seek  protective  arrangements.  Each
day  adds  largely  to  our  numbers  by  natural  increase  and  by
immigration ;  and  each  day  adds  to  the  labor-saving  ma-
chinery. Each  day,  therefore,  increases  the  number  seek-
ing employment  and  decreases  the  demand  for  their  service.
The  natural  law  of  supply  and  demand,  therefore,  if  per-
mitted to  go  on  uninterruptedly,  will  soon  brins  labor


328


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


back  where  it  was  a  century  ago,  and  leave  all  the  advan-
tages of  our  day  in  the  hands  of  capital.  It  is  this  that  we
seek  to  avert.

This  ultimate  tendency  of  many  real  blessings  to  work
injury,  unless  restrained  by  wise  and  equitable  laws,  was
long  since  seen  ;  but  the  rapidity  with  which  one  invention
has  followed  another,  and  the  consequent  increased  demand
for  labor  in  providing  this  labor-saving  machinery,  has  been
so  great  that  the  ultimate  result  has  been  delayed,  and  in-
stead, the  world  has  had  a  "  boom  " — an  inflation  of  values,
wages,  wealth,  credits  (debts)  and  ideas — from  which  the
readtion  is  now  commencing  gradually  to  take  place.

In  the  last  few  years  there  have  been  produced  in  vast
quantities  agricultural  implementsof  every  description  which
enable  one  man  to  accomplish  as  much  as  five  could  formerly.
This  has  a  two-fold  effe6t :  first,  three  times  as  many  acres  are
worked,  giving  employment  to  three  out  of  the  five  laborers,
thus  setting  two  adrift  to  compete  for  other  labor ;  secondly,
the  three  who  remain  can,  by  the  use  of  the  machinery,  pro-
duce as  great  a  crop  as  fifteen  would  have  done  without  it.
The  same  or  greater  changes  are  wrought  in  other  depart-
ments by  similar  agencies ;  for  instance,  in  iron  and  steel
making.  Its  growth  has  been  so  enormous  that  the  number
of  employes  has  greatly  increased,  notwithstanding  the  fadl
that  machinery  has  enabled  one  man  at  present  to  accom-
plish about  as  much  as  twelve  did  formerly.  One  of  the
results  will  be  that  very  shortly  the  capacity  of  these  ex-
tensive works  will  more  than  meet  the  present  enormous
demands,  and  the  demands,  instead  of  continuing  to  in-
crease, will  probably  decrease ;  for  the  world  is  fast  being
supplied  with  railroads  beyond  present  needs,  and  the
yearly  repairs  on  these  could  probably  be  supplied  by
less  than  one-half  the  present  number  of  establishments.

Thus  we  are  brought  in  contadl  with  the  peculiar  condi


77ie  Day  of  Jehovah.


329


don  in  which  there  is  an  over-produ<5lion,  causing  idleness
occasionally  to  both  capital  and  labor,  while  at  the  same
time  some  lack  the  employment  which  would  enable  them
to  procure  necessities  and  luxuries  and  thus  in  a  measure
cure  the  over-producflion.  And  the  tendency  toward
both  over-produdlion  and  lack  of  employment  is  on  the  in-
crease, and  calls  for  a  remedy  of  some  kind  which  society's
physicians  are  seeking,  but  of  which  the  patient  will  not
make  use.

While,  therefore  (continues  the  wage-worker),  we  realize
that  as  the  supply  begins  to  exceed  the  demand,  compe-
tition is  greatly  reducing  the  profits  of  capital  and  ma-
chinery, and  throughout  the  world  is  distressing  the  rich
by  curtailing  their  profits,  and  in  some  cases  causing  them
adlual  loss  instead  of  profit,  yet  we  believe  that  the  class
which  benefited  most  by  the  "boom"  and  inflation  should
suffer  most  in  the  readlion,  rather  than  that  the  masses
should  suffer  from  it.  To  this  end,  and  for  these  reasons,
wage-workers  are  moving  to  obtain  the  following  results — by
legislation  if  possible,  or  by  force  and  lawlessness  in  coun-
tries where,  for  any  cause,  the  voice  of  the  masses  is  not
heard,  and  the  interests  of  the  masses  are  not  conserved : —

It  is  proposed  that  the  hours  of  labor  be  shortened  ia
proportion  to  the  skill  or  severity  of  the  labor,  without  a
reduction  of  wages,  in  order  thus  to  employ  a  greater  num.
ber  of  persons  without  increasing  the  produ6ls,  and  thus
to  equalize  the  coming  over-produ6tion  by  providing  a
larger  number  with  the  means  of  purchasing.  It  is  prO'
posed  to  fix  and  limit  the  rate  of  interest  on  money  at
much  less  than  the  present  rates,  and  thus  compel  a  leniency
of  the  lenders  toward  the  borrowers  or  poorer  class,  or
else  an  idleness  or  rusting  of  their  capital.  It  is  proposed
that  railroads  shall  either  be  the  property  of  the  people,  op-
erated by  their  servants,  government  officials,  or  that  legisla-


33°


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


tion  shall  restridl  their  liberties,  charges,  etc.,  and  compel
their  operation  in  such  a  manner  as  to  serve  the  public  bet-
ter. As  it  is,  railroads  built  during  a  period  of  inflated  val-
ues, instead  of  curtailing  their  capital  to  conform  to  the  gener-
al shrinkage  of  values  experienced  in  every  other  department
of  trade,  have  multiplied  their  originally  large  capital  stocks
two  or  three  times  (commonly  called  watering  their  stocks),
without  real  value  being  added.  Thus  it  comes  that  great
railroad  systems  are  endeavoring  to  pay  interest  and  divi-
dends upon  stocks  and  bonded  debts  which  on  an  average
are  four  times  as  great  as  these  railroads  would  a6lually
cost  to-day  new.  As  a  consequence  the  public  suffers.
Farmers  are  charged  heavily  for  freights,  and  sometimes
find  it  profitable  to  burn  their  grain  for  fuel ;  and  thus  the  cost
of  food  to  the  people  is  greater  without  being  to  the  far-
mer's advantage.  It  is  proposed  to  remedy  this  matter,  so
that  railroads  shall  pay  to  their  stockholders  about  four  per
cent,  on  their  present  a6lual  value,  and  not  four  to  eight
per  cent,  on  three  or  four  times  their  present  value,  as  many
of  them  now  do,  by  preventing  competition  through  pool-
ing arrangements.

We  well  know,  says  the  artisan,  that  in  the  eyes  of  those
who  hold  watered  railroad  stocks,  and  other  stocks,  this  re-
du6tion  of  profits  on  their  invested  capital  will  seem  terri-
ble, and  will  come  like  drawing  teeth,  and  that  they  will
feel  that  their  rights  (?)  to  use  their  franchises  granted  by
the  people,  to  squeeze  from  them  immense  profits,  based  upon
fictitious  valuations,  are  being  grievously  outraged,  and  that
they  will  resist  it  all  they  know  how.  But  we  feel  that  they
should  be  thankful  that  the  public  is  so  lenient,  and  that
they  are  not  required  to  make  restitution  of  millions  of
dollars  already  thus  obtained.  We  feel  that  the  time  has  come
for  the  masses  of  the  people  to  share  more  evenly  the  blessings
of  this  day  of  blessings,  and  to  do  this  it  is  necessary  so


TTie  Day  of  Jehovah.


33»


*o  legislate  that  all  greedy  corporations,  fat  with  money  and
power  derived  from  the  public,  shall  be  restrained,  and
compelled  by  law  to  serve  the  public  at  reasonable  rates.
In  no  other  way  can  these  blessings  of  Providence  be  se-
cured to  the  masses.  Hence,  while  great  corporations,
representing  capital,  are  to  a  large  extent  a  blessing  and  a
benefit,  we  are  seeing  daily  that  they  have  passed  the  point
of  benefit  and  are  becoming  masters  of  the  people,  and  if
unchecked  will  soon  reduce  wage-workers  to  penury  and
slavery.  Corporations,  composed  of  numbers  of  people
all  more  or  less  wealthy,  are  rapidly  coming  to  occupy  the
same  relation  to  the  general  public  of  America  that  the  Lords
of  Great  Britain  and  all  Europe  occupy  toward  the  masses
there,  only  that  the  corporations  are  more  powerful.

To  accomplish  our  ends,  continue  the  wage-workers,  we
need  organization.  We  must  have  the  co-operation  of
the  masses  or  we  can  never  accomplish  anything  against
such  immense  power  and  influence.  And  though  we  are
organized  into  unions,  etc.,  it  must  not  be  understood  that
our  aim  is  anarchy  or  injustice  toward  any  class.  We,  the
masses  of  the  people,  simply  desire  to  proteft  our  own
rights,  and  those  of  our  children,  by  putting  reasonable
bounds  upon  those  whose  wealth  and  power  might  other-
wise crush  us — which  wealth  and  power,  properly  used  and
limited,  may  be  a  more  general  blessing  to  all.  In  a  word,
they  conclude,  we  would  enforce  the  golden  rule — "Do
unto  others  as  you  would  that  they  should  do  to  you."

Happy  would  it  be  for  all  concerned  if  such  moderate
and  reasonable  means  would  succeed ;  if  the  rich  would  rest
with  their  present  acquirements  and  co-operate  with  the
great  mass  of  the  people  in  the  general  and  permanent  im-
provement of  the  condition  of  all  classes;  if  the  wage-
workers  would  content  themselves  with  reasonable  demands  ;
Si  the  golden  rule  of  love  and  justice  could  thus  be  put  '\n


332


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


practice.  But  men  in  their  present  condition  will  not  ob-
serve this  rule  without  compulsion.  Though  there  be  some
among  the  artisans  of  the  world  who  would  be  thus  mod-
erate and  just  in  their  ideas,  the  majority  are  not  so,  but
will  be  extreme,  unjust  and  arrogant  in  their  ideas  and  de-
mands, beyond  all  reason.  Each  concession  on  the  part
of  capitalists  will  but  add  to  such  demands  and  ideas ;  and
all  having  experience  know  that  the  arrogance  and  rule  of
the  ignorant  poor  are  doubly  severe.  And  so  among  those
of  wealth — some  are  fully  in  sympathy  with  the  laboring
classes,  and  would  be  glad  to  a6l  out  their  sympathy  by
making  such  arrangements  as  would  gradually  effedt  the
needed  reforms;  but  they  are  greatly  in  the  minority  and
wholly  powerless  in  the  operating  of  corporations  and  to
a  great  extent  in  their  private  business.  If  they  be  mer-
chants or  manufadturers,  they  cannot  shorten  the  hours  of
labor  or  increase  the  wages  of  their  employes ;  for  compet-
itors would  then  undersell  them,  and  financial  disaster  to
themselves,  their  creditors  and  their  employes  would  follow.

Thus  we  see  the  natural  cause  of  the  great  trouble  of  this
"Day  of  Jehovah."  Selfishness,  and  blindness  to  all  ex-
cept their  own  interests,  will  control  the  majority  on  both
sides  of  the  question.  Wage-workers  will  organize  and
unify  their  interests,  but  selfishness  will  destroy  the  union ;
and  each,  being  a6luated  mainly  by  that  principle,  will
scheme  and  conspire  in  that  diredlion.  The  majority,  igno-
rant and  arrogant,  will  gain  control,  and  the  better  class
will  be  powerless  to  hold  in  check  that  which  their  intelli-
gence organized.  Capitalists  will  become  convinced  that
the  more  they  yield  the  more  will  be  demanded,  and  will
soon  determine  to  resist  all  demands.  Insurrcdtion  will
result ;  and  in  the  general  alarm  and  distrust  capital  will  be
withdrawn  from  public  and  private  enterprises,  and  business
dep':ession  and  financial  panic  will  follow.    Thousands  of


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


333


men  thrown  out  of  employment  in  this  way  will  finally  be-
come desperate.  Then  law  and  order  will  be  swept  away
— the  mountains  will  be  swallowed  up  in  that  stormy  sea.
Thus  the  social  earth  will  melt,  and  the  governmental  heav-
ens (church  and  state)  will  pass  away ;  and  all  the  proud,
and  all  who  do  wickedly,  will  be  as  stubble.  Then  the
mighty  men  will  weep  bitterly,  the  rich  will  howl,  and
fear  and  distress  will  be  upon  all  the  multitude.  Even
now,  wise,  far-seeing  men  find  their  hearts  failing  them  as
they  look  forward  to  those  things  coming  upon  the  world,
even  as  our  Lord  predidled.  (Luke  21 :  26.)  The  Scriptures
show  us  that  in  this  general  rupture  the  nominal  church
(including  all  denominations)  will  be  gradually  drawn  more
and  more  to  the  side  of*  the  governments  and  the  wealthy,
will  lose  much  of  its  influence  over  the  people,  and  will
finally  fall  with  the  governments.  Thus  the  hcavena  [eccle-
siastical rule] ,  being  on  fire,  will  pass  away  with  a  great  hissmg.

All  this  trouble  will  but  prepare  the  world  to  realize  that
though  men  may  plan  and  arrange  ever  so  well  and  wisely,
all  their  plans  will  prove  futile  as  long  as  ignorance  and
selfishness  are  in  the  saddle  and  have  the  control.  It
will  convince  all  that  the  only  feasible  way  of  corredting
the  difficulty  is  by  the  setting  up  of  a  strong  and  righteous
government,  which  will  subdue  all  classes,  and  enforce  prin-
ciples of  righteousness,  until  gradually  the  stony-hearted-
ness  of  men  will,  under  favorable  influences,  give  place  to
the  original  image  of  God.  And  this  is  just  what  God  has
promised  to  accomplish  for  all,  by  and  through  the  Millen-
nial Reign  of  Christ,  which  Jehovah  introduces  by  the  chas-
tisements and  lessons  of  this  day  of  trouble. — Ezek.  n  :  19  ;
36  :  25,  36  ;  Jer.  31  :  29-34 ;  Zeph.  3:9;  Psa.  46  :  8-10.

Though  this  day  of  trouble  comes  as  a  natural  and  una-
voidable result  of  man's  fallen,  selfish  condition,  and  was
fully  foreseen  and  declared  by  the  Lord,  who  foresaw  that


334


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


his  laws  and  instruflions  would  be  disregarded  by  all  but
the  few  until  experience  and  compulsion  force  obedience,
yet  all  who  realize  the  state  of  things  coming  should
set  themselves  and  their  affairs  in  order  accordingly.  Thus
we  say  to  all  the  meek — the  humble  of  the  world,  as  well
as  the  body  of  Christ :  Seek  ye  the  Lord,  ye  meek  of  the
earth  which  have  wrought  his  judgment  [his  will] ;  seek
righteousness ;  seek  meekness,  that  ye  may  be  partially  hid-
den in  the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger.  (Zeph.  2  :  3.)  None
will  entirely  escape  the  trouble,  but  those  seeking  righteous-
ness and  rejoicing  in  meekness  will  have  many  advantages
over  others.  Their  manner  of  life,  their  habits  of  thought
and  aftion,  as  well  as  their. sympathies  for  the  right,  which
will  enable  them  to  grasp  the  situation  of  affairs,  and  also
to  appreciate  the  Bible  account  of  this  trouble  and  its  out-
come, will  all  conspire  to  make  them  suffer  less  than  others —
especially  from  harassing  fears  and  forebodings.

The  trend  of  events  in  this  Day  of  the  Lord  will  be  very
deceptive  to  those  not  Scripturally  informed.  It  will  come
suddenly,  as  fire  consuming  chaff  (Zeph.  2  :  2),  in  compai-i-
son  to  the  long  ages  past  and  their  slow  operation ;  but  not
suddenly  as  a  flash  of  lightning  from  a  clear  sky,  as  some
erroneously  expedl  who  anticipate  that  all  things  written
concerning  the  Day  of  the  Lord  will  be  fulfilled  in  a  twenty-
four  hour  day.  It  will  come  as  "a  thief  in  the  night,"  iri
the  sense  that  its  approach  will  be  stealthy  and  unobserved
by  the  world  in  general.  The  trouble  of  this  day  will  be
in  .spasms.  It  will  be  a  series  of  convulsions  more  frequent
and  severe  as  the  day  draws  on,  until  the  final  one.  The
Apostle  so  indicates  when  he  says — as  travail  upon  a
woman."  (i  Thes.  5  :  2,  3.)  The  relief  will  come  only
with  the  birth  of  the  new  order  of  things — a  new  heavens
[the  spiritual  control  of  Christ]  and  a  new  earth  [re-organ-
ized society]  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness  (2  Pet.  3:10,


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


335


13} — in  which  justice  and  love,  instead  of  power  and  self-
ishness, will  be  the  law.

Each  time  these  labor  pangs  of  the  new  era  come  upon
the  present  body  politic,  her  strength  and  courage  will  be
found  less,  and  the  pains  severer.  All  that  society's  physi-
cians (political  economists)  can  do  for  her  relief  will  be  to
help,  and  wisely  direft  the  course  of  the  inevitable  birth —
to  prepare  gradually  the  way  for  the  event.  They  cannot
avert  it  if  they  would ;  for  God  has  decreed  that  it  shall
come  to  pass.  Many  of  society's  physicians  will,  however,
be  totally  ignorant  of  the  real  ailment  and  of  the  necessities
and  urgency  of  the  case.  These  will  undertake  repressive
measures;  and  as  each  paroxysm  of  trouble  passes  away,
they  will  take  advantage  of  it  to  fortify  the  resistive  appli-
ances, and  will  thereby  increase  the  anguish ;  and  while  they
will  not  long  delay  the  birth,  their  malpractice  will  hasten
the  death  of  their  patient ;  for  the  old  order  of  things  will
die  in  the  labor  of  bringing  forth  the  new.

To  lay  aside  the  forcible  figure  suggested  by  the  Apostle,
and  speak  plainly  : — The  efforts  of  the  masses  for  deliver-
ance from  the  grasp  of  Capital  and  machinery  will  be  im-
mature; plans  and  arrangements  will  be  incomplete  and
insufficient,  as  time  after  time  they  attempt  to  force  their
way  and  burst  the  bands  and  limits  of  "supply  and  de-
mand "  which  are  growing  too  small  for  them.  Each  un-
successful attempt  will  increase  the  confidence  of  Capital  in
its  ability  to  keep  the  new  order  of  things  within  its  pres-
ent limits,  until  at  length  the  present  restraining  power  of
organizations  and  governments  will  reach  its  extreme  limit,
the  cord  of  social  organism  will  snap  asunder,  law  and  order
will  be  gone,  and  wide-spread  anarchy  Avill  bring  all  that
the  prophets  have  foretold  of  the  trouble  "such  as  was  not
since  there  was  a  nation" — and,  thank  God  for  the  assur-
ance added — "nor  ever  shall  be  "  afterward.


336


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


The  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egypt  and  from  the  plagues
which  came  upon  the  Egyptions  seems  to  illustrate  the  com-
ing emancipation  of  the  world,  at  the  hands  of  the  greater
than  Moses,  whom  he  typified.  It  will  be  a  deliverance
from  Satan  and  every  agency  he  has  devised  for  man's  bond-
age to  sin  and  error.  And  as  the  plagues  upon  Egypt  had
a  hardening  effeft  as  soon  as  removed,  so  the  temporary  re-
lief from  the  pains  of  this  Day  of  the  Lord  will  tend  to
harden  some,  and  they  will  say  to  the  poor,  as  did  the
Egyptians  to  Israel,  "Ye  are  idle,"  and  therefore  dissatis-
fied !  and  will  probably,  like  them,  attempt  to  increase  the
burden.  (Exod.  5  :  4-23.)  But  in  the  end  such  will  wish,
as  did  Pharaoh  in  the  midnight  of  his  last  plague,  that  they
had  dealt  more  leniently  and  wisely  long  ago.  (Exod.  12  :
30-33.)  To  mark  further  the  similarity,  call  to  mind  that
the  troubles  of  this  Day  of  the  Lord  are  called  "seven  vials
of  wrath,"  or  "seven  last  plagues,"  and  that  it  is  not  until
the  last  of  these  that  the  great  earthquake  [revolution}
occurs,  in  which  every  mountain  [kingdom]  will  disap-
pear.— Rev.  16:  17-20.

Another  thought  with  reference  to  this  Day  of  Trouble
is  that  it  has  come  just  in  due  time — God's  due  time.  In
the  next  volume  of  this  work,  evidence  is  adduced
from  the  testimony  of  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  of  the-
Old  Testament,  as  well  as  from  Jesus  and  the  apostolic
prophets  of  the  New  Testament,  which  shows  clearly  and
unmistakably  that  this  Day  of  Trouble  is  located  chrono-
logically in  the  beginning  of  the  glorious  Millennial  reign
of  Messiah.  It  is  this  necessary  jireparation  for  the  com-
ing work  of  restitution  in  the  Millennial  age  that  precipi-
tates the  trouble.

During  the  six  thousand  years  interim  of  evil,  and  until
the  appointed  time  for  the  establishment  of  the  righteous,
and  powerful  government  of  Christ,  it  wguld  have  been  a.


The  Day  of  fehovah.


337


positive  injury  to  fallen  men  had  they  been  afforded  much
idle  time,  through  an  earlier  development  of  present  labor-
saving  machinery,  or  otherwise.  Experience  has  given  rise
to  the  proverb  that  "  Idleness  is  the  mother  of  vice,"  thus  ap-
proving the  wisdom  of  God's  decree,  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy
face  shalt  thou  eat  bread  till  thou  return  unto  the  dust."
Like  all  God's  arrangements,  this  is  benevolent  and  wise,
and  for  the  ultimate  good  of  his  creatures.  The  trouble
of  the  Day  of  the  Lord,  which  we  already  see  gathering,
confirms  the  wisdom  of  God's  arrangement;  for,  as  we
have  seen,  it  comes  about  as  the  result  of  over-produdlion
by  labor-saving  machinery,  and  an  inability  on  the  part
of  the  various  elements  of  society  to  adjust  themselves  to
the  new  circumstances,  because  of  selfishness  on  the  part
of  each.

An  unanswerable  argument,  proving  that  this  is  God's
due  time  for  the  introdudlion  of  the  new  order  of  things,
is  that  he  is  lifting  the  veil  of  ignorance  and  gradually
letting  in  the  light  of  intelligence  and  invention  upon  man-
kind, just  as  foretold,  when  foretold,  and  with  the  results
predicted.  (Dan.  12:4,  i.)  Had  the  knowledge  come
sooner,  the  trouble  would  have  come  sooner ;  and  though
society  might  have  re-organized  after  its  storm  and  melting,
it  would  have  been  not  a  new  earth  [social  arrangement]
wherein  righteousness  would  prevail  and  dwell,  but  a  new
earth  or  arrangement  in  which  sin  and  vice  would  have
much  more  abounded  than  now.  The  equitable  division
of  the  benefits  of  labor-saving  machinery  would  in  time
have  brought  shorter  and  shorter  hours  of  labor ;  and  thus,
jeleased  from  the  original  safeguard,  fallen  man,  with  his
perverted  tastes,  would  not  have  used  his  liberty  and  time
for  mental,  moral  and  physical  improvement,  but,  as  the
kistory  of  the  past  proves,  the  tendency  would  have  been
toward  licentiousness  and  vice.

22


J38


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


The  partial  lifting  of  the  veil  now  prepares  thousands  of
conveniences  for  mankind,  and  thus  furnishes,  from  the
outstart  of  the  age  of  restitution,  time  for  education  and
moral  and  physical  development,  as  well  as  for  preparation
for  the  feeding  and  clothing  of  the  companies  who  will  from
time  to  time  be  awakened  from  the  tomb.  And  further-
more, it  locates  the  time  of  trouble  just  where  it  will  be  of
benefit  to  mankind,  in  that  it  will  give  them  the  lesson  of
their  own  inability  to  govern  themselves,  just  at  the  Millen-
nial dawn,  when,  by  the  Lord's  appointment,  he  who  re-
deemed all  is  to  begin  to  bless  them  with  the  strong  rule  of
the  iron  rod,  and  with  full  knowledge  and  assistance
whereby  they  may  be  restored  to  original  perfedlion  and
everlasting  life.

DUTY  AND  PRIVILEGE  OF  THE  SAINTS.

An  important  question  arises  regarding  the  duty  of  the
saints  during  this  trouble,  and  their  proper  attitude  toward
the  two  opposing  classes  now  coming  into  prominence.
That  some  of  the  saints  will  still  be  in  the  flesh  during  at
least  a  part  of  this  burning  time  seems  possible.  Their  po-
sition in  it,  however,  will  differ  from  that  of  others,  not  so
much  in  that  they  will  be  miraculously  preserved  (though
it  is  distindtly  promised  that  their  bread  and  water  shali  be
sure),  but  in  the  fa6t  that,  being  instrudted  from  God's
Word,  they  will  not  feel  the  same  anxiety  and  hopeless  dread
that  will  overspread  the  world.  They  will  recognize  the
trouble  as  the  preparation,  according  to  God's  plan,  for
blessing  the  whole  world,  and  they  will  be  cheered  and
comforted  through  it  all.  This  is  forcibly  stated  in  Psa.
91 ;  Isa.  33:  2-14,  15-24.

Thus  comforted  and  blessed  by  the  divine  assurance,  the
first  duty  of  the  saints  is  to  let  the  world  see  that  in  the
midst  of  all  the  prevailing  trouble  and  discontent,  and  even
while  they  share  the  trouble  and  suffer  under  it,  they  are


The  Day  of  Jehovah.


339


hopeful,  cheerful  and  always  rejoicing  in  view  of  the  glori-
ous outcome  foretold  in  God's  Word.

The  Apostle  has  written  that  "Godliness  with  contentment
is  great  gain;"  and  though  this  has  always  been  true,  It
will  have  double  force  in  this  Day  of  the  Lord,  when  discon-
tent is  the  chief  ailment  among  all  worldly  classes.  To  these
the  saints  should  be  a  notable  exception.  There  never  was
a  time  when  dissatisfa6tion  was  so  wide-spread ;  and  yet
there  never  was  a  time  when  men  enjoyed  so  many  favors
and  blessings.  Wherever  we  look,  whether  into  the  palaces
of  the  rich,  replete  with  conveniences  and  splendors  of
which  Solomon  in  all  his  glory  knew  almost  nothing,  or
whether  we  look  into  the  comfortable  home  of  the  thrifty
and  temperate  wage-worker,  with  its  evidences  of  taste,
comfort,  art  and  luxury,  we  see  that  in  every  way  the  pres-
ent exceeds  in  bountiful  supply  every  other  period  since  the
creation,  many-fold ;  and  yet  the  people  are  unhappy  and
discontented.  The  fadl  is  that  the  desires  of  a  selfish,  de-
praved heart  know  no  bounds.  Selfishness  has  so  taken
possession  of  all,  that,  as  we  look  out,  we  see  the  whole  world
madly  pushing  and  driving  and  clutching  after  wealth.  A
few  only  being  successful,  the  remainder  are  envious  and
soured  because  they  are  not  the  fortunate  ones,  and  all
Me  discontented  and  miserable — more  so  than  in  any  for-
mer time.

But  the  saint  should  take  no  part  in  that  struggle.  His
consecration  vow  was  that  he  would  strive  and  grasp  and
run  for  a  higher,  a  heavenly  prize,  and  hence  he  is  weaned
from  earthly  ambitions,  and  labors  not  for  earthly  things,
except  to  provide  things  decent  and  needful ;  for  he  is
giving  heed  to  the  course  and  example  of  the  Master  and
the  apostles.

Therefore  they  have  contentment  with  their  godlinesS;
not  because  they  have  no  ambition,  but  because  their  am«


340


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


bition  is  turned  heavenward  and  absorbed  in  the  effort  to
lay  up  treasure  in  heaven  and  to  be  rich  toward  God  j  in
view  of  which,  and  of  their  knowledge  of  God's  plans
revealed  in  his  Word,  they  are  content  with  whatever  of
an  earthly  sort  God  may  provide.  These  can  joyfully
sing  :—

"  Content,  whatever  lot  I  see,
Since  'tis  God's  hand  that  leadeth  me."

But  alas  !  not  all  of  God's  children  occupy  this  position.
Many  have  fallen  into  the  discontent  prevalent  in  the  world,
and  are  robbing  themselves  of  the  enjoyments  of  life  be-
cause they  have  left  the  Lord's  footsteps  and  are  casting
their  lot  and  taking  their  portion  with  the  world — seeking
earthly  things  whether  attaining  them  or  not,  sharing  the
world's  discontent,  and  failing  to  realize  the  content-
ment and  peace  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor
take  away.

We  urge  the  saints,  therefore,  to  abandon  the  strife  of
greed  and  vainglory  and  its  discontent,  and  to  strive  for  the
higher  riches  and  the  peace  they  do  afford.  We  would  re-
mind them  of  the  Apostle's  words  : —

"Godliness  with  contentment  is  great  gain;  for  we
brought  nothing  into  this  world,  and  it  is  certain  we  can
carry  nothing  out.  And  having  \needful'\  food  and  raiment,
let  us  therewith  be  content.  But  they  that  will  [to]  be
rich  [whether  they  succeed  or  not]  fall  into  temptation  and
a  snare,  and  into  many  foolish  and  hurtful  lusts  which
drown  [sink]  men  in  ruin  and  destrudlion.  For  a  root  of
all  vices  is  the  love  of  money  [whether  in  rich  or  poor],
which  some  being  eager  for  were  led  away  from  the  faith
and  pierced  themselves  through  with  many  pangs.  But
thou,  O  man  of  God,  flee  from  these,  and  be  pursuing  right-
eousness, godliness,  faith,  love,  endurance,  meekness;  be
contesting  in  the  noble  contest  of  the  faith,  lay  hold  on  ever-


The  Day  of  Jehovah.  341


lasting  life,  unto  which  thou  wast  called  and  didst  make  a
noble  covenant." — 1  Tim.  6:  6-12.

If  the  example  of  the  saints  is  thus  one  of  contentment
and  joyful  anticipation,  and  a  cheerful  submission  to  present
trials  in  sure  hope  of  the  good  time  coming,  such  living
examples  alone  are  valuable  lessons  for  the  world.  And  in
addition  to  the  example,  the  counsel  of  the  saints  to  those
about  them  should  be  in  harmony  with  their  faith.  It
should  be  of  the  nature  of  ointment  and  healing  balm.  Ad-
vantage should  be  taken  of  circumstances  to  point  the  world
to  the  good  time  coming,  to  preach  to  them  the  coming
Kingdom  of  God,  and  to  show  the  real  cause  of  present
troubles,  and  the  only  remedy. — Luke  3  :  14;  Heb.  13:5;
Phil.  4:  II.

The  poor  world  groans,  not  only  under  its  real,  but  also
under  its  fancied  ills,  and  especially  under  the  discontent  of
selfishness,  pride  and  ambitions  which  fret  and  worry  men
because  they  cannot  fully  satisfy  them.  Hence,  while  we
can  see  both  sides  of  the  question,  let  us  counsel  those  wil-
ling to  hear  to  contentment  with  what  they  have,  and  to
patient  waiting  until  God  in  his  due  time  and  way  brings
to  them  the  many  blessings  which  his  love  and  wisdom
have  provided.

By  probing  and  inflaming  either  real  or  fancied  wounds
and  wrongs,  we  would  do  injury  to  those  we  should  be
helping  and  blessing,  thus  spreading  their  discontent,
and  hence  their  trouble.  But  by  fulfilling  our  mission,
preaching  the  good  tidings  of  the  ransom  given  for  all,
and  the  consequent  blessings  to  come  to  all,  we  shall  be
true  heralds  of  the  kingdom — its  ambassadors  of  peace.
Thus  it  is  written,  "How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains
[kingdoms]  are  the  feet  of  him  [the  last  members  of  the
body  of  Christ]  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth
peace,  that  bringeth  good  tidings  of  good." — Isa.  52:  7.


342


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


The  troubles  of  this  "Day  of  Jehovah"  will  giveoppor
tunity  for  preaching  the  good  tidings  of  coming  good,  such
as  is  seldom  afforded,  and  blessed  are  they  who  will  follow
the  footsteps  of  the  Master,  and  be  the  good  Samaritans
binding  up  the  wounds  and  pouring  in  the  oil  and  wine  of
comfort  and  cheer.  The  assurance  given  such  is  that  their
labor  is  not  in  vain ;  for  when  the  judgments  of  the  Lord
are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  will  learn
righteousness. — Isa.  26:  9.

The  sympathy  of  the  Lord's  children,  like  that  of  their
heavenly  Father,  must  be  largely  in  harmony  with  the  groan-
ing creation,  striving  for  any  deliverance  from  bondage ;
although  they  should,  like  him,  remember  and  sympathize
with  those  of  the  opposing  classes  whose  desires  are  to  be  just
and  generous,  but  whose  efforts  are  beset  and  hindered,  not
only  by  the  weaknesses  of  their  fallen  nature,  but  also  by
their  surroundings  in  life,  and  their  association  with  and
dependence  upon  others.  But  the  Lord's  children  should
have  no  sympathy  with  the  arrogant,  insatiate  desires  and
endeavors  of  any  class.  Their  utterances  should  be  calm
and  moderate,  and  always  for  peace  where  principle  is  not
at  stake.  They  should  remember  that  this  is  the  Lord's
battle,  and  that  so  far  as  politics  or  social  questions  are  con-
cerned, they  have  no  real  solution  other  than  that  predidled
in  the  Word  of  God.  The  duty  of  the  consecrated,  there-
fore, is  first  of  all  to  see  that  they  are  not  in  the  way  of
Jehovah's  chariot,  and  then  to  "stand  still  and  see  the  sal-
vation of  God,"  in  the  sense  of  realizing  that  it  is  no  part
of  their  work  to  share  in  the  struggle,  but  that  it  is  the
Lord's  doing,  through  other  agencies.  Regardless  of  all
such  things,  they  should  press  along  the  line  of  their  own
mission,  proclaiming  the  heavenly  kingdom  at  hand  as  the
only  remedy  for  all  classes,  and  their  only  hope.


STUDY  XVI.


CONCLUDING  THOUGHTS.
[^nt  Durr  Toward  thb  Truth.— Its  Cost,  Its  Vamtb,  Its  Profw.

TN  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  seen  that  both  the  light
*  of  nature  and  that  of  revelation  clearly  demonstrate  the
fa<5l  that  an  intelligent,  wise,  almighty  and  righteous  God
IS  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  that  he  is  the  supreme  and
rightful  Lord  of  all ;  that  all  things  animate  and  inanimate
are  subje6l  to  his  control ;  and  that  the  Bible  is  the  revela-
tion of  his  character  and  plans  so  far  as  he  is  pleased  to
disclose  them  to  men.  From  it  we  have  learned  that  though
evil  now  predominates  among  some  of  his  creatures,  it  exists
for  only  a  limited  time  and  to  a  limited  extent,  and  by  his
permission,  for  wise  ends  which  he  has  in  view.  We  have
also  learned  that  though  darkness  now  covers  the  earth,  and
gross  darkness  the  people,  yet  God's  light  will  in  due  time
dispel  all  the  darkness,  and  the  whole  earth  will  be  filled
with  his  glory.

We  have  seen  that  his  great  plan  is  one  that  has  required
ages  for  its  accomplishment  thus  far,  and  that  yet  another
age  will  be  required  to  complete  it ;  and  that  during  all  the
dark  ages  of  the  past,  when  God  seemed  to  have  almost  for-
gotten his  creatures,  his  plan  for  their  future  blessing  has
been  silently  but  grandly  working  out,  though  during  all
those  ages  the  mysteries  of  his  plan  have  been  wisely  hidden
from  men.  We  have  also  seen  that  the  day  or  age  which
is  now  about  to  dawn  upon  the  world  is  to  be  the  day  of
tiie  world's  judgment  or  trial,  and  that  all  previous  prepara-
343


344


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


tion  has  been  for  the  purpose  of  giving  mankind  in  general
as  favorable  an  opportunity  as  possible,  when,  as  individuals,
they  will  be  placed  on  trial  for  eternal  life.  The  long
period  of  six  thousand  years  has  greatly  multiplied  the  race,
and  their  buffetings  and  sufferings  under  the  dominion  of
evil  have  given  them  an  experience  which  will  be  greatly
to  their  advantage  when  they  are  brought  to  judgment.
And  though  the  race  as  a  whole  has  been  permitted  thus  to
suffer  for  six  thousand  years,  yet  as  individuals  they  have
run  their  course  in  a  few  brief  years.

We  have  seen  that  while  the  race  was  undergoing  this
necessary  discipline,  in  due  time  God  sent  his  Son  to  re-
deem them ;  and  that  while  the  mass  of  mankind  did  not
recognize  the  Redeemer  in  his  humiliation,  and  would  not
believe  that  the  Lord's  Anointed  would  thus  come  to  their
rescue,  yet  from  among  those  whose  hearts  were  toward
God,  and  who  believed  his  promises,  God  has  been,  during
these  ages  past,  sele6ting  two  companies  to  receive  the  hon-
ors of  his  kingdom — the  honors  of  sharing  in  the  execution
of  the  divine  plan.  These  two  seledl  companies,  we  have
seen,  are  to  constitute  the  two  phases  of  the  Kingdom  of
God.  And  from  the  prophets  we  learn  that  this  kingdom
is  soon  to  be  established  in  the  earth ;  that  under  its  wise
and  just  administration  all  the  families  of  the  earth  will  be
blessed  with  a  most  favorable  opportunity  to  prove  them-
selves worthy  of  everlasting  life ;  that  as  the  result  of  their
redemption  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  a  grand  high-
way of  holiness  will  be  cast  up ;  that  the  ransomed  of  the
Lord  (all  mankind — Heb.  2  :  9)  may  walk  in  it ;  that  it  will
be  a  public  thoroughfare  made  comparatively  easy  for  all
who  earnestly  desire  to  become  pure,  holy ;  and  that  all  the
stumbling-stones  will  be  gathered  out,  and  all  the  snares,
allurements  and  pitfalls  removed,  and  blessed  will  all  those
be  who  go  up  thereon  to  perfection  and  everlasting  life.


Concluding  Thoughts.


345


It  is  manifest  that  this  judgment,  or  rulership,  cannot
begin  until  Christ,  whom  Jehovah  hath  appointed  to  be  the
Judge  or  Ruler  of  the  world,  has  come  again — not  again  in
humiliation,  but  in  power  and  great  glory  :  not  again  to  re-
deem the  world,  but  to  judge  [rule]  the  world  in  righteous-
ness. A  trial  can  in  no  case  proceed  until  the  judge  is  on
the  bench  and  the  court  in  session  at  the  appointed  time,
though  before  that  time  there  may  be  a  great  preparatory
work.  Then  shall  the  King  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his
glory,  and  before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations,  and  he
shall  judge  them  during  that  age  by  their  works,  opening
to  them  the  books  of  the  Scriptures  and  filling  the  earth
with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  And  by  their  conduct
under  all  that  favor  and  assistance,  he  shall  decide  who  of
them  are  worthy  of  life  everlasting  in  the  ages  of  glory  and
joy  to  follow. — Matt.  25  :  31  ;  Rev.  20  11-13.

Thus  we  have  seen  that  the  second  advent  of  Messiah,
to  set  up  his  kingdom  in  the  earth,  is  an  event  in  which
all  classes  of  men  may  have  hope,  an  event  which,  when
flilly  understood,  will  bring  joy  and  gladness  to  all  hearts.
It  is  the  day  when  the  Lord's  "  little  flock"  of  consecrated
saints  has  the  greatest  cause  for  rejoicing.  It  is  the  glad
day  when  the  espoused  virgin  Church  with  joy  becomes  the
Bride,  the  Lamb's  wife ;  when  she  comes  up  out  of  the  wil-
derness leaning  upon  the  arm  of  her  Beloved,  and  enters
into  his  glorious  inheritance.  It  is  the  day  when  the  true
Church,  glorified  with  its  Head,  will  be  endued  with  divine
authority  and  power,  and  will  begin  the  great  work  for  the
•world,  the  result  of  which  will  be  the  complete  restitution
of  all  things.  And  it  will  be  a  glad  day  for  the  world  ..-hen
the  great  adversary  is  bound,  when  the  fetters  that  have  held
the  race  for  six  thousand  years  are  broken,  and  when  the
knowledge  of  the  Lord  fills  the  whole  earth  as  the  waters
cover  the  sea.


346


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


A  knowledge  of  these  things,  and  the  evidences  that  they
are  nigh,  even  at  the  door,  should  have  a  powerful  influence
upon  all,  but  especially  upon  the  consecrated  children  of
God,  who  are  seeking  the  prize  of  the  divine  nature.  We
urge  such,  while  they  lift  up  their  heads  and  rejoice,  know-
ing that  their  redemption  draweth  nigh,  to  lay  aside  every
weight  and  hindrance,  and  to  run  patiently  the  race  in
which  they  have  started.  Look  away  from  self  and  its  un-
avoidable weaknesses  and  imperfe6lions,  knowing  that  all
such  weaknesses  are  covered  fully  by  the  merits  of  the  ran-
som given  by  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  and  that  your  sacrifices
and  self-denials  are  acceptable  to  God  through  our  Re-
deemer and  Lord — and  thus  only.  Let  us  remember  that
the  strength  sufficient  which  God  has  promised  us,  and  by
use  of  which  we  can  be  "overcomers,"  is  provided  in  his
Word.  It  is  a  strength  derived  from  a  knowledge  of  his
chara6ler  and  plans,  and  of  the  conditions  upon  which  we
may  share  in  them.  Thus  Peter  expresses  it,  saying,  ' '  Grace
and  peace  be  multiplied  unto  you  through  the  knowledge  of
God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  according  as  his  divine
power  hath  given  unto  us  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life
and  godliness,  through  the  ktiowledge  of  him  who  hath  called
us  to  glory  and  virtue ;  whereby  are  given  unto  us  exceed-
ing great  and  precious  promises,  that  by  these  ye  might  be
partakers  of  the  divine  nature. ' ' — 2  Pet.  i :  2-4.

But  to  obtain  this  knowledge  and  this  strength,  which
God  thus  proposes  to  supply  to  each  runner  for  the  heav-
enly prize,  will  surely  test  the  sincerity  of  your  consecra-
tion vows.  You  have  consecrated  all  your  time,  all  your
talents,  to  the  Lord  ;  now  the  question  is,  How  much  of  it
are  you  giving  ?  Are  you  still  willing,  according  to  your
covenant  of  consecration,  to  give  up  all? — to  give  up  your
own  plans  and  methods,  and  the  theories  of  yourselves  and
Others,  to  accept  of  God's  plan  and  way  and  time  of  doing


Concluding  TTioughts.


347


great  work  ?  Are  you  willing  to  do  this  at  the  cost  of
earthly  friendships  and  social  ties  ?  And  are  you  willing  to
give  up  time  from  other  things  for  the  investigation  of  these
glorious  themes  so  heart-cheering  to  the  truly  consecrated,
with  the  certain  knowledge  that  it  will  cost  you  this  self-
denial?  If  all  is  not  consecrated,  or  if  you  only  half
meant  it  when  you  gave  all  to  the  Lord,  then  you  will  be-
grudge the  time  and  effort  needful  to  search  his  Word  as
for  hid  treasure,  to  obtain  thus  the  strength  needful  for  all
the  trials  of  faith  incident  to  the  present  (the  dawn  of  the
Millennium)  above  other  times.

But  think  not  that  the  givmg  will  end  with  the  giving  of
the  needful  time  and  energy  to  this  study  :  it  will  not.  The
sincerity  of  your  sacrifice  of  self  will  be  tested  in  full,  and
will  prove  you  either  worthy  or  unworthy  of  membership
in  that  "little  flock,"  the  overcoming  Church,  which  will
receive  the  honors  of  the  kingdom.  If  you  give  diligence
to  the  Word  of  God,  and  receive  its  truths  into  a  good,
honest,  consecrated  heart,  it  will  beget  in  you  such  a  love
for  God  and  his  plan,  and  such  a  desire  to  tell  the  good
tidings,  to  preach  the  gospel,  that  it  will  become  the  all-
absorbing  theme  of  life  thereafter ;  and  this  will  not  only
separate  you  from  the  world  and  from  many  nominal
Christians,  in  spirit,  but  it  will  lead  to  separation  from  such
entirely.  They  will  think  you  peculiar  and  separate  you
from  their  company,  and  you  will  be  despised  and  counted
a  fool  for  Christ's  sake ;  because  they  know  us  not,  even  as
they  knew  not  the  Lord. — 2  Cor.  4:  8-10;  Luke  6 :  22 ;
1  John  3  :  I ;  I  Cor.  3  :  18.

Are  you  willing  to  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord  through
evil  and  through  good  report  ?  Are  you  willing  to  forsake
all,  to  follow  as  he  may  lead  you  by  his  Word  ? — to  ignore
the  wishes  of  friends,  as  well  as  your  own  desires  ?  It  is
hoped  that  many  of  the  consecrated  who  read  this  volume


348


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


may  by  it  be  so  quickened  to  fresh  zeal  and  fervency  of
spirit,  through  a  clearer  apprehension  of  the  divine  plan,
that  they  will  be  able  to  say,  "By  the  grace  of  God,  I
will  follow  on  to  know  and  to  serve  the  Lord,  what-
ever may  be  the  sacrifice  involved."  Like  the  noble  Be-
reans  (Afts  17:  11),  let  such  studiously  set  themselves  to
prove  what  has  been  presented  in  the  foregoing  pages.
Prove  it,  not  by  the  conflicting  traditions  and  creedsof  men,
but  by  the  only  correCl  and  divinely  authorized  standard —
God's  own  Word.  It  is  to  facilitate  such  investigation  that
we  have  cited  so  many  scriptures.

It  will  be  useless  to  attempt  to  harmonize  the  divine  plan
herein  set  forth  with  many  of  the  ideas  previously  held  and
supposed  to  be  Scriptural,  yet  not  proved  so.  It  will  be
observed  that  the  divine  plan  is  complete  and  harmonious  with
itself  in  every  part,  and  that  it  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the
character  which  the  Scriptures  ascribe  to  its  great  Author.
It  is  a  marvelous  display  of  wisdom,  justice,  love  and  power.
It  carries  with  it  its  own  evidence  of  superhuman  design,  be-
ing beyond  the  power  of  human  invention,  and  almost  be-
yond the  power  of  human  comprehension.

Doubtless  questions  will  arise  on  various  points  inquir-
ing for  solution  according  to  the  plan  herein  presented.
Careful,  thoughtful  Bible  study  will  settle  many  of  these
at  once ;  and  to  all  we  can  confidently  say,  No  question
which  you  can  raise  need  go  without  a  sufficient  answer,
fully  in  harmony  with  the  views  herein  presented.  Succeed-
ing volumes  elaborate  the  various  branches  of  this  one
plan,  disclosing  at  every  step  that  matchless  harmony  of
wliich  the  tnith  alone  can  boast.  And  be  it  known  that  no
other  system  of  theology  even  claims,  or  has  ever  attempted,
to  harmonize  in  itself  every  statement  of  the  Bible ;  yet
nothing  short  of  this  can  we  claim  for  these  views.  This
harmony  not  only  with  the  Bible,  but  with  the  divine  chai-


Concluding  Thoughts.


349


a6ler  and  with  san6lified  common  sense,  must  have  arrested
the  attention  of  the  conscientious  reader  already,  and  filled
him  with  awe,  as  well  as  with  hope  and  confidence.  It  i?
marvelous  indeed,  yet  just  what  we  should  expe6l  of  the
TRUTH,  and  of  God's  infinitely  wise  and  beneficent  plan.

And  while  the  Bible  is  thus  opening  up  from  this  stand-
point, and  disclosing  wondrous  things  (Psa.  119:  18),  the
light  of  the  present  day  upon  the  various  creeds  and  tradi»
tions  of  men  is  affedling  them  in  an  opposite  manner.
They  are  being  recognized  even  by  their  worshipers  as  im-.
perfect  and  deformed,  and  hence  they  are  being  measurably
ignored ;  and  though  still  subscribed  to,  they  are  seldom
elaborated,  for  very  shame.  And  the  shame  attaching  to
these  human  creeds  and  traditions  is  spreading  to  the  Bible,
which  is  supposed  to  uphold  these  deformities  of  thought
as  of  divine  origin.  Hence  the  freedom  with  which  th^
various  advanced  thinkers,  so-called,  are  beginning  to  deny
various  parts  of  the  Bible  not  congenial  to  their  views.
How  striking,  then,  the  providence  of  God,  which  at  this
very  time  opens  before  his  children  this  truly  glorious  and
harmonious  plan — a  plan  that  rejects  not  one,  but  harmo-
nizes every  part  and  item  of  his  Word.  Truth,  when  due,
becomes  meat  for  the  household  of  faith,  that  they  may
grow  thereby.  (Matt.  24:  45.)  Whoever  comes  in  contadt
with  truth,  realizing  its  charadler,  has  thereby  a  responsi-
bility with  reference  to  it.  It  must  be  either  received  and
a(Sled  upon,  or  rejected  and  despised.  To  ignore  it  does
not  release  from  responsibility.  If  we  accept  it  ourselves,
we  have  a  responsibility  toward  it  also,  because  it  is  for  all
the  household  of  faith ;  and  each  one  receiving  it  becomes
its  debtor,  and,  if  a  faithful  steward,  must  dispense  it  to  the
other  members  of  the  family  of  God.  Let  your  light  shine  !
If  it  again  becomes  darkness,  how  great  will  be  the  darkness.
Lift  up  the  light !    Lift  up  a  standard  for  the  people !


The  Plan  of  the  Ages.


THE  DIVINE  WEAVING.

«  See  the  mystic  Weaver  sitting
High  in  heaven — His  loom  below.
Up  and  down  the  treadles  go.
Takes,  for  web,  the  world's  dark  ages^
Takes,  for  woof,  the  kings  and  sages.
Takes  the  nobles  and  their  pages,
Takes  all  stations  and  all  stages.
Thrones  are  bobbins  in  His  shuttle.
Armies  make  them  scud  and  scuttle —
Web  into  the  woof  must  flow  :
Up  and  down  the  nations  go !
At  the  Weaver's  will  they  go !

"Calmly  see  the  mystic  Weaver
Throw  His  shuttle  to  and  fro;
'Mid  the  noise  and  wild  confusion,
Well  the  Weaver  seems  to  know
What  each  motion,  and  commotion.
What  each  fusion,  and  confusion,
In  the  grand  result  will  show  I

"Glorious  wonder !    What  a  weaving!
To  the  dull,  beyond  believing.
Such  no  fabled  ages  know.
Only  faith  can  see  the  mystery.
How,  along  the  aisles  of  history.
Where  the  feet  of  sages  go,
Loveliest  to  the  fairest  eyes.
Grand  the  mystic  tapet  lies  !
Soft  and  smooth,  and  ever  spreading;
As  if  made  for  angels'  treading —
Tufted  circles  touching  ever:
Every  figure  has  its  plaidings,
Brighter  forms  and  softer  shadings.
Each  illumined — what  a  riddle  ! —
From  a  cross  that  gems  the  middle.

•'Tis  a  saying — some  rejedl  it —
That  its  light  is  all  refleded ;
That  the  tapet' s  lines  are  given
By  a  Sun  that  shines  in  heaven !
'Tis  believed — by  all  believing —
That  great  God,  Himself,  is  weaving,
Bringing  out  the  world's  dark  mystery,
In  the  light  of  faith  and  history ;
And,  as  web  and  woof  diminish,
Comes  the  grand  and  glorious  finish.
When  begin  the  Golden  Ages,
Long  foretold  by  seers  and  sages."


INDEX
SCH.I  FTXJTIB  CIXAXIOHS
SCRIPTURE  STUDIES,  SERIES  I.


GENESIS.

1:26,  31   174

i:  27   171

2:4   IJ9

2:9,  16,  17   209

2:  17  140,  154

3:>5  57.98

3  :  22  120,  209

5   160

5:1   201

7:13   221

12  =  3   58

13:  «4-i7   293

18: 1,2   183

18:18   58

19:24   no

19:36-38   42

22:18   58

26  :  4   58

38    43

49  :  10   43

49  :  28   78

EXODUS.

5:4-23    336

>2:  30-33   336

12:49   50

18  :  13-26   47

19:17-25   55

21:26,27   S3

22  :  21-24   53

22:25   50

23--4,5   SI

23:9   53

23:12   51

24  .-12   53

26  :  30   54

LKvmcus.

I :  J   54

19:13   53

19s  «4    53


19:17   55

'9:32    53

19:  33.  34- ••.50.  53

24:  22   50

25:9,13-23,27-30  so

25  :  36,  37   50

26:14-16   125

NUMBERS.
11:16,17,24-30  47

26  :  52-56   50

DEUTERONOMY.

J:  15    47

1:10,17   49

1:17   48

5:1-5   55

9:9-11   53

12  :  19   52

14:27   52

18:15   78

18  :  15,  19   58

22:  10   51

24:14.15   53

25:4   51

26  :  5   78

28  :  I-14   125

28  :  15-32   125

3'  :  9-27    43

31  :  10-13   50

JOSHUA.

23:6-11,12-16.  125

JUDGES.

3:9-11   142

6  :  11-22   183

13  :  20   183

I.  SAMUEL.

8  :  6-22   48

10:  19   125

15:3   "I

3SI


I.  KINGS.

18  :  4,  10,  17,  18  54

18:40   55

19 : 10   54

I.  CHRON.

16  :  16, 17   78

>6:  31-34   147

29  :  23   248

II.  CHRON.

13  :  8   248

NEHEMIAH.
2:17   125

6:7   55

JOB.

14:  10,  21   210

38  :  7   220

PSALMS.

» = '  V   25

2  : 1-6, 10-12  . .  272

2:8   308

2:8-12  256,  303

5:4   118

8:4-8   191

«  =  5  ,• '75

8:5  0   247

8:5-8  174,  179

10:6   125

"  =  5-7   303

16  :  10   58

17:  15   222

24:3.  4   301

25:14   171

27:5   125

30:5   9

34:7   182

34:13.  14   309

34: 19   125

34 :  20   58


352


Index  of  Texts.


67

68

209

125

45 : 7

303

294

323

46 :  6

323

323

333

48  :  2    ,  .  .  ,

295

49:  7-15  ••

172

303

50:3

323

72:7

67

72:8

283

250

77:  18  ....

171

78:70,  71.

248

88  :  3

125

89  :  32  ... .

303

338

94 : 13  • . •  •

125

323

97: II  ....

20

98:9

243

125

125

92

323

308

291

349

119:  loS  . .

20

141:5  ••.

125

i49  :  8,  9  . .

261

PROVERBS.

4:18

20

15:3

145

ECCLESIASTES.

1:4

69

7:  14

125

7 :  29

171

,106,  210

"  =3

105

12:14

145

ISAIAH.

I:  18

58

2:  19

67

I :

26

  294

2:

3

.256,  297

8:

20

  '63

II

:9   .75.  217,  302

13

:  I-II  . .

  324

14

  187

14

:  24-27  .

19

21

26

:9  ....

....  342

28

:  17  ....

• ■ •  303

28

61

32

.  ,  269

33

:  2-14,  15-24  338

35

:  1-6

161

35

•8

35

■  8  Q

.  0,  9 . . .

.205,  216

35  ■

35

40;

42 ;

42:

45  :

7

45  =

18  ^  IQI

45  '

;  17'...'.

.  /.  67

46;

;9-ii  ..

66

49 :

6

....  59

52  ;

■1

....  341

52  :

9

. ...  297

53

4

...  230

53  ■

3-6...

....  58

53  •

:  8,  9,  II

....  58

53  •

....  132

53  •

:  12

....  58

55  •

8,9...

55  •

....  95

60:

:  2,  3  .  .  .

18

61  :

61  ;

218, 308

62;

....  217

63:

1-4  .. .

....  308

65;

:  18

....  297

65:

;  20

•  144,  242

66:

10-12

. . . .  j297

JEREMIAH.

3:  17   297

3:  22,  23   256

16:19   59

24:5-7   109


30  :  18   294

31  :28   109

31  :  29,  30..  109,  143

31  :  29-34   333

31:34  75.215

32  :  40-42  ...  .  109
33:6-16   109


40  :  10   125

51  :  2   125


LAMENTATIONS.


1 : 21

•  125

EZEKIEL.

•  315

If  :  19

•  333

16:48-54,  55.

.  112

16:48-63

.  Ill

18:4  I2{

!.  143

,  248

21  :  25-27  ....

36:  25,36....

•  333

36  :  26

310

37: 11-14

108

DANIEL.

2:31-45

.  252

2:35

.  260

2  : 37-43

252

2  :  44.  .262,  270,  308

2:43.44, 45...

■  254

4:32

■  274

7:2-7

■  257

7:7.8

.  258

7:9.13,14,  22,

27

308

7:  II

,  260

7:  13,  27

261

7:  14,  17.  27  ..

.  270

7  :  27

.  283

9 : 24-27

•  223

9  :  26

■  58

10:  6, 10,  15,  17

•  'f3

184

12:1

■  307

12:  1,4,  10  . . .

.  168

12:  3  291

,  292

12:4,  I

•  337

HOSEA.

6:1

.  256

.  256

Index  of  Texts.


353


JOEL.
2:9-16   324

AMOS.


3:2

..97,  221

3:6

■  124.  125

MICAH.


....  58

HABAKUK.

2  :  1-3.  13.

14..  61

3:2-11  ...

61

ZEPHANIAH.

I  :  7-9.  14-

18..  31S

2:2,  3....

  334

3:8,9...

•  317.  333

HAGGAI.

2:7

266

ZECHARIAH.

»:  15

....  125

9:"

11:12

...  58

14:1,  6,7  .

  61

14:9

  303

MALACHI.

  59

3  : 1-3    •  •  •

....  320

3:1s

..67,  257

3:1s.  18  •■

  217

4:1

•  •69.319

4:2

.210,322

MATTHEW.

I  :  2-16  .  . .

  42

  107

3:2

  273

3:16,  17  ..

  179

4:9

  251

4:17

  273

5  :  35  ... .

7:  «3.  '4.

  205

7:15  ....

  55

8:  16,  17

  230

8  :  22

10:5,6  ..

.•..72,97

10:7  ....

  273

  303

II  ;  23,  24

61

13  :  43

86,  322

13:38.39.41.49-  237

13:41-43  ••■

•  ■  239

14:  5

. .  55

22  :  37-40  .  .

23  :  38

,72,  223

24  :  14

91

24  :  21,  22  .  .  ,

. . .  307

24:38.  39  ■■•

61

24:45

■•  349

*4  •  4!>»       ■  •  '

2?  :

345

25 : 31-46. . I

.^8,  144

25  :  34

•  •  305

25  :  46

.  ••  93

28  :  20

89

MARK.

3  :  22-27  . .  .  ,

. . .  69

5  :  30

.  •  •  2  30

12  :  30.  3'  ■  •

■  ■  •  45

LUKE.

. . .  107

•  •  •  59

3  :  14

3:  15

••■  273

3  :  I7t  21,  22

. .  229

3:  23. 3'.  33.

34  42

3:38......

...  225

4:  1, 18

224

4: 19

218

4:43

...  274

6-22

..-  347

8:1

...  274

8:  10   128

9:2   273

10:  27   136

12:32..  72,235,274

12  :  42   24

12:47.48  303

13  :  30   29s

14  :  II   187

14:  23   194

16  :  16   277

17  :  20-30   276

17  :  26   61

17  :  29   lie

19:10   177

19:  "   274

19  :  11-15   283

19  :  12   249

19:44-    79

21  :  24   249

21  :  26   333

21:34,35   90

22  :  29,  30   274

24  :  21   80

24:21,25-27..  274


JOHN.


1:9..

l:  14  .

  178

1:18

  288

1:29  .

....103.  157

Ui

  278

3:6..

  182

3:8..

  231

3:13  •

  282

3:16.

  104

3: 17 .

  255

3:36.

5  :  22

 137.  141

5:26..

186,  187,  211

5:44-

  214

12 :3i

  250

14:3.

  89

14:  26

  80

14 :  30 ,

,  ,  .    68,  250

15:5  .

  82

16:  8-11   309

16 :  12,

13...  22,80

16  :  13

»6:33

  214

354


Index  of  Texts.


17  =  5

  203

211

19:36  ....

....  58

20: 19,  26.

....  231

ACTS.

1:6

.  • • •  93

1:6,7

..80,  275

2:31

....  58

3:19

....  154

73,108,162,191,222

3:20,  21

89

3:21

3 :  22

78,  243

3  :  23 . .  107,

243,  303

4:  12

lOI

266

266

5:31

....  142


....  293

9:7

184

10:  28

....  27

10:37.  38  .

....  223

10:38

81,  224

10:45  ••••

224

11:1-3  ...

....  59

II  :9

80

15:6

....  278

81

....  349

17:31

.137,  «39

24 :  25

....  309

ROMANS.

1:28

263,  308

2  :  6,  10,  II

....  298

2:14

3 :  10

20

3  :  10,  19,  2

0. ..  loi

5:1,8  ...

232

5  :  10, 12, 17-19,  21

....  124,

128,  162

S:I2

....  171

S:  14

....  124

5s»7

. ...  61

5: 17-19.. 58,131,300

5:18,19.108,156,177

6:8

202,  213

....  197

128

8:9

8:  II

....  197

8:  13,  14  ..

....  213

8  : 17.  .59,86,196,212

8  •  18

  292

8-19

88  162

8  •  21

  147

8  .  27'

5  ■     '  ^  ■  ■

•  98,  251

8  •  24

8 • 28—31

8  •  30

8  .  11  — T  A

8  :  33, 34  .  •

  157

9  ^  0,  2

1°;     ^'^  ■

108

J ' ' "

278

II  :  23,  24  .

II  :  25,  26

108

11:25-33..

....  300

....  113

11:28-33..

....  108

;I2  :  I

196,  226,

237.  309

198,  269

13:1

250,  252

13:  1-7  -  ..

266

14:9

.141,  149

14: 14, 17  .

15:4.-  ..

252  l>

16 :  20

.  .  98,  306

I.  COR.

....  84

2:7

....  305

2:8

....  85

182

2  :  14  ....  .

....  i8i

3 :  "

295

320

3:18  ^

347

21

286

4:8

■3'*/

4  •  10-17

207

5:5

214

6:2

146

6:3..

289

12  :  12-28

82

14: 1-6  .

55

15  :  13-22

60

15  :  21

178

15  : 22

106

129

1 5  •  24  ■

305

15-25

15  :  25,  26.

121

222

15  :  25-28

304

15  :  27

261

15  :  28

308

15  :  38,  44  .

191

15:38-49  •

i8i

15  :44,  52.

.  200,

235

15:49  ..-

198

15:53-  54.

186

II.  COR.

1:21   81

3:6   305

4: 17   211

5  :  '4   289

5:  17   227

6:1   236

6:2   139

8:12   143

11:3   61

11  :  14   259

12:2-4   70

12:4   27

12:7   68

12  :  6   214

GALATIANS.

1:4   67

2:2   27

2  :  2,  12,  14   80

2  :  U-14   27

3:15-18   84

3  :  16   84


Index  of  Texts.


355


3 :  27,  29   SS

3:28   85

3:29  82,  97

4    85

EPHrSIANS.

1:4,5   »93

1:9,10,17,18..  26
1 : 10.  ..219,  242,  289

1:  II  73.  167

1 :  13,  14  . .  .I97i  202

1  :  14   247

I  :  20,  21   134

1  :  22   82

2:2  68,  250

2:7   219

2  :  7-12   292

2:8   100

2:  19   267

3  :  4-6   26

3:9   88

4  :  II-16   12

5  :  25-30   82

6:12   68

PHILIPPIANS.

2:7,  8   178

2:8,  9..  84,178,  179

2  :  10  283,  289

3:8-15   218

3:  21   92

4:"   341

COLOSSIANS.

I  :  18  82,  197

1 :  20   289

1:26   77

1  :  27  81,211

3:4   86

I.  THES.

2  :  16   229

5  :  2,  3   334

II.  THES.

2:>3   299

2: 14   211

I.  TIMOTHY.

2:3-6   126

2:4    106

2:4-6   131

2  :  5,  6   104


2:6    178

2:11,  12   212

2  :  14.  .  .61,  123,  124

4  :  10   106

5  :  24   US

6  :  6-12   341

6:  14-16   210

6:  15   139

6:16  186,288

II.  TIMOTHY.

1  :  10. .  .  22,  204,  206

2  :  II,  12   86

2:12  196,  288

2:  13   118

3:1-4   90

3:1.13   75

3:12   68

3:13   90

3:15   21

3:15-17   25

4:8  215,287

TITUS.

»:I2   55

HEBREWS.

1:3   2"

»:3-S   176

1:4   203

1:9   303

1 :  14   182

2:5  67,  220

2:7   17s

2:7-9   179

2:  9- •••97.  104,  344

2  :  14  121,  187

2:  16   178

3:1   222

3:5.6   145

3:8,9   139

4:1   19s

5  :  14   24

6  :  4-8   321

6:6   198

6  :  18   118

7  :  19  225,  229

9:  "   301

9  :  11-20   79

10:  I  222,  229

10:  4   221


10 :  8-i8  . .  79

10: 16,  29   141

10  :  20   207

10:  26-31   321

10:31   305

10:38,39   107

11  :  13,39,40  .  293

"  :  19   155

11:32-38   54

11  :  39.  40   288

"  :  40   93

12  :  I   25

12  :  26-29   321

•3:5   341

13  :  20,  21   141

JAMES.

1  :  18  194,  196

2:5  284

2:  10   lOI

2  :  23   228

4:4   214

5:1-4   3H

5    303

I.  PETER.

»:2   299

1:3   80

I  :  lO   84

I  :  10-13   26

':"   79

1:12  13,  57

»:I2.  13   319

I  :  19   103

1  :  23   196

2:2   24

2:4-6   83

2:9  82

2  :  21   196

3:15   25

3:18   156

3  :  20   61

5:4   215

5:5.6   84

5  :  10   211

II.  PETER.

1:2-4   346

I  :  4  186,196,203  222
I  :S-"   321


356


Index  of  Texts.


I ,

I  :

2 :

2  :

2:

:i6   61

3:

;  6   67

3i

:6,7   319

3:

^7   67

3.

;  10-13   319

3:

:  10.  13  334

3:

:  13   67

I.  JOHN.

I  :

;  9   157

2  :

:  I   137

2 ;

;  2   157

2  :

2 :

27   81

2 :

29   278

3  •

I  85,  278,  347

3:

2  182,  200,211

3:

9   278

4:

7  278

4:

5:

1, 18   278

5:

JUDE.

II   61

23   320

REVELATION.

1:3   28

1:7   90

2  :  10   284

2  :  26,  27  .  . .  256.  303

3  :  17,18   287

3:21

91,  223,  256,  288

4:11   ii8

5  :  12   60

7:9-17   214

7:14.15   241

10  :  7   87

11  :  15   68

11  :  17,  18   324

II:  18   94

12  :9  61,  258

14:  I   195

14:  14   238

16:  17-20   336

17  :  2  268,  270

17 : 3-5   268


17:  14  195.270

18  :  7   268

18:21   JI3

19:  6,  7,  9   240

19:7  87,98

19:11-19   270

19: 15.  19  324

19:17   315

20  :  1-3   324

20:  2  61,  69

20:  3   146

20:4  73.  9»

20  :  5   288

20:  6  .  .197,285,288

20 :  9

242,  291,303,320
20:  n-13   345

20:  15   144

21  :  I   70

21:3-5   162

21 :  4  72,  192

21  :  8  107,  144

21  :  24-26   296

22  :  12,  20   90

22:  17... 97,  98,  157


BEREAN  QUESTIONS


THE  DIVINE  PLAN
OF  THE  AGES


INTERNATIONAL  BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,  NEW  YORK
1914


STUDIES  IN  THE
SCRIPTURES

The  general  title  of  a  series  of  six  intensely  interesting
and  handsomely  bound  volumes,  which  have  attained  a
circulation  far  surpassing  any  known  work  except  the
Bible,  and  treating  in  simple  language
"The  Divine  Plan"         "The  Day  of  Vengeance"
"The  Time  is  at  Hand"    "The  At-One-Ment"
"Thy  Kingdom  Come"   "The  New  Creation"

SEVENTH  MILLION  NOW  ON  THE  PRESS


"The  Wonderfal  Bible  Keys"


Any  volume — 35c  Postpaid — Any  language
Entire  set— Over  3000  pages— Only  ,$2.00

Many  vital  and  precious  Bible  truths  have  long  been  misunder-
stood, thereby  causing  the  Great  Creator  to  appear  unjust,  merci-
less, cruel.

THE  TIME  HAS  COME  when  facts  well  known  to  theologians
should  be  plainly  told  to  the  public.   Do  not  delay.


Send  order  at  once  direct  to  publishers


International  Bible  Students  Association

London  —  Brooklyn  —  Melbourne  —  Barmen-
Copeaixatsea  —  Orebro  —  Christiania


BEREAN  QUESTIONS

IN

SCRIPTURE  STUDIES


SERIES  I.


STUDY  I.

EARTH'S   NIGHT  OF  SIN   TO   TERMINATE  IN  A
MORNING  OF  JOY.

(1)  What  thought  does  "the  Divine  Plan  of  the  Ages"
suggest  to  our  minds?  And  why  is  the  period  in  which
sin  is  permitted  called  "a  dark  night,"  and  when  will  "the
morning"  be  ushered  in?    P.  9.

(2)  What  seems  to  be  the  almost  instinctive  longing
of  the  whole  creation?  And  how  do  these  indefinite  hopes
and  longings  approximate  the  Creator's  gracious  provision
for  mankind?    P.  10,  H  i.

(3)  Why  is  it  now  possible  to  understand  the  Divine
Plan  as  it  was  not  possible  in  past  Ages  ?    P.  10,  H  2.

(4)  What  is  the  foundation  of  all  true  religion?    P.  10,

H  3.

(5)  Should  we  expect  the  Divinely  provided  foundation
for  our  faith  to  be  harmonious  with  reason  and  justice?
And  what  should  be  our  object  as  truth-seekers?    P.  11,  ^  i.

(6)  As  inquirers,  what  two  methods  are  open  to  us?
Eph.  4:11-16.    P.  II,  H  2.

(7)  What  is  a  common  failing  of  the  present  and  of  all
times  with  respect  to  accepting  certain  doctrines,  and
what  should  be  the  test  of  all  religious  teaching  and
teachers?    P.  12,  H  i.

(8)  What  is  the  method  of  Bible  study  pursued  in  our
text-book,  "The  Plan  of  the  Ages"?  And  why  is  careful
and  orderly  study  of  this  work  essential  to  a  thorough
understanding  of  "Present  Truth"?   P.  12,  ^  3.

(9)  What  is  the  object  of  the  prophecies  contained  in
the  Scriptures?    P.  13,  ff  i.

(10)  Judging  from  conditions  in  the  world  to-day,  what

3


4  The  Divine  Plan

must  be  the  conclusion  reached  by  any  thoughtful  ob-
server in  ignorance  of  the  Divine  Plan?    P.  14,  jf  i.

(11)  What  is  the  religious  condition  of  the  world  as
shown  in  the  Missionary  Diagram?    P.  14,  U  2,  to  P.  17,

U  I.

(12)  What  do  the  various  creeds  of  "Orthodoxy"  teach
with  respect  to  these  billions  of  heathen?    P.  17,      2,  3.

(13)  How  has  the  Word  of  God,  through  the  Prophet
Isaiah,  foretold  this  very  condition  of  affairs  and  its  remedy?

P.  18,  H  I.

(14)  Have  the  continued  darkness  and  misery  of  the
■world  been  a  mystery  to  worldly  men  as  well  as  to  the
Church?   P.  18,  H  2,  to  P.  20,  H  i.

(15)  While  "darkness  covers  the  earth,  and  gross  dark-
ness the  people,"  what  class  among  men  is  privileged  to
walk  in  the  light  of  Truth?    P.  20,  ^  2.

(16)  Why  are  many  still  sitting  in  darkness  when  they
might  walk  in  the  light?    P.  21,  j[  i.

(17)  How  will  the  Spirit  of  God  guide  the  Church  into
the  Truth?   P.  21,  ^1  2.

(18)  What  Scriptural  assurance  have  we  that  even  the
world  shall  not  always  remain  in  darkness?    P.  21,  ^  3.

(19)  What  was  the  nature  of  the  Divine  promises  in
past  Ages,  and  how  has  the  "path  of  the  just"  been  pro-
gressive with  respect  to  knowledge?    P.  21,  ff  4.

(20)  What  was  the  special  light  brought  by  our  Lord
Jesus  at  His  first  advent?    P.  22,  ^  i.

(21)  After  the  Apostles  fell  asleep,  what  was  the  ex-
perience of  the  majority  of  the  Church?  And  what  made
the  development    of  Papacy  possible?   P.  22,  If  2.

(22)  What  was  the  nature  of  the  Reformation  move-
ment, and  why  have  Protestants  made  so  little  progress
since  the  days  of  the  Reformers?    P.  23,  H  i.

(23)  What  do  we  understand  by  the  term  "dispensa-
tional  truths"?  And  what  has  given  rise  to  the  proverb,
"The  Bible  is  a  fiddle  upon  which  any  tune  can  be
played"?    P.  24,  H  i,  2;  P.  25,  H  i.

(24)  What  is  the  great  importance  of  walking  in  the
light?  And  how  do  the  Scriptures  contrast  walking  with
sitting  or  standing?  P.  25,  H  2.

(25)  If  we  believe  that  perfection  of  knowledge  is  not
a  thing  of  the  past  but  of  the  future,  why  do  we  go  back


Of  the  Ages


S


to  tlie  words  of  the  Apostles  and  Prophets  for  all  our
knowledge  of  the  present  and  the  future?    P.  25,  ^  3.

^26)  Although  the  Lord  promised  that  the  Church
should  be  guided  into  all  Truth,  in  what  manner  evidently
was  the  Truth  to  be  unfolded?  P.  26,  H  i.

(27)  What  was  the  special  value  of  the  Apostle  Paul's
visions  and  revelations,  since  he  was  not  permitted  to
make  them  known  either  to  the  other  Apostles  or  to  the
Church  in  general?  P.  27,  \  1.

(28)  How  does  the  book  of  Revelation  corrobate  the
foregoing  statements?    P.  27,  H  2.

(29)  What  was  the  promise  of  Rev.  i  :3,  and  how  has
it  been  fulfilled?    P.  27,  H  3.


STUDY  II.


THE  EXISTENCE  OF  A  SUPREME,  INTELLIGENT
CREATOR  ESTABLISHED.

(1)  What  evidence,  aside  from  the  Bible,  examined  in
the  light  of  reason,  proves  the  existence  of  an  intelligent,
personal  Creator?    P.  29,  \  i,  2.

(2)  \^'hat  is  the  theory  of  some  who  deny  the  existence
of  a  personal  God?    P.  30,  \  i.

(3)  What  facts  in  nature  are  the  strongest  evidence
against  the  theory  of  Evolution?    P.  30,  TJ  2,  P.  31,  i.

(4)  What  is  one  theory  of  the  creation  (excepting
man)  to  which  no  serious  objection  can  be  offered?    P.  31,

H  2,  3.  _

(5)  In  view  of  the  foregoing,  what  is  our  reasonable
conclusion  as  to  the  existence  of  an  intelligent  Creator?
P.  32,  ^  I.

(6)  Realizing  the  existence  of  ^uch  a  mighty  being,  how
does  reason  allay  any  dread  of  His  omnipotent  strength?
P.  32,  H  2.

(7)  What  should  we  expect  of  such  an  all-wise,  all
mighty,  all-loving  Creator?   P.  33,  H  i,  2.

(8)  Is  it  not  most  reasonable  to  expect  such  a  God
to  give  his  creatures,  made  m  His  own  image,  some  revela-
tion of  Himself  and  His  purposes?    P.  33,  11  3.

(9)  Had  Divine  Wisdom  deemed  it  inexpedient  to  give
mankind  any  knowledge  of  his  future  destiny,  what  course
would  Justice,  Love  and  Power  have  dictated  as  respects
God's  dealings  with  men?    P.  34,     i,  first  half.


6


The  Divine  Plan


(10)  What  is  the  reasonable  conclusion  regarding  earth-
quakes, cyclones,  and  other  minor  irregularities  in  this
earth,  when  we  consider  the  general  harmony  and  order
of  the  rest  of  creation?    P.  34,      i,  last  half.

(11)  What  book  claims  to  be  this  revelation  from  God
to  man,  and  what  should  we  expect  of  it?    P.  35,  \  i.


STUDY  III.


THE  BIBLE  AS  A  DIVINE  REVELATION  VIEWED
IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  REASON.

(1)  What  is  the  influence  of  the  Bible,  as  recognized
even  by  its  enmeies?  And  what  injury  has  the  grand  old
Book  often  suffered  at  the  hands  of  its  staunchest  friends?
P.  37,  H  I.

(2)  What  is  the  claim  of  the  Bible?   P.  37,  1[  2.

(3)  How  old  is  the  Bible,  and  what  do  the  facts  of  its
remarkable  preservation  indicate?    P.  38,  H  i.

(4)  What  is  the  moral  influence  of  the  Bible,  and  how
must  it  be  used  by  those  who  would  enjoy  its  richest
treasures?    P.  38,  H  2.

(5)  Who  is  the  most  prominent  character  constantly  re-
ferred to  throughout  the  Bible?    P.  39,  If  i.

(6)  What  does  the  existence  of  any  book  imply?  And
what  motives  only  could  be  reasonably  attributed  to  the
writers  of  the  New  Testament?    P.  39.  II  2;  P.  40,  H  i.

(7)  What  was  the  character  of  the  writers  of  the  Old
Testament?  And  what  does  the  straightforwardness  of  the
Bible  indicate?    P.  41,  H  i.

(8)  Having  conceded  that  the  Bible  was  written  by
men  whose  motives  were  apparently  pure,  what  would
logically  be  the  next  step  in  our  examination  of  the  Bible?

P.   41,  'H  2.

(9)  Would  it  require  a  special  revelation  to  simply  nar-
rate the  facts  contained  in  the  first  five  books  of  the  New
Testament  and  several  of  the  Old  Testament?  Upon  what
does  the  credibility  of  such  writings  depend?    P.  41,  H  3.

(10)  Does  it  in  any  way  invalidate  the  credibility  of
certain  portions  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  to  say  that  they
were  simply  truthful  records  of  events  of  the  period  in
which  the  writers  lived?    And  what  was  the  evident  im-


Of  the  Ages  7

portance  of  carefully  recording  certain  facts  of  history  con-
sidered indelicate  at  the  present  time?    P.  42,  ^  i.

(11)  While  there  are  other  portions  of  the  Scriptures
similar  in  character,  can  it  be  said  that  the  Bible  anywhere
countenances  impurity?    P.  43,  H  i.

THE   BOOKS   OF   MOSES   AND   THE   LAWS    THEREIN  PROMULGATED

(12)  What  are  the  "Books  of  Moses,"  and  what  proofs
have  we  that  they  were  or  were  not  written  by  Moses?
P.  43.  H  2.

(13)  How  does  the  Genesis  account  of  Creation  com-
pare with  that  of  other  nations,  and  what  is  the  reasonable
conclusion  respecting  Moses  as  its  author?    P.  44,  1[  i.

(14)  What  can  be  said  in  general  about  the  Laws  of
Moses?    P.  44,  H  2.

(15)  What  is  the  "Decalogue"?  For  what  purpose  were
the  Ten  Commandments  given,  and  how  were  they  epitomized
by  Jesus?    P.  45,  H  I.

(16)  What  were  the  peculiarities  of  the  government  es-
tablished by  Moses?  Did  this  arrangement  give  opportunity
for  the  priesthood  to  impose  upon  the  people?    P.  45,  \  2.

(17)  Who  was  the  chief  one  in  authority  under  this
government?  Was  Israel's  government  a  democracy  or
a  theocracy?    P.  46,  H  i.

(18)  How  did  Moses'  example  in  conducting  the  gov-
ernment tend  to  cultivate  in  the  people  the  spirit  of  liberty?
P.  47,  II  I.

(19)  Give  a  concise  definition  of  Israel's  government.
How  long  did  it  last,  and  under  what  conditions  was  it
changed  to  a  kingdom?    P.  48,  IJ  i.

(20)  Explain  the  custom  of  the  tribal  division  in  Israel.
P.  48,  H  2.

(21)  What  were  the  instructions  given  to  the  civil  rulers
tmder  this  government?    P.  49,  ^  i,  2.

(22")  Did  the  Laws  of  Moses  favor  the  rich  to  the  dis-
adva!itage  of  the  poor?  What  was  the  provision  of  the
Jubilee  Year?    P.  49,  ^  3.

(23)  What  safeguards  were  provided  to  prevent  tamper-
ing with  the  rights  of  the  people?  And  what  was  the  duty
of  the  priests  towards  the  poor  and  unlearned?    P.  50,  |f  i.

(24)  What  provision  for  the  rights  of  foreigners  and
enemies  was  made  by  the  Mosaic  Law?    P.  50,  1[  2  to  5.


8  The  Divine  Plan

(25)  Were  even  the  dumb  animals  neglected  by  the
Laws  of  Moses?    P.  51.  H  i-

(26)  Was  the  position  of  the  priesthood  a  specially
favored  one  in  Israel?  How  were  the  Levites  supported?
P.  SI,  H  2,  3;  P.  52,  H  I.

(27)  Do  any  of  the  foregoing  arrangements  savor  of
priestcraft?    P.  52,  U  2.

(28)  Was  there  any  special  provision  for  reverencing
the  priesthood?  How  does  this  peculiarity  contrast  with
the  laws  respecting  other  classes  of  persons?    P.  52,  3.

(29)  What  can  be  said  of  the  sanitary  arrangements
of  the  Mosaic  Law?    P.  53,  H  i.

(30)  What  is  the  only  reasonable  conclusion  respecting
Moses'  claim  to  have  received  these  laws  from  God  Him-
self?   P.  S3,  ^  2.

THE    PROPHETS    OF    THE  BIBLE

(31)  Were  the  prophets  of  the  Bible  from  the  priestly
class?  What  was  the  burden  of  their  messages?  And  what
does  the  term  prophet  signify?    P.  54,  U  i ;  P.  5s,  H  I.

(32)  What  were  the  characteristics  of  the  class  of
prophets  specially  commissioned  by  the  Lord?  P.  55,  ^
2,  3-

(33)  If  we  find  a  common  bond  of  union  between  the
Law  and  the  Prophets  and  the  New  Testament  writers,
what  must  be  our  conclusion  respecting  their  claims?  P.

56,  H  I.

(34)  Explain  how  this  one  plan,  spirit,  aim  and  pur-
pose pervades  the  entire  Bible.    P.  56,  f[  2.

(35)  Is  the  Bible  merely  a  collection  of  moral  precepts,
wise  maxims  and  words  of  comfort?    P.  57,  If  i.

(36)  How  is  the  teaching  of  Genesis  respecting  the
trial,  condemnation  and  ultimate  redemption  of  the  hu-
man race  elaborated  throughout  the  prophetic  writings  of
the  Old  Testament?  Quote  from  memory  various  pro-
phecies regarding  the  Redeemer.    P.  57,  If  2.

(37)  What  was  the  work  of  the  New  Testament  writers
as  respects  the  Plan  of  Redemption?    P.  s8,  If  i.

(38)  What  was  the  double  teaching  of  Moses  in  the
Law  respecting  a  sacrifice  and  a  blessing  to  follow?  P.  58,
If  2.

(39)  What  was  the  claim  of  the  New  Testament  writers
respecting  their  ability  to  realize  the  fulfilment  of  the  Old
Testament  prophecies?    P.  S9,  If  i,  2.


Of  the  Ages


9


(40)  What  is  the  glorious  theme  of  all  the  prophets?  P.
59.  If  3.

(41)  How  has  this  hope  of  the  Kingdom  affected  the
faithful  people  of  God?    P.  59,  H  4.

(42)  What  is  the  special  doctrine  of  the  Bible  found
nowhere  else,  and  in  opposition  to  the  theory  of  all  the
heathen  rehgions?    P.  60,  \  i.

(43)  While  composed  of  many  parts,  a  harmonious
■whole,  are  there  any  useless  or  unnecessary  features  in
the  Bible?  What  would  be  the  result  of  eliminating  or
discrediting  the  miracles,  a  popular  proceeding  at  the
present  time?  Mention  the  miracles  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment referred  to  by  our  Lord  and  the  writers  of  the  New
Testament.    P  60,  f  2.

(44)  How  do  these  miracles  find  their  parallels  in  our
everyday  experiences  and  are  thus  made  to  appear  not
unreasonable?    P.  62,  ^  i.

(45)  Give  a  resume  of  the  steps  which  lead  us  to  con-
clude that  the  Bible  is  a  Divinely  inspired  revelation,  and
not  the  mere  device  of  ordinary  men.    P.  62,  f  2;  P.  63,  H  i.


STUDY  IV.


EPOCHS  AND  DISPENSATIONS  MARKED  IN  THE
DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  DIVINE  PLAN.

(1)  Why  do  many  in  their  ignorance  now  misjudge  the
great  Jehovah's  character  and  work?    P.  65,  H  i.

(2)  However  mysterious  or  haphazard  God's  dealings
may  appear  to  men,  what  is  the  declaration  of  his  Word
respecting  the  definiteness  of  His  purposes?    P.  65,  H  2.

(3)  Inquiring  of  our  Father's  Word,  what  do  we  learn
regarding  the  periods  of  time  into  which  God's  Plan  is
divided?    P.  66,  H  i.

(4)  Briefly,  what  do  these  three  great  epochs  represent,
and  how  are  they  designated?    P.  66,     2  to  P.  67,  H  2.

(5)  What  were  the  distinctive  features  of  the  first  and
second  periods  respectively?  And  what  is  to  be  the  character
of  the  third?    P.  67,  H  3-

(6)  Why  is  the  present  dispensation  called  an  "evil
world,"  and  the  third  one  a  "world  wherein  dwelleth
righteousness" ?  P.  67,  ^  4.

(7)  What  is  the  special  reason  why  the  future  dispensa-


10


The  Divine  Plan


tion  is  to  be  so  markedly  different  from  the  present  one?  P.
67,  H  5.

(8)  Why  cannot  Christ's  Kingdom  now  control  the
earth?    Quote  Scriptures  on  this  point.  P.  68,  ^  i,  2.

(9)  What  is  the  Scriptural  usage  of  the  word  "world"?
Does  the  "end  of  the  world"  signify  the  destruction  of  the
physical  earth?  How  are  the  terms,  "heavens"  and  "earth"
used  in  Scripture?  When  and  how  did  the  first  heavens  and
earth  come  to  an  end?  When  and  under  what  conditions
will  the  present  heavens  and  earth  pass  away?    P.  69.

(10)  What  did  St.  Paul  mean  when  he  declared  he
was  caught  away  to  the  "third  heaven"?  And  what  were
doubtless  the  things  which  he  saw  but  was  not  permitted
to  reveal?    P.  70,  \  i.

AGES    OR  DISPENSATIONS.

(11)  What  is  the  distinction  between  an  Age  and  a
Dispensation?  Was  the  first  world  or  dispensation  sub-
divided into  Ages?  And  what  did  this  "world"  manifest?
P.  70,  H  2,  3.

(12)  Into  how  many  Ages  is  this  present  Dispensation
subdivided?    P.  71,  ^  i.

(13)  What  Ages  compose  "the  world  to  come"?   P.  71,

U  2.

( 14)  How  is  the  first  Age  in  '  the  world  that  now  is"
designated?  Why  so  called.  And  when  did  it  end?  P.  71,
U  3,  first  eight  lines.

(15)  What  was  the  next  Age?  When  did  it  begin,  how
long  continue,  and  what  were  its  characteristics?  P.  71,  8th
line  to  end  of  ^.

(16)  What  Age  began  at  Jesus'  death,  and  what  are
its  characteristics?    P.  72,  H  i.

(17)  When  and  how  will  the  Gospel  Age  end?  P.  73,
H  I.

(18)  What  does  the  word  Millennium  mean,  and  how
is  it  Scripturally  applied?    P.  73,  H  2.

(19)  Where  is  the  expression.  "Plan  of  the  Ages,"  found
in  Scripture?    (See  Eph.  3:11,  Diaglott.)

C20)  What  is  the  chief  characteristic  of  the  Divine
Plan,  and  what  is  the  object  of  the  various  "Ages"?  P.  73.

H  3.

(21)  Give  an  illustration  showing  why  Jehovah's  works


Of  the  Ages


II


appear  to  the  uninstructed  mind  like  confusion  and  failure.
P.  74.  II  I.

(22)  What  must  be  remembered  with  respect  to  these
various  Ages,  if  we  would  "rightly  divide  the  Word  of
'truth"?    P.  74,  H  2,  3-

(23)  What  is  a  very  common  error  with  respect  to  God's
Kingdom  being  established  and  now  ruling  in  the  earth?
P.  75.  H  I.

(24)  How  has  the  poet  Cowper  beautifully  described
"the  stately  steppings  of  our  God"  in  Ages  past?    P.  75,  U  2.


STUDY  V.


THE    MYSTERY    HID    FROM    AGES    AND  FROM
GENERATIONS,  BUT  NOW  MADE  MANI-
FEST TO  HIS  SAINTS.

(1)  During  the  long  period  of  suffering  under  the
curse  of  sin  and  death,  has  mankind  never  received  from
God  any  expression  of  His  purpose  to  restore  and  bless
the  condemned  race?    P.  77,  II  i.

(2)  What  was  the  first  faint  ray  of  hope  that  shone
in  Eden?    P.  77.  H  2.

(3)  How  long  until  a  further  ray  of  light  was  sent  to
Abraham?  And  unto  whom  was  the  promise  to  Abraham
subsequently  "confirmed"?    P.  77,  H  3.

(4)  What  was  the  expectation  of  the  Twelve  Tribes  of
Israel  at  the  time  of  Jacob's  death,  and  their  disap-
pointment?   P.  78,  H  I.

(5)  Who  was  the  great  deliverer  sent  of  God  to  revive
the  hope  of  His  chosen  people?  And  what  further  insighc
into  God's  Plan  was  revealed  by  him?  P.  78,  H  2  to  P.  79,
top.

(6)  Who  was  Moses'  successor,  and  what  did  he  ac-
complish?   P.  79,  top.

(7)  Under  what  conditions  did  the  nation  of  Israel  seem
about  to  realize  the  consummation  of  their  hopes?  And
how  was  their  hope  again  deferred?    P.  79,  H  i.

(8)  What  was  the  expectation  of  all  Israel  at  the  time
Jesus  was  born?  Why  did  they  not  receive  Him  as  their
long-promised  Messiah?    P.  79,  f  2,  first  17  lines.

(9)  What  was  the  effect  of  Jesus'  unexpected  death  upon
His  followers?    P.  79,  H  2,  last  sentence,  to  end  of  ^.


12


The  Divine  Plan


(lo)  What  was  the  attitude  of  Jesus'  disciples  after
His  ascension?    P.  80,  1|  i.

(n)  When  did  the  disciples  begin  more  clearly  to
comprehend  the  Divine  purposes?    P.  80,  2.

(12)  What  light  was  thrown  upon  the  work  of  the
Gospel  Age  by  the  Apostle  James  in  Acts  15?    P.  81,  ^  i.

(13)  What  is  the  great  "Mystery  hid  from  ages  and
from  generations,"  declared  by  the  Apostle  Paul  (Col.
I  -.27)  ?    P.  81,  H  2.

(14)  What  does  "Christ  in  you"  signify?  P.  81,  H  3;  P.
82,  U  I.

(15)  How  has  the  Apostle  guarded  the  Church  against
any  presumptuous  claims?    P.  82,  ^[  2.

(16)  Explain  how  the  figure  of  the  pyramid  beautifully
illustrates  the  oneness  of  the  Lord  and  His  Church  as  an
anointed  company.    P.  82,  ^  3,  4.

(17)  Who  is  the  Chief  Corner-stone  in  this  building  of
God?    P.  83,  H  I.

(18)  What  thoughts  are  suggested  by  the  reference  to
the  members  of  Christ's  Body  as  "living  stones"?  P.  83,  H  2.

(19)  What  is  the  "high  calling,"  and  why  is  it  called  a
mystery r  P.  84,  H  i.

(20)  How  does  the  Apostle  Paul  in  Galatians  3  and  4
open  up  this  entire  Mystery?    P.  84,  H  2.

(21)  What  was  evidently  the  neceso'ty  for  keeping  this
mystery  so  long  hidden?    P.  85,  i.

(22)  Why  is  the  peculiar  course  in  which  the  "little
flock"  has  been  called  to  walk  a  mystery  to  the  world?  P.
8s.  H  2;  P.  86,  H  I.

(23)  Will  the  Divine  purposes  always  remain  shrouded
in  mystery?    P.  86,  H  2.

(24)  How  will  the  world  of  mankind  during  the  Mil-
lennial Age  be  brought  to  an  understanding  of  the  promises
of  God,  which  arc  now  appreciated  only  by  the  Lord's  "ser-
vants and  handmaids"?  P.  86,  H  3 ;  P    87,  If  i.

(25)  What  are  the  two  senses  in  which  the  "Mystery  of
God"  is  used,  and  when  will  it  be  "finished"?  P.  87,  1j  2,
top  of  page  88.

(26)  What  does  the  greatness  of  this  Mystery,  so  long
kept  secret,  suggest  respecting  the  work  to  follow  its  com-
pletion?   P.  88.


Of  the  Ages


«3


STUDY  VI.


OUR  LORD'S  RETURN— ITS  OBJECT,  THE  RESTI-
TUTION OF  ALL  THINGS.

(1)  Upon  what  Scriptures  is  based  the  Church's  hope-
of  her  Lord's  second  Personal  coming?    P.  89,  H  i,  2.

(2)  What  is  the  Scriptural  proof  that  the  outpouring
of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  or  the  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem, was  not  the  fulfilment  of  Christ's  promised  teturn?-
P.  89.  H  3.

(3)  How  do  the  Scriptures  contradict  the  popular-
thought  that  the  conversion  of  sinners  is  a  part  of  the-
second  coming  of  the  Lord?    P.  90,  1[  i,.  2.

(4)  What  is  the  claim  of  post-millennialists  regarding-,
the  time  and  conditions  of  the  second  advent?    P.  90,  H  3.

(5)  Do  the  Scriptures  favor  this  view,  or  the  opposite-
one,  viz.,  that  Christ  must  come  before  the  conversion  of'
the  world?    P.  91,  I  i.

(6)  Quote  one  of  the  texts  chiefly  relied  upon  by  post-
millennialists,  and  show  why  this  text  does  not  support
their  claim.    P.  91,  H  2.

(7)  What  is  the  main  object  of  the  Gospel  Age?  P.  92,.
If  I.

(8)  What  is  the  other  text  specially  quoted  by  post-
millennialists  in  support  of  their  theory?  What  is  the  proper
interpretation  of  this  text?    P.  92,  K  2.

(9)  What  is  the  object  of  the  first  and  second  advents,
respectively,  and  how  are  they  logically  related  to  the  Divine
Plan?    P.  93,  H  I.

(10)  Could  not  the  restoration  and  blessing  of  the  world
have  immediately  followed  the  giving  of  the  Ransom-price?
P.  93,  H  2.  _

(11)  What  is  the  object  of  the  long  period  intervening-
between  the  first  and  second  advents?  Had  not  Jehovah
purposed  the  selection  of  the  Church,  at  what  time  would  the-
first  advent  have  occurred?    P.  94,  IJ  i,  2.

(12)  What  does  the  Apostle  Peter  teach  respecting  the-
object  and  conditions  of  the  second'  advent?  And  what  is^
therefore,  the  logical  conclusion  respecting  the  mission  of
the  Church  in  this  Age?    P.  94;  If  3>

(13)  Is  it  reasonable  to  bfiiieve  that  God  has  been  trying


14  The  Divine  Plan

for  6,000  years  to  convert  the  world,  and  has  failed?  What
is  the  position  of  the  leading  sects  as  respects  this  proposi-
tion, and  what  is  the  Scriptural  assurance?    P.  95,  ^  i,  2.

(14)  What  are  the  two  main  lines  of  thought  respect-
ing God's  purposes,  which  have  divided  Christians  for
centuries?  Do  both  have  Scriptural  support,  and  if  so,  what
should  we  conclude?  And  how  only  can  these  opposing  doc-
trines be  reconciled?    P.  96,  ^  i.

(15)  What  is  the  nature  of  the  Election  taught  in  the
Scriptures?    P.  96,  ^  2.

(16)  Brief! V,  what  does  the  Bible  teach  concerning  Free
Grace?    P.  96,  H  3.

C17)  How  was  the  doctrine  of  Election  illustrated  by
God's  dealings  with  Abraham  and  the  nation  of  Israel?  P.
97,  H  I,  2.

(18)  How  has  God's  Election  operated  during  the  Gospel
Age?    P.  97.  If  3-

(19)  What  is  necessary  before  the  promised  "Seed"  can
bruise  the  serpent's  head  and  bless  all  the  families  of  the
earth?    P.  98,  I  i.

(20)  Does  the  Church's  mission  end  with  the  Gospel
Age?    P.  98,  H  2.

(21)  Do  the  Scriptures  hold  forth  any  hope  of  Millen-
nial blessings  for  those  who  are  in  their  graves?  P.  99,  If  i.

(22)  What  is  the  estimated  number  of  human  beings
who  have  lived  on  the  earth  during  the  past  6,000  years?
And  how  many  of  these  could  reasonably  have  been  saints
of  God  ?    P.  99,  ^  2.

(23)  What  queries  with  respect  to  this  vast  multitude
must  arise  in  the  mind  of  every  thoughtful  person?    P.  99,

H  3.

(24)  What  reply  does  Atheism  make  to  these  questions?
P.  100,  H  2.

(25)  What  does  Galvanism  answer?    P.  100,  H  3.

(26)  What  reply  is  given  by  Arminianism?   P.  100,  H  4.

(27)  To  which  of  the  foregoing  views  do  the  majority
of  Christians  give  assent?  And  what  say  the  Scriptures  on
this  point?    P.  ico,  5.

(28)  What  does  the  Apostle  Paul  teach  respecting  the
necessity  for  hearing  the  Gospel  in  order  to  faith  and  salva-
tion?   P.  lOI,  H  I.


Of  the  Ages  15

(29)  What  text  is  quoted  by  some  who  claim  Paul
teaches  that  ignorance  will  save  men?  Show  how  a  proper
understanding  of  the  Apostle's  argument  contradicts  this
claim.    P.  loi,  H  2.

(30)  How  does  the  Apostle  James  corroborate  the
Apostle  Paul's  position?  And  what  is  the  only  door  of
hope  for  the  condemned  race?    P.  loi,  H  3.

(31)  What  is  the  belief  of  many  Christians  with
respect  to  the  salvation  of  ignorant  children  and  heathen?
P.  102,  H  I.

(32)  Do  these  persons  act  in  accordance  with  their
professed  belief?  And,  if  all  the  heathen  would  be  saved
through  ignorance,  what  would  be  the  most  logical  as  well
as  the  kindest  course  as  respects  sending  missionaries  to  the
heathen?  And  why  not  apply  the  same  argument  to  alt
mankind?    P.  102,  H  2.

(33)  While  the  teaching  of  the  Bible  discountenances
the  idea  of  several  ways  of  salvation,  what  is  the  only  door
of  hope  through  which  the  condemned  race  may  enter  into
everlasting  life?    P.  102,  ^  3.

(34)  Whatever  may  have  become  of  the  billions  that
have  died,  what  Scriptural  assurance  have  we  that  their
present  condition  is  not  their  full  reward?    P.  103,  ^  1,  2.

(35)  How  can  we  harmonize  the  thought  of  any  being
lost  through  lack  of  the  necessary  knowledge,  with  the
character  of  Jehovah  as  set  forth  in  I  John  4:8  and  John
3:16?    P.  103,  H  3.

(36)  If  the  past  and  present  are  the  only  opportunities
for  salvation,  how  can  we  explain  John  1:9?    P.  104,  ^  i.

(37)  What  texts  prove  that  Christ's  sacrifice  will  be
efficacious  for  "every  man"?    P.  104,  H  2,  3.

(38)  What  is  the  key  to  the  Divine  Plan  of  Redemption?
And  how  does  it  apply  to  the  different  classes  of  humanity?
P.  105,  \  I.

(39)  What  Scripture  is  generally  quoted  to  prove  that
all  probation  ends  with  this  present  life?  And  how  is  it
properly  interpreted?    P.  105,  H  2,  first  11  hues.

(40)  Briefly,  what  is  the  reasonable,  beautiful  and
Scriptural  Plan  of  God  for  the  salvation  of  the  world?  P.
105,  H  2,  nth  line  to  end  of  i

(41)  What  is  the  contrast  between  Father  Adam  and  the
Second  Adam,  Christ,  as  respects  their  relation  to  mankind?
P.  106,  H  I.


l6  The  Divine  Plan

(42)  Explain  i  Tim.  4:10,  a  text  generally  ignored  ex-
cept by  Universalists.    P.  106,  U  2.

(43)  How  did  Simeon  contrast  these  two  salvations?
And  what  other  texts  agree  with  this  statement?    P.  107,

!I  I-

(44)  What  is  the  general  salvation,  and  how  will  it  be
brought  to  mankind?  What  is  the  special  salvation  of  the
Church?  And  upon  what  conditions  will  attainment  to
these  blessings  depend?  What  is  the  "second  death,"  and
who  will  suffer  it?    P.  107,  H  2.

(45)  How  only  can  hitherto  difficult  and  apparently  con-
tradictory texts  on  the  foregoing  subjects  be  harmonized?

P.  107.  H  3.

(46)  What  is  the  Apostle  Peter's  statement  regarding
restitution  and  "all  the  holy  prophets"?  What  is  the  pro-
phecv  of  Ezekiel  with  respect  to  Israel's  restoration?  P.
108,  'H  I.

(47)  What  are  the  statements  of  the  Apostle  Paul  in
Romans  11,  and  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah  respecting
Israel's  restoration?    P.  108,  H  2.

(48)  Explain  and  apply  the  proverb,  "The  fathers  have
eaten  a  sour  grape,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on
edge,"  etc.    (Jer.  31 129,  30.)  P.  109,  jl  i.

(49)  How  do  we  know  that  many  of  the  prophecies  and
promises  of  future  blessing,  while  seeming  to  apply  to
Israel  onl}',  are  also  generally  applicable  to  the  whole
world?    P.  109,  H  2.

(50)  In  addition,  what  other  nations  besides  Israel  are
mentioned  by  name  and  promised  restoration?    P.  109,  U  3.

(51)  How  do  we  know  that  the  Sodomites  did  not  enjoy
a  full  opportunity  for  salvation?  P.  no,  H  i.

(52)  Since  both  the  Israelites  and  Sodomites  are  to  be
blessed  under  the  "New  Covenant,"  suretied  by  the  blood
of  Jesus,  what  does  their  restoration  imply?    P.  no,  H  2.

(53)  ' Read  carefully  Ezekiel  16:48-63.  Why  did  God
see  good  to  destroy  the  Sodomites  without  giving  them  a
full  opportunity,  if  death  ends  all  probation?  P.  in,  jj  I.

(54)  How  can  we  understand  the  dealings  of  a  God  of
Love  with  those  nations  which  he  commanded  Israel  to
"destroy  utterly"?  P.  in,  1[  2.

(55)  How  did  the  experiences  of  these  wicked  nations
show  forth  the  Divine  determination  toward  all  evil-doers?
P.  112,  H  I.


Of  the  Ages


17


(56)  What  is  meant  by  the  "captivit>'"  of  Sodom  -and
Samaria  and  Israel,  referred  to  in  Ezekiel  i6?  And  what
must  a  "return  to  their  former  estate"  signify?    P.  112,  j  2.

(57)  How  do  we  know  that  the  Lord  is  not  speaking,
ironically  to  Israel  in  this  prophecy,  as  some  contend?  P.
112,  \  3.

(58)  What  is  the  Apostle  Paul's  corroborative  testimony
on  this  point?    P.  113,  \  i.

(59)  What  will  be  the  sentiments  of  all  mankind  when
"in  due  time"  they  shall  see  how  "God  so  loved  the  world"T
P.  113,  H  2.

(60)  What  mistake  regarding  the  Divine  Plan  and
promises  has  been  similarly  made  by  both  Jews  and  Chris-
tians?   P.  113,  H  3.

(61)  Briefly  stated,  how  have  the  conflicting  doctrines
of  Calvinism  and  Arminianism  distorted  the  truth  of  God's
glorious  Plan  and  purposes?    P.  114,  \  i.

(62)  In  detail,  what  does  Calvinism  teach?    P.  114,  II  2

(63)  What  are  the  commendable  features  of  this  view,
and  in  what  two  essential  qualities  is  it  lacking?    P.  114,

H  3.

(64)  What  says  Arminianism?    P.  115,  H  i.

(65)  What  is  the  one  redeeming  feature  of  this  view,
and  in  what  two  important  elements  is  it  sadly  deficient?
P.  115.  If  2.

(66)  What  must  be  the  natural  effect  of  the  Arminian
view  of  the  Divine  character?    P.  116,  ^  i.

(67)  How  only  can  these  apparently  conflicting  doctrines
of  Election  and  Free  Grace  be  harmonized?    P.  116,  H  2.

(68)  In  view  of  God's  glorious  plans  for  the  future,
what  must  be  the  attitude  of  every  true  Christian  respecting
the  second  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  first  step
toward  the  accomplishment  of  the  long-promised  and  long-
expected  blessings  for  the  world  of  mankind?    P.  116,  \  3.


"Soon  shall  restitution  glory

Bring  to  earth  a  blessed  rest;
And  the  poor,  and  faint,  and  weary
Shall  be  lifted  up  and  blest"


28


The  Divine  Plan


STUDY  VII.


THE  PERMISSION  OF  EVIL  AND  ITS  RELATION
TO  GOD'S  PLAN.

(1)  What  is  the  definition  of  evil?   P.  117,  ^  i.

(2)  What  are  some  of  the  most  frequent  and  difficult
•questions  which  present  themselves  to  the  inquiring  mind
with  respect  to  the  subject  of  evil?  P.  117,  ^  2.

(3)  Since  Jehovah  is  omnipotent,  what  must  be  the  rea-
sonable conclusion  in  view  of  the  fact  that  He  has  not  pre-
vented the  entrance  of  sin  into  the  world?  P.  117,  11  3  to  top
of  P.  118.

(4)  What  was  the  Divine  purpose  which  would  have
teen  defeated  had  God  interfered  to  prevent  the  full  ac-
complishment of  Satan's  base  designs?    P.  118.

(5)  Since  the  Scriptures  declare  that  all  things  were
created  for  the  Lord's  pleasure,  does  His  permitting  evil
imply  that  He  approves  it,  or  is  in  league  with  it?  P.  118.
H  I.

(6)  Define  right  and  wrong^  principles,  respectively,  with
their  results  when  put  into  action.    P.  118,  1[  2.

(7)  What  is  the  moral  sense  in  man,  and  what  is  its
function?  Do  the  lower  animals  possess  this  moral  sense,
or  conscience?    P.  119,  f  i.

(8)  Had  Jehovah  created  man  without  the  ability  to  dis-
cern between  right  and  wrong,  or  with  power  to  do  right
only,  what  would  have  been  his  condition?    P.  119,  ^  2.

(9)  What  was  the  experience  of  Adam  and  Eve  with
respect  to  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  and  how  does
the  experience  of  their  posterity  differ?    P.  120,  U  i,  2.

(10)  What  were  the  most  important  elements  of  Adam's
likeness  to  his  Creator?    P.  120,  ^  3.

(11)  Why  did  not  Jehovah  give  Adam  some  vivid  im-
pression of  the  results  of  sin  instead  of  permitting  him  to
suffer  the  actual  experiences  of  evil?    P.  121,  ]\  1.

(12)  How  long  have  the  principles  of  right  and  wrong
existed?  And  which  principle  alone  will  forever  continue
to  be  active?    P.  121,  t  2.

(13)  What  are  the  four  ways  of  knowing  things?  And
why  might  not  Adam  have  known  good  and  evil  by  intuition
or  observation?    P.  121,  H  3.


Of  the  Ages


19


(14)  In  which  of  these  four  ways  has  mankind  been
gaining  knowledge?    P.  122,  If  i.

(15)  How  had  Adam  already  received  a  knowledge  of
evil  before  his  transgression?    P.  122,  ^  2.

(16)  How  do  the  Scriptures  describe  the  temptation  and
fall  of  our  first  parents?  And  why  did  the  serpent  approach
Eve  instead  of  Adam?    P.  122,  ^[  3.

(17)  What  was  the  severity  of  the  temptation  which  led
to  Adam's  transgression?  And  why  was  he  more  culpable
than  Eve?    P.  123,  H  i.

(18)  How  will  Jehovah's  permission  of  evil  ultimately
result  in  good?    P.  124,  ^  i,  first  19  lines.

(19)  Does  the  fact  that  God  has  permitted  sin  prove
that  He  is  the  author  of  sin?  What  two  Ransom-denying
theories  have  resulted  from  this  erroneous  charge  against
the  Almighty?  And  how  does  such  reasoning  ignore  man's
noblest  quality?    P.  124,  \  i,  19th  line  to  end  of  ^I.

(20)  What  two  texts  of  Scripture  are  used  to  support  the
theory  that  God  is  the  author  of  sin?  What  is  the  distinction
between  sin  and  evil?  P.  124,  footnote.

(21)  Although  God  has  absolute  power  to  force  man  into
sin  or  righteousness,  why  would  such  a  course  be  a  moral  im-
possibility?   P.  126,  II  I,  first  II  lines.

(22)  What  was  the  difference  between  the  method  by  vrhich
God  offered  to  teach  man  the  knowledge  of  sin  and  death  and
the  method  chosen  by  our  first  parents?  And  how  did  Jeho-
vah's foreknowledge  of  what  man  would  do  operate  in  the
latter's  favor?    P.  126,  H  i,  nth  line  to  end  of  If.

(23)  Was  the  severity  of  the  penalty  an  evidence  of
hatred  or  malice  on  God's  part?  Why  would  it  be  im-
possible for  God  to  continue  the  existence  of  evil  doers
everlastingly?    P.  127,  \  i.

(24)  Why  have  Adam's  posterity  suffered  no  injustice
in  not  having  had  offered  to  each  of  them  an  individual
trial?    P.  127,  H  2.

(25)  When  our  race  was  placed  on  trial  representatively
in  Adam,  what  was  the  alternative?  Was  it  eternal  tor-
ment?   P.  127,  If  3.

(26)  Is  eternal  torment  for  the  sinner  anywhere  even
suggested  in  the  Old  Testament?  And  what  portions  of
the  New  Testament  are  so  misconstrued  as  to  seem  to
teach  this  doctrine?    P.  128,  H  i.

(27)  Will  the  condemnation  of  the  world  in  Adam  and


J20  The  Divine  Plan

their  subsequent  opportunity  and  trial  for  life  be  more  or
less  favorable  than  that  of  Adam?    P.  128,  H  2.

(28)  Briefly,  what  is  the  philosophy  of  the  Divine  Plan
of  redemption  through  the  Ransom-price  given  by  Jesus?
(I  Cor.  15:22.)  P.  128,  H  3-

(29)  What  is  God's  arrangement  by  which  all  men  shall
■sooner  or  later  be  restored  to  the  position  enjoyed  by  Adam
before  he  fell?    P.  129,  %  1,  to  last  sentence  on  page.

(30)  As  each  one  (in  this  Age  or  the  next)  becomes
fully  aware  of  the  Ransom-price  given  by  Christ,  and  of
his  subsequent  privileges,  what  is  his  position,  and  what
will  be  required  of  him?    P.  130,  top.

(31)  Would  not  this  mean  a  second  chance  for  some
of  the  race  to  gain  everlasting  life?    P.  130,  H  i.

(32)  What  is  the  special  advantage  of  the  Divine  ar-
rangement? Why  not  give  mankind  an  individual  trial  now?
Is  it  probable  that  any  would  be  found  perfectly  obedient?
P.  131,  1[  I,  to  P.  132,  7th  line.

(33)  Suppose  that  under  an  individual  trial,  one-half  of
the  race  would  prove  worthy  of  life,  what  would  probably
be  their  experience?    P.  132.

(34)  What  hope  would  there  be  for  the  other  one-half
that  would  go  into  death  as  a  result  of  their  wilful  sin?
R  132,  H  I.

(35)  Why  is  Jehovah's  Plan  much  wiser  than  the  fore-
going suggestion?    P.  132,  H  2,  3.

(36)  What  is  the  chief  objection  to  a  separate  trial  for
each  individual  at  first?    P.  133,  H  i,  2.

(37)  How  would  such  an  individual  trial  have  affected
the  Divine  plan  for  the  selection  of  the  Church?  P.  133,
If  3.

(38)  How  do  those  who  fully  appreciate  this  feature
of  God's  plan,  viz.,  the  condemnation  of  all  in  one  repre-
sentative, find  in  it  the  solution  of  many  perplexities?  P.
134.  II  I-

(39)  What  blessings  will  eventually  result  through  the
permission  of  evil?  And  how  will  the  wisdom,  justice,  love
and  power  of  the  Divine  character  be  more  fully  manifested
through  this  method  than  through  any  other  conceivable  by
•the  finite  mind?    P.  13S,  H  I,  2.

(40)  What  purpose  has  the  permission  of  sin  and  its
■concomitant  fyih  served  'n  the  discipline  and  development
of  the  Church?    P.  n^,  H  3.


Of  the  Ages


21


(41)  What  is  the  expression  of  the  Divine  Law  which
must  eventually  govern  all  of  God's  intelligent  creatures?
And  how  will  the  permission  of  evil  be  ultimately  regarded
by  all  creatures  in  heaven  and  on  earth?    P.  136,  ^  i.


STUDY  VIII


THE  DAY  OF  JUDGMENT

(1)  What  Scriptural  ground  is  there  for  belief  in  a  Day
of  Judgment?    P.  137,  H  i.

(2)  What  is  the  general  view  of  the  Day  of  Judgment?
P.  137.  H  2.

(3)  How  long  is  the  Day  of  Judgment  generally  sup-
posed to  be?    P.  138,  t[  1.

(4)  What  parable  is  used  as  the  basis  for  these  erron-
eous views,  and  how  is  it  misapplied?    P.  138,  jj  2.

(5)  What  does  the  term  judgment  properly  signify?  P.

138,  H  3.

(6)  How  is  the  term  day  applied  both  in  Scripture  and
in  common  usage?    P.  138,  H  4.

(7)  What  does  a  consultation  of  any  Bible  Concordance
reveal  with  respect  to  the  character  and  amount  of  work  to
be  done  during  the  Day  of  Judgment?  And  what  is  the
reasonable  conclusion  to  be  drawn  therefrom?  P.  139,  ^  i.

(8)  Do  the  Scriptures  refer  to  more  than  one  Judgment
Day?    P.  139.  H  2.

(9)  Where  and  when  did  the  first  great  judgment  of
the  human  race  take  place,  and  what  was  the  verdict?  P.
140,  I.

(10)  What  are  the  evidences  that  the  Divine  penalty
has  been  enforced?    P.  140,  ^  2,  first  7  lines.

(11)  Nevertheless,  what  gracious  provision  has  God
made  for  the  condemned  race?    P.  140,  H  2,  8th  to  22nd  line.

(12)  Does  the  fact  that  the  Church  alone  has  "escaped
the  corruption  that  is  in  the  world"  signify  that  the  rest
of  mankind  will  have  no  future  hope  of  escape?  P.  140,  H
2,  23rd  Ime  to  end  of  I.

(13)  Since  the  Scriptures  declare  that  He  "hath  ap-
pointed a  day"  for  the  world's  judgment,  does  this  signify
that  Jehovah  has  changed  His  mind?    P.  141,  f  I.


22  The  Divine  Plan


(14)  Who  will  be  the  Judge  at  the  world's  individual
trial?    P.  142,  If  I.

(15)  What  does  the  character  of  the  Judge  guarantee
for  this  judgment?    P.  142,  ^  2.

(16)  What  duties  appertained  to  the  office  of  a  judge
in  Old  Testament  times,  and  how  will  Christ  fulfil  these
in  the  world's  Judgment  Day?    P.  142,  H  3;  P.  143,  H  i.

(17)  Upon  what  principles  will  the  coming  judgment
be  conducted?  Why  will  the  second  trial  be  more  favor-
able for  mankind  than  the  first?  When  the  world  has
reached  perfection,  what  will  be  required  of  all  men?  P.
143.

(18)  What  will  be  the  experience  of  wilful  sinners?
And  how  many  years  of  trial  are  guaranteed  to  each  in-
dividual?   P.  144,^11  I.

(19)  What  parable  of  our  Lord's  and  what  other  Scrip-
tures describe  the  conclusion  of  the  world's  Judgment  Day?
P.  144.  H  2.

(20)  How  does  the  coming  trial  affect  each  individual's
present  responsibility?    P.  145,  If  i.

(21)  How  long  a  period  intervenes  between  the  first
and  second  judgment  days?  And  what  has  been  the  object
of  this  interval?    P.  145,  H  2.

(22)  How  are  these  two  classes  respectively  designated
by  St.  Paul?  And  will  they  come  into  judgment  with  the
world?    P.  145,  H  3.

(23)  What  was  necessary  before  the  members  of  these
two  classes  could  be  placed  on  trial?    P.  146,  If  i.

(24)  Contrast  the  judgments  ,of  these  special  classes
with  the  world's  trial.    P.  146,  ff  2.

(25)  How  and  by  whom  have  the  world  and  the  nom-
inal Church  been  deceived  respecting  the  true  character  of
the  future  Judgment  Day?    P.  146,  If  3.

(26)  How  did  the  Prophets  and  the  Apostles  regard  the
promised  Day  of  Judgment?    P.  147,  If  i,  2.

(27)  Explain  how  John  5:28,  29  has  been  mistranslated
and  misapplied.    P.  147,  If  3.


"I  can  see  His  coming  judgments,  as  they  circle  all  the  earth.
The  signs  and  groanings  promised,  to  precede  a  second  birth ;
I  read  His  righteous  sentence,  in  the  crumbling  thrones  of
earth:

Our  King  is  marching  on."


Of  the  Ages


23


STUDY  IX.


RANSOM  AND  RESTITUTION.

(1)  What  is  the  logical  sequence  of  the  "Ransom  for  all"?
P.  149.  II  I.

(2)  What  statement  is  made  by  St.  Paul  in  Romans  con-
cerning the  object  of  the  Lord's  death  and  resurrection?
And  if  Jesus  gave  Himself  "a  ransom  for  all,"  is  it  reason-
able to  believe  that  only  a  feiv  will  ever  receive  any  benefit
from  His  sacrifice?    P.  149,  H  2.

(3)  What  is  the  Scriptural  distinction  between  "the  dead"
and  "the  living"?  P.  150,  footnote.

(4)  Does  the  Ransom  assure  everlasting  life  to  any
man?  If  not,  what  does  it  guarantee?  And  how  is  the  re-
sult of  the  first  trial  in  Eden  to  be  turned  into  a  blessing  of
experience  to  all  the  loyal-hearted?    P.  150,  U  i.

(5)  Will  the  world's  second  trial  take  place  under  ex-
actly the  same  circumstances  as  the  first  trial?  Will  the
terms  or  conditions  of  the  world's  trial  be  the  same  as
those  of  the  Adamic  trial?  What  will  constitute  the  great
advantage  of  the  second  trial?    P.  151,  If  i.

(6)  Does  the  Ransom  excuse  sin  or  count  sinners  as
saints?  or  how  does  it  operate?    P.  152,  If  i.

(7)  Do  all  who  live  in  civilized  lands  now  enjoy  a  full
opportunity  or  trial  for  life?    P.  152,  jf  2.

(8)  Who  are  the  few  that  now  receive  any  benefit  from
the  Ransom?  Explain  the  conditions  and  circumstances  of
their  trial.    P.  152,  If  3.

(9)  What  two  great  differences  between  the  experi-
ences of  the  world  and  the  Church  during  their  respective
trials?    P.  153,  H  I.

(10)  Is  it  the  pain  and  suffering  in  dyitig,  or  death — ex-
tinction of  life — that  constitutes  the  penalty  of  sin?  Was
there  any  intimation  of  a  release  at  the  time  the  penalty
was  pronounced?    P.  153,  If  2.

(11)  What  was  suggested  in  the  promise  that  the  "Seed
of  the  woman  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head"?  P.  154,
II  I.

(12)  Did  God's  dealings  with  Abraham  indicate  that  He
had  changed  His  mind,  and  would  excuse  sin  in  man?  How
did  Jehovah  show  through  Abraham's  experiences  the  neces-
sity for  Christ's  death?    P.  155,  tf  i.


24


The  Divine  Plan


(13)  If  it  is  clear  that  Jesus  died  for  Adam,  how  were
Adam's  children  to  receive  any  benefit  from  this  transac-
tion?   P.  155,  H  2.

(14)  What  is  the  philosophy  of  the  Ransom  as  shown
in  Romans  5:18,  19?  If  the  giving  of  the  Ransom  alone
made  the  sinner  righteous,  how  would  verse  19  have  been
written?    P.  156.

(15)  How  does  the  Justice  of  God,  which  condemned
the  sinner,  stand  pledged  to  release  the  purchased  race?

P.  157,  H  I.

(16)  What  is  the  strongest  possible  argument  for  the
restitution  of  all  the  willing  of  mankind,  in  considering
the  ransom?    P.  157,  H  2.

(17)  Does  the  foregoing  view  deny  the  necessity  for
repentance  and  reformation  of  character  in  order  to  gain
salvation?    P.  158,  H  i.

(18)  In  view  of  the  Ransom,  what  is  the  strongest  argu-
ment against  the  theory  that  eternal  torment  is  the  penalty
for  sin?    P.  158,  H  2.

(19)  What  position  are  some  of  the  advocates  of  eternal
torment  forced  to  take  when  confronted  by  the  Scriptures
on  the  subject  of  the  Ransom?    P.  159,  ^  I.

(20)  What  is  the  fear  of  some  with  respect  to  the  doc-
trine of  Restitution?    P.  159,  U  2.

(21)  Briefly  estimate  the  number  of  the  human  race,
from  creation  to  the  present  time.    P.  160,  ^  i,  2.

(22)  Where  shall  we  find  room  for  this  vast  multitude?
How  many  would  the  State  of  Texas  accommodate,  as  a
cemetery?    P.  160,  H  3.

(23)  Where  could  this  number  find  standing  room?  P.
161.  II  I.

(24)  What  say  the  Prophets  concerning  the  provision
God  will  make  for  the  needs  of  the  human  race?    P.  161,

H  2.

(25)  How  would  an  Evolutionist  regard  Restitution?  P.
161.  f  3-

(26)  What  do  some  professed  ministers  of  the  Gospel
teach  respecting  the  fall  of  man?    P.  162,  If  i.

(27)  If  we  thus  make  of  none  effect  the  Word  of  God
as  respects  the  fall  of  man,  how  can  we  accept  the  testi-
mony of  the  Apostles  and  Prophets  upon  other  subjects?
P.  162,  1[  2.


Of  the  Ages


25


(28)  What  is  the  popular  theory  regarding  Evolution
and  the  Brain-Age,  so-called?    P.  162,  ^  3.

(29)  What  is  the  position  of  a  true  scientist?  And  why
are  the  deductions  of  scientific  research  not  infallible?  P.
163.  H  I.

(30)  What  should  be  our  attitude  toward  scientific  in-
vestigation, and  how  should  the  Book  of  Nature,  when
rightly  understood,  compare  with  the  Book  of  Divine
Revelation?    P.  163,  H  2.

(31)  In  regard  to  the  theory  of  Evolution  and  the
Brain-Age,  what  are  the  facts  with  respect  to  brain  capacity
in  past  Ages,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  present  day?

P.  163.  H  3.

(32)  How  do  modern  logic,  poetry  and  laws  compare
with  the  Old  Testament  writings?    P.  164,  H  i.

(33)  What  shall  we  say  of  the  arts  and  sciences  among
the  Ancients?    P.  165,  H  i.

(34)  What  scientific  facts  are  demonstrated  in  the
"Great  Pyramid  of  Egypt,"  erected  about  Abraham's  time?
P.  i6s.  II  2.

(35)  If.  then,  the  mental  capacity  of  today  is  prob-
ably less  than  that  of  by-gone  ages,  how  shall  we  account
for  modern  inventions  and  the  general  increase  of  knowl-
edge?   P.  i6s,  H  3-

(36)  In  an  investigation  of  causes  for  present-day  in-
ventions, etc.,  do  we  find  that  all  men  are  inventors,  or  do
the  majority  of  inventors  possess  exceptional  brain  power?
What  is  the  history  of  some  of  the  greatest  discoveries  and
inventions?    P.  166,  tl  i.

(37")  How  can  modern  inventions  be  accounted  for  from
a  human  standpoint?  Does  education  increase  brain  capac-
ity, or  what  is  its  effect?    P.  166,  H  2.

(38)  What  do  the  Scriptures  reveal  upon  this  subject
of  the  increase  of  knowledge,  etc.?    P.  167,  U  i.

(39)  Why  did  not  God  so  arrange  that  present  blessings
of  inventions,  etc.,  should  have  come  earlier  in  the  history
of  the  race?    P.  i68,  H  i.

(40)  Explain  how  God's  permission  of  present  advan-
tages will  serve  to  teach  the  world  that  blessings  bestowed
upon  those  whose  hearts  are  evil  would  lead  to  greater
evils;  first,  as  respects  monopolies.  (P.  168,  2.)  Secondly,
with  respect  to  the  evils  of  idleness.    P.  169.

(41)  With  what  great  event  does  the  Prophet  Daniel
connect  this  increase  of  knowledge?    P.  170,  ^  i.


26


The  Divine  Plan


(42)  What  characteristics  of  depraved  human  nature
will  continue  to  control  both  rich  fnd  poor  until  the  climax
is  reached?    P.  170,  H  2.

(43)  When  and  how  will  the  great  Time  of  Trouble
end?    P.  171,  U  I.

(44)  What  is  the  difference  between  the  position  of
the  world  and  that  of  the  Lord's  people  in  the  "day  of  His
preparation"?    P.  171,  H  2.

(45)  Give  a  resume  of  the  foregoing  arguments,  show-
ing the  direct  antagonism  between  the  Scriptures  and  the
Evolution  theory.    P.  171,  H  3.


STUDY  X.


SPIRIT  AND  HUMAN  NATURES  SEPARATE  AND
DISTINCT.

(1)  What  is  the  common  misapprehension  respecting
salvation  and  the  spirit  nature?    P.  173,  T[  i.

(2)  Is  restitution  for  the  world  of  mankind  any  less  com-
plete a  salvation  from  sin  and  death  than  the  special  salva-
tion of  the  Church?    P.  173,  t[  2.

(3)  What  misunderstandings  have  led  to  this  erroneous
thought  that  none  will  be  saved  except  to  the  spirit  nature?
And  what  is  the  common  view  with  respect  to  the  presence
of  a  perfect  man  on  the  earth?    P.  174,  j[  i.

(4)  What  say  the  Scriptures  as  to  the  number  of  perfect
men  that  have  lived  on  this  earth?    P.  174,  If  2.

(5)  In  what  respect  was  man  created  after  the  likeness
of  Jehovah?  Did  God  finish  His  creation  of  man,  and  what
was  His  statement  concerning  man's  perfection?  P.  174,
H  3.

(6)  How  is  man's  original  perfection  described  in
Psalms  8:5-8?  And  what  is  the  significance  of  "a  little
lower  than  the  angels"?    (Heb.  2:7.)  P.  174,  H  4.

(7)  What  is  the  prophetic  intimation  in  Psalms  8:5-8
respecting  God's  purpose  for  mankind,  and  how  does  the
Apostle  Paul  in  Heb.  2:7  corroborate  this  statement?  P.
175.  H  I-

(8)  Does  a  little  lower  in  degree  signify  that  a  creature  is
less  perfect?    P.  175,  H  2,  to  top  of  P.  176.

(9)  Explain  the  table  illustrating  the  different  grades
of  nature,  animate  and  inanimate.    P.  176,  If  i.

(10)  While  the  different  classes  mentioned  are  separate


Of  the  Ages  27

and  distinct,  what  comparison  may  be  instituted  between
them?    P.  176,  H  2.

(11)  Contrast  man's  present  degraded  condition  with
that  of  the  perfect  man,  created  in  the  image  of  God.  What
did  man  lose?  and  what,  therefore,  did  Jesus  come  to  "seek
and  to  save"?  P.  177,  H  i.

(12)  What  further  proof  have  we  that  a  perfect  man
is  not  a  spirit  being?    P.  177,  1[  2.

(13)  Is  angelic  nature  the  only  order  of  spirit  being?
And  what  do  Heb.  2:16  and  Phil.  2:7-9,  teach  as  regards
the   divine,   angelic   and  human   natures,   respectively?  P.

178.  H  I.  2.

(14)  Why  was  it  necessary  for  Jesus  to  have  been  a
perfect  Man  from  the  standpoint  of  the  perfect  Law  of
God  and  the  Ransom?    P.  178,  H  3.

(15)  If  Jesus  in  the  flesh  was  a  perfect  Man,  what  con-
clusions do  we  draw  concerning  the  relation  of  a  perfect
man  to  the  angelic  and  the  human  natures?    P.  179,  ^  i.

(16)  Was  Jesus  a  combination  of  two  natures?  De-
scribe in  detail  the  different  changes_  of  nature  _  experienced
by  our  Lord  from  His  creation  to  His  glorification.  P.  179,
t[  2;  P.  180,  II  I.

(17)  What  do  we  see  manifested  in  Jesus'  grand  exam-
ple of  perfect  humanity?    P.  180,  H  2.

(18)  What  will  doubtless  be  man's  future  experience
in  the  use  of  his  perfect  faculties?  And  will  the  exercise
of  these  powers  result  in  any  change  of  nature?    P.  180,

H  3.

(19)  Of  what  class  is  Jesus  an  illustration  since  His  resur-
rection?   P.  180,  4.

(20)  Does  God's  Plan  end  with  the  completion  of  this
"elect"  company?    P.  180,  H  5.

(21)  What  do  the  Apostles  Paul  and  John  say  about  spirit
beings,  their  powers  and  the  laws  by  which  they  are  gov-
erned?   P.  181,  II  I.

(22)  Is  there  any  record  of  a  being,  except  the  Son  of
God,  ever  having  been  changed  from  one  nature  to  another?
P.  182,  H  I.

(23)  What  general  information  regarding  the  spirit
nature  is  drawn  from  the  facts  recorded  of  our  Lord  after
His  resurrection?  First,  as  to  the  visibility  of  spirit  beings?
P.  182,  H  2.

(24)  Secondly,  regarding  some  ci  the  powers  of  spirit
beings?    P.  183,  H  I.


28  The  Divine  Plan

(25)  Thirdly,  as  respects  the  normal  condition  and  ap-
pearance of  angels?    P.  183,  ^  2.

(26)  What  did  the  manifestation  of  the  risen  Lord  to
Saul  on  his  way  to  Damascus  reveal  concerning  spirit  be-
ings?   P.  183,  H  3-

(27)  What  is,  therefore,  the  conclusion  respecting  the
separateness  of  the  human  and  spirit  natures?  And  what  is
the  purpose  of  God  in  permitting  a  change  from  one  nature
to  another  in  special  cases?    P.  184,  ^  2.

(28)  What  is  the  significance  of  the  word,  "Mortality"?
P.  184,  H  3;  P.  185,  If  1.

(29)  What  does  "Immortality"  signify?  P.  185,  ^  2.

(30)  What  is  the  popular  but  erroneous  idea  about
mortality  and  immortality  f  P.  185,  H  3.

(31)  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  immortal?  And
was  Adam  mortal  or  immortal  before  he  sinned?  P.  185,
II  4,  5-

(32)  If  Adam  was  mortal,  was  he  on  trial  for  immor-
tality? P.  186,  H  I.

(33)  Is  there  any  Scriptural  authority  for  the  theory
that  angels  are  immortal,  or  that  restored  humanity  will  be
immortal?  P.  186,  H  2;  P.  187,  ^  i.

(34)  When  the  incorrigible  have  been  destroyed,  what
will  be  the  everlasting  experience  of  both  mortal  and  im-
mortal beings,  respectively?    P.  187,  H  2.

(35)  What  is  the  foundation  of  the  unscriptural  doc-
trine of  eternal  torment,  and  how  does  a  proper  understand-
ing of  the  terms  mortal  and  immortal  destroy  this  founda-
tion?   P.  187,  H  3.

(36)  What  is  the  mistaken  idea  of  some  regarding  the
requirements  of  God's  Justice  in  making  a  difference  in
the  bestowing  of  His  favors  among  His  creatures?  P.  187,
H  4.

(37)  If  this  suggestion  were  correct,  bow  should  we  ex-
pect this  law  of  progression  to  operate  throughout  the  uni-
verse?   P.  188,  H  I.

(38)  How  would  the  carrying  out  of  this  principle  affect
the  pleasing  variety  and  beauty  of  God's  handiwork?  P.
188,  H  2.

(39)  Should  a  favor  ever  be  considered  as  a  justly
merited  reivard?  And  does  a  simple  act  of  justice  call  for
special  gratitude,  or  is  it  any  proof  of  love?  P.  188,  U  3.

(40)  What  were  Jehovah's  sovereign  rights  with  respect


Of  the  Ages  29

to  man's  creation  and  continued  existence?  What  attitude
is  becoming  to  all  God's  intelligent  creatures?    P.  189,  \  1.

(41)  What  lesson  should  both  men  and  angels  learn  from
Satan's  ambition  and  fall?    P.  189,  H  2.

(42)  Are  the  principles  upon  which  God's  election  is
based,  conditional  or  unconditional?    P.  189,  H  3.

(43)  Was  it  because  the  chosen  ones  were  better  than
others  of  mankind,  that  God  invited  them  to  be  partakers
of  the  divine  nature?  Who  is  he  that  dares  to  question  the
Divine  right  to  do  according  to  His  good  pleasure?    P.  190,

H  1.

(44)  What  is  the  proper  attitude  of  man  toward  his
Creator? — to  ask  or  to  dictate?    P.  190,  1[  2.

(45)  What  does  St.  Paul  declare  conc?rning  the  nature
of  the  first  man,  and  of  his  posterity,  in  the  resurrection?
What  is  the  only  exception  to  this  rule?  What  do  the  Lord,
St.  Peter  and  all  the  holy  Prophets  declare  respecting  the
restoration  of  the  human  race?    P.  191,  i.

(46)  Picture  the  glorious  portion  which  God  has  prom-
ised to  all  the  obedient  of  mankind  in  the  "Ages  to  come."
P.  191.  tl  2.

(47)  Describe  the  changes  which  the  earth  itself  will  un-
dergo in  order  to  become  the  fit  abode  for  the  restored
human  race.  Will  man  be  dissatisfied  with  his  position  on
the  human  plane,  and  prefer  the  spirit  conditions?  P.  192,
If  I.

(48)  At  what  time  in  the  Divine  Plan  did  Jehovah  pur-
pose the  selection  of  the  Church  class?    P.  193,  1[  i.

(49)  Do  the  Scriptures  teach  an  individual,  uncondi-
tional election?  If  not,  explain  the  Bible  presentation  of
election  and  predestination.    P.  193,  ^  2.

(50)  What  is  the  proper  significance  of  the  word  "glori-
fied" in  Romans  8:30?  How  does  it  apply  to  Jesus  and  His
Church?    P.  194,  H  I.

(51)  In  selecting  the  Church  are  all  mankind  called?  P.

19s,  H  I-

(52)  In  what  respect  is  the  selection  of  the  Church  con-
ditional?  P.  195,  H  2.

(53)  What  principle  characterizes  God's  disposition  of
His  favors?    P.  195,  H  3.

(54)  What  aie  the  conditions  upon  which  the  Church
may  become  partakers  of  the  divine  nature?  P.  195,  tf  4:
P.  196,  H  I.


30


The  Divine  Plan


(55)  To  what  is  the  beginning  and  development  of  the
new  nature  likened?    P.  196,  If  2.

(56)  Explain  the  experiences  of  the  old  and  new  crea-
tures, respectively,  during  the  process  of  development  of  the
New  Creature.    P.  197,  H  i.

(57)  When  does  the  birth  of  the  New  Creature  take
place?    P.  197,  H  2.

(58)  What  must  naturally  precede  the  spirit-birth?  P.
197,  H  3-

(59)  Is  the  transforming  of  the  mind  an  instantaneous  or
a  gradual  work?    P.  198,  l|  i.

(60)  To  what  class  are  the  words  of  the  Apostle  in
Romans  12:1  addressed?    P.  198,  H  2.

(61)  Explain  the  difference  between  transformation  of
character  and  transformation  of  nature.    P.  198,  If  3.

(62)  Describe  the  difference  between  "new  creatures"
and  justified  "brethren,"  as  to  their  hopes,  desires  and  aims.
P.  199,  If  I.

(63)  Will  the  change  from  human  to  spirit  bodies  be
gradual  or  instantaneous?    P.  200,  If  i.

(64)  In  what  respects  is  the  human  nature  a  likeness  of
ithe  spirit  nature?    And  how  does  it  differ?    P.  201,  If  i,  2.

(65)  By  keeping  what  thought  clearly  in  mind  can  we
readily  comprehend  how  the  change  from  human  to  spirit
nature  is  effected?    P.  201,  If  3.

(66)  Is  the  transformation  of  mind  from  earthly  to
heavenly  a  change  of  brain  matter,  or  of  the  will?  P.  202,
If  I-

(67)  What  illustration  assists  us  to  understand  how  we
shall  recognize  ourselves  in  our  new,  spirit  bodies?  P.  202,
If  2,  and  footnote.

(68)  Explain  the  philosophy  of  Jesus'  change  from  the
spirit  to  the  earthly  conditions,  and  His  ability  to  describe
His  former  glory.    P.  202,  If  3.

(69)  Is  the  transforming  of  the  mind  an  active  or  a
passive  process?    P.  203,  If  i.

(70)  Are  the  promises  to  the  Church  earthly  or  heavenly,
and  to  what  Age  is  the  heavenly  calling  confined?  When
did  the  earthly  calling  begin,  and  when  will  it  end?  P.
203,  II  2.

"A  heart  in  every  thought  renewed.
And  full  of  love  Divine,
Perfect,  and  right,  and  pure,  and  good,
A  copy,  Lord,  of  Thine."


Of  the  Ages


31


STUDY  XI.


THE  THREE  WAYS— THE  BROAD  WAY,  THE  NAR-
ROW WAY,  THE  HIGHWAY.

(1)  What  Scriptures  bring  to  our  attention  the  "three
ways,"  and  how  are  they  designated?    P.  205,  H  i  to  3.

(2)  WJiy  is  the  broad  road  so  named?    P.  205,  ^  4.

(3)  How  long  has  the  race  traveled  this  "broad  way,"
and  have  none  ever  tried  to  retrace  their  steps?  When
and  how  was  the  only  way  of  escape  brought  to  light?
P.  206,  H  I.

(4)  What  is  the  new  way  to  life  opened  up  for  the
Royal  Priesthood?    P.  206,  If  2.

(5)  Why  is  it  that  after  having  heard  of  the  new  way,
so  few  are  willing  to  walk  therein?    P.  207,  If  i.

(6)  What  is  the  end  to  which  this  narrow  way  leads?
And  what  is  this  "highest  form  of  life"?  P.  207,  ^  2.

(7)  How  shall  we  define  Life?  What  is  the  difference
between  the  operation  of  the  principle  of  life  in  Jehovah  and
in  mankind?    P.  207,  H  3.

(8)  What  are  the  characteristic  conditions  of  the  divine
nature  with  respect  to  life?    P.  208,  t[  i.

(9)  Using  the  illustrations  of  light  reflected  from  a  dia-
mond and  from  a  brick,  and  the  measure  of  life  in  the  lower
animals,  show  why  Adam  was  grander  in  his  perfection  than
any  other  creature.    P.  208,  ^  2,  3.

(10)  How  did  the  conditions  in  Eden  show  man's  de-
pendence upon  a  continued  supply  of  life?  And  what  was
the  natural  result  when  Adam  was  separated  from  the
"trees  of  life"?    P.  209,  H  i,  2.

(11)  What  is  the  reward  promised  to  those  who  pursue
the  "narrow  way"  to  the  end?  And  who  alone  originally
possessed  immortality?    P.  210,  U  i,  2.

(12)  What  Scriptures  teach  that  the  Son  of  God  pos-
sesses immortality  since  His  resurrection?  And  to  whom  has
this  great  honor  been  subsequently  extended?    P.  211,  ^  1,  2.

(13)  While  the  High  Calling  is  confined  exclusively  to
the  Gospel  Age,  is  there  any  other  offer  during  this  Age?  P.
2",  U  3-

(14)  What  other  name  might  be  applied  to  the  narrow
way?  And  what  is  the  difference  between  dying  zifith  Adam
and  dying  with  Christ?  P.  212,  J  I.


32


The  Divine  Plan


(is)  When  will  the  "narrow  way"  to  immortality  come
to  an  end?    And  when  will  death  be  abolished?  P.  212,  If  2.

(16)  In  what  manner  are  the  saints  on  the  way  to  life,
and  on  the  way  to  destruction,  respectively?    P.  213,  ^  1.

(17)  What  are  some  of  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  the
"narrow  way"?    P.  213,  ^  2.

(18)  In  what  manner  are  some  partially  overcome  by  the
temptations  of  the  world,  the  desires  of  the  flesh  and  the
wiles  of  the  Adversary?  And  what  will  be  their  experience?
P.  213,     3;  P.  214,  H  I.

(19)  How  has  the  Lord  provided  for  His  loyal-hearted
and  faithful  followers  the  necessary  assistance  along  this
steep  and  rugged  way?    P.  214,  If  2.

(20)  How  will  the  Highway  of  Holiness  specially  differ
from  the  Narrow  Way?    P.  215,  If  i.

(21)  Will  the  highway  of  holiness  be  difficult  for  man-
kind to  find  and  walk  therein?    P.  215,  If  2.

(22)  Will  the  world  in  the  Millennial  Age  be  reckoned
justified  and  receive  a  reckoned  standing  before  God  as  they
start  upon  the  highway?  Why  do  many  preach  a  highway
of  holiness  during  this  Gospel  Age?    P.  216,  If  i.

(23)  What  symbolic  language  is  used  by  Isaiah  (Chaps.
35,  II  and  62)  in  describing  this  "highway  of  holiness"?  Why
did  not  our  Lord  Jesus  refer  to  this  highway?    P.  217,  %  i.

(24)  Give  a  resume  of  the  Three  Ways  with  their  dis-
tinguishing characteristics.    P.  218,  If  i.


STUDY  XII.

EXPLANATION  OF  CHART  REPRESENTING  THF
PLAN  OF  THE  AGES.

(1)  What  is  the  special  advantage  of  using  the  Chart  of
the  Ages  in  Bible  study?    P.  219,  If  i.

(2)  Point  out  on  the  Chart  the  three  great  Dispensations,
giving  the  duration  of  each.  How  are  these  designated  in
the  Scriptures?    P.  219,  If  2.

(3)  What  is  the  relation  of  each  of  these  "worlds"  to  the
Divine  Plan  and  to  each  other?  Who  is  the  Prince  of  "this
present  evil  world"?  Who  were  the  spirit  rulers  of  the
"first  world"?  How  do  the  Scriptures  indicate  that  the
world  before  the  flood  was  under  ministration  of  angels?
P.  220.

(4)  What  has  Jehovah  permitted  mankind  to  attempt


Of  the  Ages  33

during  "this  present  evil  world,"  and  why  has  man  failed  to
properly  govern  himself?    P.  221,  ^  i.

(5)  How  is  the  second  great  Dispensation  sub-divided
into  distinct  Ages?  How  are  these  designated,  and  what
are  the  characteristic  features  of  each,  as  shown  in  the
Scriptures?    P.  221,  U  2  to  4;  P.  222,  H  i.

(6)  Of  how  many  Ages  is  the  third  great  Dispensation
composed?  What  is  the  first  of  these  called,  and  what  is  its
object?    P.  222,  H  2.

(7)  What  will  doubtless  be  the  characteristics  of  the  re-
maining "Ages  to  come"?    P.  223,  H  i.

(8)  What  is  the  order  of  progress  during  these  Dispen-
sations? What  was  the  duration  of  the  "  Harvest"  of  the
Jewish  Age?    P.  223,  2.

(9)  When  did  the  Jewish  Age  end  in  a  measure,  and  why
■was  Divine  favor  shown  to  individuals  of  that  nation  for
three  and  a  half  years  afterwards?    P.  223,  1|  3.

(10)  At  what  time  did  the  Jewish  Age  end  in  its  more
complete  sense?    P.  223,  H  4.

(11)  When  did  the  Gospel  Age  begin,  and  what  is  the
purpose  of  this  Age?    P.  224,  ][  i.

(12)  Is  there  a  "harvest"  period  in  the  end  of  the  Gospel
Age?  How  is  the  harvest  of  the  Jewish  Age  a  "shadow"  or
picture  of  this  harvest?    P.  224,  2.

(13)  On  the  Chart,  what  do  the  letters  K,  L,  M,  N,  P
and  R  represent?  Upon  what  plane  was  Adam  before  he
sinned?  And  to  what  plane  did  he  fall  through  disobedi-
ence?   What  does  plane  P  represent?    P.  224,  ^  3.

(14)  What  two  classes  are  respectively  represented  as
actually  or  reckonedly  standing  upon  plane  N  ?    P.  225,  ^  i.

(15)  What  offer  has  God  made  during  the  Gospel  Age
to  all  upon  the  plane  of  justification  through  faith?  And
what  is  the  significance  of  presenting  ourselves  as  "living
sacrifices"?    P.  225,  ^  2.

(16)  Since  Jehovah  would  not  accept  blemished  or  im-
perfect typical  sacrifices,  how  can  any  member  of  the  fallen
race  become  an  acceptable  sacrifice?    P.  226,  K  i.

(17)  Upon  what  plane,  as  illustrated  on  the  Chart,  are  all
consecrated  believers  reckoned  as  standing?  And  how  are
these  considered  in  God's  sight?    P.  226,  tf  2.

(18)  What  does  plane  L  represent,  and  what  conditions
tnust  be  carried  out  before  this  plane  can  be  reached?  At


34  The  Divine  Plan

what  time  will  the  Body  of  Christ  enter  upon  this  plane  of
spirit-birth?    P.  227,  H  1.

(19)  What  is  the  further  step  beyond  perfection  of
spirit  being,  and  how  is  it  shown  on  the  Chart?  What  is  the
difference  in  glory  between  planes  L  and  K?  P.  227,  ^  2.

(20)  Why  is  the  figure  of  a  pyramid  eminently  fit  to  repre-
sent perfection  from  a  Scriptural  and  mathematical  stand-
point?   P.  228,  H  I.

(21)  Upon  which  plane  shall  we  place  the  pyramid  rep-
resenting Adam  when  created?    P.  228,  H  2.

(22)  Where  would  Abraham  and  others  of  the  Patriarchs
be  represented  on  the  Chart,  and  why?    P.  228,  If  3.

(23)  Upon  what  plane  is  all  the  remaining  world  of  man-
kind since  the  flood?  P.  228,  H  4.

(24)  What  does  plane  P  represent,  and  who  only  were
lifted  up  to  that  plane?    P.  229,  H  i.

(25)  What  was  the  baptism  of  fire  upon  the  Jewish
nation,  and  where  is  it  represented  on  the  Chart?  P.  229,
II  2.

(26)  What  did  the  justice  of  God  require  in  the  nature  of
a  ransom  price  for  the  condemned  human  race,  and  how  did
Jesus  meet  those  requirements?  Where  is  our  Lord  repre-
sented upon  the  Chart?    P.  229,  ^  3.

(27)  "Being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,"  what  was  Jesus'
next  experience  as  Scripturally  illustrated  on  the  Chart?  P.
230,  H  I ;  H  2,  first  6  lines.

(28)  How  long  did  our  Lord  remain  upon  the  spirit-be-
gotten plane  M,  and  when  did  he  reach  the  plane  of  spirit-
birth,  as  illustrated  on  the  Chart?  P.  230,  H  2,  6th  line  to
end  of  t

(29)  Did  not  Jesus  after  His  resurrection  appear  as  a
man?  What  was  His  object  in  so  doing,  and  what  Scripture
explains  His  mysterious  resurrection  powers?    P.  231,  H  i.

(30)  When  was  Jesus'  new  nature  reckoned  as  begun,
and  when  was  it  actually  completed,  as  shown  on  the  Chart?
P.  231,  H  2.

(31)  When  did  Jesus  reach  plane  K,  the  plane  of  Divine
Glory,  and  what  has  been  His  position  during  the  whole
Gospel  Age?    P.  231,  If  3.

(32)  How  may  the  Church  attain  to  the  plane  of  Divine
glory  with  her  Lord,  and  what  steps  are  necessary  in  order
to  reach  the  plane  of  justification,  N?  P.  231,  If  4.

(33)  How  is  the  word  nature  properly  used?  P.  232,
footnote.


Of  the  Ages  35

(34)  Does  justification  change  our  nature?  What  is  the
ofifer  made  to  the  justified,  by  the  Lord?    P.  232,  H  i.

(35)  As  illustrated  on  the  Chart,  how  far  does  faith
carry  us  along  the  pathway  to  glory?  And  what  further  is
necessary  in  order  to  make  progress  toward  the  goal,  and
reach  plane  M?   P.  233,  j[  i.

(36)  When  we  present  our  all  to  the  Lord,  and  ask  how
we  shall  perform  our  sacrifice,  what  instructions  are  given
us  through  His  Word?    P.  234,  H  i.

(37)  When  will  our  "crown"  be  won?    P.  234,  ^  2.

(38)  What  will  be  the  experience  of  those  who  "sleep,"
and  of  those  of  the  same  class  who  are  "alive"  at  the  second
advent  of  the  Lord?    P.  234,  H  3.

(39)  What  is  the  "Marriage  of  the  Lamb,"  and  how  is  it
illustrated  on  the  Chart?    P.  235,  I  i.

(40)  Describe  the  four  classes  of  the  Nominal  Gospel
Church  represented  on  the  Chart  by  n,  m,  p  and  q.  P.  235
K  2,  to  P,  237,  I  I.

(41)  In  which  parable  does  our  Lord  show  His  determi-
nation to  separate  the  "wheat"  from  the  "tares,"  and  at
what  time  will  this  take  place?    P.  237,  \  2.

(42)  Who  are  the  "good  seed"  and  the  "tares,"  respec-
tively?   P.  238,  ^  I.

(43)  Into  what  two  parts  is  the  harvest  of  the  Gospel
Age  divided?  And  what  are  the  correspondencies  between
the  harvests  of  the  Gospel  and  Jewish  Ages?    P.  238,  If  2.

(44)  Where  is  the  separation  of  the  "little  flock"  from
"Babylon"  shown  on  the  Chart?  What  do  figures  t,  u  and
V  represent?    P.  239,  U  i.

(45)  How  are  the  experiences  of  those  who  have  built
with  "gold,  silver  and  precious  stones,"  and  with  "wood,  hay
and  stubble,"  respectively,  represented  on  the  Chart?    P.  240.

(46)  When  will  the  Time  of  Trouble  affect  the  world,
and  what  will  be  natural  Israel's  experiences  during  this
period?    P.  241,  H  i.

(47)  Describe  the  manner  in  which  the  perfect  pyramid
on  the  Chart  will  be  gradually  made  complete,  and  what  will
be  the  experience  of  all  who  "will  not  hear  that  Prophet?"
P.  241,  H  2.

(48)  Briefly,  what  will  be  the  consummation  of  Jehovah's
Plan?    P.  242,  I  I.

(49)  How  does  the  pyramid  beautifully  illustrate  the
onc-ncss  of  the  whole  restored  creation?   P.  242,  U  2,  3.


36


The  Divine  Plan


(so)  What  is  the  order  of  selecting  the  "living  stones"  in
this  glorious  structure,  and  how  does  it  essentially  differ  from
an  earthly  building?    P.  243,  ^  i,  2.

(51)  Briefly  show  the  harmony  of  the  Tabernacle  in  the
Wilderness  with  the  Chart  of  the  Ages.  P.  244.


STUDY  XIII.


THE  KINGDOMS  OF  THIS  WORLD.

(1)  What  was  Jehovah's  purpose  concerning  His  earthly
creation  and  its  government,  as  declared  in  Genesis?  P.  245,
H  I.

(2)  Was  the  first  dominion  given  to  Adam  alone  or  to
the  whole  human  race?  P.  245,  2.

(3)  In  the  beginning  was  one  man  given  authority  to
rule  over  his  fellow  men?  What  form  of  government  was
originally  designed  by  God?  P.  246,  ^  i,  2.

(4)  Upon  what  one  contingency  did  the  everlasting  con-
tinuance of  the  first  dominion  depend?    P.  246,  ^  3.

(5)  How  was  this  first  establishment  of  the  Kingdom  of
God  in  the  earth  overthrown?  When  and  under  what  cir-
cumstances was  it  for  a  short  time  re-established?  P.  247,
II  I-

(6)  How  and  by  whom  was  the  forfeited  inheritance
redeemed,  and  when  will  it  be  restored?  Will  the  reign  of
Messiah  on  the  earth  be  everlasting?    If  not,  why  not?  P.

247,  H  2.

(7)  Under  what  two  forms  of  government  was  the  typical
Kingdom  of  God  established  during  the  Jewish  Age?  P.

248,  t[  I.

(8)  When  and  under  what  circumstances  was  this  typical
Kingdom  of  God  overthrown?    P.  248,  ^  2,  3.

(9)  How  long  was  the  Kingdom  of  God  on  earth  de-
creed to  remain  overturned?  What  is,  therefore,  the  in-
ference respecting  all  other  kingdoms  in  power  since  Zede-
kiah's  time?    P.  249,  H  i,  2.

(10)  How  is  the  period  of  time  intervening  between  the
removal  of  God's  government  and  the  re-establishment  of
the  same  in  power  and  glory  Scripturally  designated?  P.

249,  H  3-

(11)  Evil  and  unsatisfactory  as  these  Gentile  Kingdoms
hav2  been,  why  were  they  permitted  or  "ordained"  of  God?
P-  250,  If  I.


Of  the  Ages  37

(12)  To  what  two  causes  may  man's  inability  to  estab-
lish a  perfect  government  in  the  earth  be  attributed?  P.  250,
f  2.

(13)  What  are  the  two  phases  of  the  dominion  of  earth
as  at  present  exercised?    P.  251,  U  i.

(14)  What  has  been  the  experience  of  the  groaning  crea-
tion during  the  centuries  past,  and  for  what  is  it  hoping
and  waiting?   P.  251,  ^  2.

(15)  Have  God's  faithful  children  been  left  in  darkness
respecting  the  present  reign  of  evil  and  His  ultimate  design
to  bring  in  a  better  government  in  His  due  time?  P.  251,
1[  3-

(16)  How  do  we  know  that  man's  present  effort  to  ex-
ercise dominion  is  not  in  successful  defiance  of  God's  will
and  power,  but  by  Divine  permission?    P.  251,  ^  4.

(17)  What  was  the  dream  of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  its
Divine  interpretation  through  the  Prophet  Daniel?  (Dan.
2:31-45.)  P.  252,  H  2.

(18)  Explain  the  symbolic  interpretation  of  the  "Stone
cut  out  of  the  mountain  without  hands."  P.  255,  ^  2.

(19)  How  might  the  Stone  be  considered  during  its
preparation,  while  being  cut  out?  And  how  does  this  apply
to  the  Church?    P.  255,  f  3.

(20)  What  New  Testament  Scriptures  corroborate  this
interpretation  of  the  "Stone"  smiting  the  nations?  P.  255,
H  4-

(21)  In  Nebuchadnezzar's  vision  how  were  the  empires
of  earth  regarded  from  the  world's  standpoint  and  from
Jehovah's,  respectively?    P.  256,  ^  i.

(22)  What  antit>-pe  do  we  find  in  the  experiences  of  the
"Stone"  class  during  its  preparative  period?    P.  256,  f  2.

(23)  What  will  the  smiting  of  the  "great  image"  mean  to
the  oppressed  and  groaning  creation?    P.  257,  If  i.

(24)  Describe  the  vision  of  these  four  universal  king-
doms as  given  to  the  Prophet  Daniel.  (Dan.  2:27-45.)  P.
257,  If  2  to  P.  258,  H  I.

(25)  What  did  the  dreadful  and  terrible  "beast  with  ten
horns"  represent?  How  was  the  Papacy  svmbolized  in  the
vision?    P.  258,  H  2.

(26)  Why  did  Daniel  give  no  descriptive  name  to  this
"fourth  beast"?    P.  258,  H  3.

(27)  What  was  to  be  the  difference  between  the  destruc-


38  The  Divifu:  Plan

tion  of  the  "little  horn"  and  that  of  the  "beast"  itself?
P.  259,  H  I-

(28)  How  and  when  will  the  Roman  Empire  be  finally
overthrown,  and  when  did  the  "consuming"  of  the  "little
horn"  begin?    P.  259,  ^  2.

(29)  What  do  the  "great  words  which  the  horn  spake"
signify?    (Dan.  7:11.)    P.  259,  \  3.

(30)  What  is  to  be  the  end  of  the  Roman  Empire  as
shown  in  Daniel's  vision,  and  what  is  the  difference  between
the  final  experience  of  the  fourth  beast  and  that  of  its  pred-
ecessors?   P.  260,  H  I.

(31)  What  will  be  the  cause  of  its  destruction,  and  how
was  this  pictured  in  Daniel's  vision?  (Dan.  7:13,  27.)  P.
260,  H  2.

(32)  By  whom  is  the  dominion  of  earth  to  be  placed  in
the  hands  of  The  Christ?  How  long  must  Christ  reign,  and
what  is  the  first  step  toward  the  accomplishment  of  this  great
Mediatorial  work?    P.  261,  If  i.

(33)  As  the  Lord's  consecrated  people  view  these  Gentile
Kingdoms  from  the  foregoing  standpoint,  what  is  the  prayer
of  their  hearts?    P.  261,  H  2.

(34)  Did  each  of  these  kingdoms  exist  before  it  came
into  power?  And  does  the  Fifth  Universal  Empire  have  a
similar  experience?  What  does  this  indicate  as  respects  the
time  for  the  setting  up  of  God's  Kingdom?    P.  261,  H  3.

(35)  Although  supreme  authority  to  rule  will  forever
belong  to  Jehovah,  we  see  that  He  gave  subordinate  control
to  Adam.  What  was  the  first  and  chief  cause  of  man's  in-
ability to  govern  the  dominion  of  earth?    P.  262,  U  i.

(36)  While  man's  efforts  along  the  line  of  government
have  not  been  very  satisfactory,  to  what  condition  have  they
been  vastly  superior?  What  form  of  rule  would  have  been
more  acceptable  to  Satan?  What  was  man's  idea  of  self-
government,  and  how  did  this  prove  to  be  Satan's  opportu-
nity?   P.  262,  2.

(37)  Notwithstanding  their  failures,  what  has  been  the
ostensible  object  in  the  organization  of  all  human  govern-
ments?   P.  263,  H  I,  2.

(38)  Was  it  because  of  the  lack  of  wise  and  suitable
laws,  or  of  courts  of  justice,  that  the  kingdoms  of  this
world  became  so  beastly  in  character?  Or  where  does  the
responsibility  properly  rest?    P.  263,  If  3;  P.  264,  If  i.

(39)  As  a  rule,  have  the  various  governments  established


Of  the  Ages


39


from  time  to  time  been  representative  of  the  average  ability
of  the  people  to  govern  themselves?    P.  264,  H  2.

(40)  What  is  the  sentiment  of  the  masses  today  as  com-
pared with  conditions  in  the  past?  When  did  the  change
begin  and  how  has  it  progressed?    P.  265,  H  i.

(41)  How  has  the  general  increase  of  knowledge  af-
fected mankind?  And  what  may  we  expect  as  the  supreme,
final  expression  of  selfishness  and  discontent?  How  will
man's  extremity  become  God's  opportunity?    P.  265,  H  2.

(42)  Why  did  neither  Jesus  nor  the  Apostles  interfere
in  any  way  with  earthly  rulers?    P.  266,  \  i.

(43)  What  should  be  the  attitude  of  the  Church  toward
the  governments  of  this  world  as  respects  offices,  rights  or
privileges?  How  can  the  Church  help  the  world  to  improve
present  conditions?  In  what  manner  only  can  the  saints
influence  the  world?    P.  266,  H  2.

(44)  To  what  should  the  Church  give  its  entire  atten-
tion, and  why?  P.  267,  U  i.

(45)  What  was  the  temptation  into  which  the  Church
fell  shortly  after  the  death  of  the  Apostles  of  the  Lord?
P.  268,  H  I.

(46)  What  wonderful  changes  followed  as  a  result  of
this  new  policy  on  the  part  of  the  Church?    P.  268,  U  2.

(47)  What  was  the  origin  of  the  so-called  "Divine  right
of  kings"?    P.  268,  H  3.

(48)  Did  God  ever  approve  of  calling  the  kingdoms  of
this  world  by  the  name  of  Christ?    P.  269,  1[  i,  2.

(49)  What  serious  injury  to  the  people  of  God  has  re-
sulted from  the  claim  that  Christ's  Kingdom  is  now  ruling
and  reigning?  And  what  claims  and  efforts  are  being  put
forth  by  some  toward  making  the  United  States  a  Christian
Nation  constitutionally?    P.  269,  \  3.

(50)  How  should  the  best  and  the  worst  of  earthly  gov-
ernments be  regarded  in  order  that  we  may  take  the  Divine
standpoint?    P.  270,  U  I.

(51)  Laboring  under  a  false  sense  of  duty  toward  these
so-called  Christian  Nations,  to  what  side  are  the  sympathies
of  many  Christians  being  forced?    P.  270,  H  2.

(52)  What  is  the  attitude  of  the  rapidly  awakening
world  of  mankind  toward  Christendom?    P.  270,  3.

(53)  In  what  manner  might  the  great  Time  of  trouble
be  averted?  And  what  is  the  Lord's  exhortation  to  the
world  through  the  word  of  the  Psalmist?    P.  271,  H  i,  2.


40


The  Divine  Plan


STUDY  XIV.


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.

(1)  What  prominence  is  given  in  Scripture  to  the  King-
dom  of  God?    P.  273,  If  i.

(2)  What  was  the  burden  of  John  the  Baptist's  message,
of  our  Lord's  parables  and  the  Apostles'  preaching?  P.
273,  H  2.

(3)  What  was  the  hope  of  the  Apostles  and  the  early
Church?    P.  274,  H  I.

(4)  Had  Jehovah  given  to  Jesus  the  dominion  of  earth
without  redeeming  mankind,  what  would  have  been  the  re-
sult? P.  274,  H  2.

(5)  How  were  Jesus'  disciples  affected  by  His  explana-
tion of  the  prophecies?    P.  275,  ^  i.

(6)  What  was  the  imperfect  conception  of  the  nature  of
the  Kingdom  as  held  by  the  disciples  at  first,  and  how  do
many  today  err  in  the  opposite  direction?    P.  275,  If  2.

(7)  What  was  the  attitude  of  the  worldly-wise  among
the  Jews  toward  the  wisdom,  power  and  claims  of  Jesus
and  His  followers?    P.  275,  H  3.

(8)  What  was  the  question  of  the  Pharisees,  and  our
Lord's  reply,  concerning  zvlien  this  Kingdom  would  appear?
P.  276,  H  I,  to  end  of  page,  and  footnote.

(9)  Did  our  Lord  refer  to  the  earthly  or  to  the  spiritual
phase  of  the  Kingdom  in  replying  to  the  Pharisees?  P.  277,
top.  '

(10)  What  was  evidently  Nicodemus'  attitude  of  mind
in  coming  to  Jesus  by  night?    P.  277,  ^  i.

(11)  Paraphrase  Nicodemus'  question  regarding  the
"Kingdom  of  heaven  at  hand,"  and  Jesus'  reply.  P.  277,  If  2
to  P.  279.

(12)  Explain  how  the  word  "gennao"  (translated  "born"
in  this  instance),  is  Scripturally  used.  How  can  we  deter-
mine whether  it  should  be  translated  born  or  begotten?  P.  278,
footnote.

(13)  What  is  the  significance  of  the  Greek  word  "eidon,"
here  translated  "see"?    P.  278,  footnote.

(14)  What  was  Nicodemus'  question  regarding  the  new
birth?    P.  279,  If  I.

(15)  How  did  Jesus,  in  replying,  explain  the  position  of


Of  the  Ages  41

the  Jewish  nation  with  respect  to  Moses  and  Himself?  P.
279,  H  2.

(16)  What  illustration  was  given  by  our  Lord  in  de-
scribing the  nature  of  beings  who  were  "born  of  the  spirit"?
P.  280.  H  I  to  P.  281,  top.

(17)  What  rebuke  and  exhortation  was  next  given  by-
cur  Lord?  Why  would  it  have  been  useless  to  tell  Nico-
demus  about  heavenly  things?    P.  281,  U  i.

(18)  What  was  the  chief  reason  for  the  failure  of  the
Jewish  nation  to  comply  with  the  conditions  and  thus  share
in  Messiah's  Kingdom?    P.  282,  ^  i.

(19)  What  has  been  the  serious  error  of  the  Nominal
Church's  teaching  with  respect  to  the  Kingdom  of  God?
P.  282,  H  2.

(20)  In  what  sense  is  Christ's  Kingdom  now  reigning?
P.  283,  H  I.

(21)  How  does  this  fact  affect  the  promise  of  a  future
Kingdom  of  Heaven  which  shall  be  "from  sea  to  sea,  and
from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth"?  P.  283,  U  2.

(22)  What  parable  of  our  Lord's  clearly  locates  the  time
of  the  establishment  of  the  Kingdom?    P.  283,  H  3.

(23)  In  what  condition  is  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  at
present,  and  what  are  its  experiences?    P.  284,  H  i,  2.

(24)  Explain  St.  Paul's  reference  to  the  Kingdom  in
Romans  14:17.    P.  284,  H  3.

(25)  What  is  our  conclusion,  in  view  of  the  foregoing?
P.  285,  H  I.

(26)  To  the  early  Church,  what  were  the  strongest  in-
centives to  faithfulness?    P.  285,  H  2,  3.

(27)  What  false  ideas  concerning  the  Kingdom  were
corrected  by  the  Apostle  Paul?    P.  286.

(28)  What  was  the  ultimate  result  of  the  false  theories
regarding  the  Church's  mission?    P.  287,  If  i.

(29)  What  is  the  Protestant  claim  with  respect  to  the
reign  of  the  Church?    P.  287,  H  2.

(30)  How  does  the  popular  view  of  the  Kingdom  harmo-
nize with  the  teachings  of  our  Lord  and  His  Apostles?  P.
287,  tf  3-

(31)  When  fully  established,  of  what  two  parts  will  the
Kingdom  of  God  consist?    P.  288,  If  i.

(32)  What  class  will  constitute  the  spiritual  phase  of  the
Kingdom,  and  what  is  the  order  and  nature  of  their  res-


42  The  Divhie  Plan

urrection?  What  will  be  the  work  of  this  class?  P.  288,
1[  2.

(33)  How  can  we  harmonize  with  the  foregoing  the
statement  in  Revelation  20:5,  "But  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived
not  again  until  the  thousand  years  were  finished"?  P.  288,
footnote.

(34)  What  will  be  the  work  of  the  earthly  phase  of  the
Kingdom  of  God,  and  of  what  class  will  this  phase  be  com-
posed?   P.  289,  H  I.

(35)  In  what  manner  may  the  two  phases  of  the  King-
dom operate,  and  what  will  the  work  of  the  Millennial  Age
necessitate?    P.  290,  H  i.

(36)  What  will  it  mean  to  gain  a  place  in  the  earthly
phase  of  the  Kingdom,  and  what  great  reward  will  await
the  honored  instruments  of  this  work  among  mankind?  P.
291.  H  I.

(37)  What  will  be  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  and  the
earthly  phases  of  the  Kingdom,  respectively,  and  how  are
they  Scripturally  contrasted?    P.  292,  t[  i.

(38)  Explain  how  God's  promise  to  Abraham  is  to  be
verified  through  these  two  phases  of  the  Kingdom.  P.  292,
II  2.  _

(39)  What  is  the  Covenant-root  from  which  these  two
branches  grow,  and  what  is  the  order  of  their  development?
P.  292,  H  3.

(40)  Of  what  nature  was  the  promise  to  Abraham,
heavenly  or  earthly,  and  has  it  yet  been  fulfilled?  P.  293,
H  I.

(41)  What  does  the  Apostle  Paul  reveal  conceding  the
time  when  these  earthly  promises  will  be  fulfilled,  and  the
relation  of  the  Church  to  the  Ancient  Worthies?    P.  293,

H  2.

(42)  What  say  the  Prophets  with  respect  to  the  Israel-
itish  nature  of  the  earthly  phase  of  the  Kingdom?  And  why
should  we  expect  the  Jews  to  be  the  first  to  come  into
harmony  with  the  laws  of  the  Kingdom?    P.  294,  H  i.

(43)  Should  the  popular  theory  of  the  "lost  tribes"  be
clearly  demonstrated,  what  advantage  would  such  nations
enjoy  under  the  heavenly  or  "high  calling"?    P.  294,  U  2.

(44)  What  Jewish  characteristics  would  prepare  for  their
speedy  harmony  with  the  principles  of  the  New  Govern-
ment?   P.  295,  1[  I.

(45)  Explain  how  God's  Kingdom  is  symbolized  by  the
New  Jerusalem.  Will  there  be  two  cities  or  governments  in
the  Kingdom  ?   P.  295,  H  2,  3.


Of  the  Ages  43

(46)  After  mankind  have  reached  perfection  at  the  end
of  the  Millennial  Age,  what  will  be  their  experience?  P.
296.  H  I.

(47)  What  is  the  Divine  promise  concerning  the  re-build-
ing of  the  literal  city  of  Jerusalem,  and  what  say  the
Prophets  about  the  future  glory  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  of
which  Jerusalem  is  a  symbol?    P.  296,  H  2,  3.

(48)  Hovt'  was  the  nation  of  Israel  typical,  in  respect  to
the  Law  Covenant,  the  New  Covenant  and  the  blood  of  the
Atonement?    P.  297,  H  i,  2.

(49)  In  what  respect  only  will  the  Jews  have  the  pre-
cedence to  God's  favor,  and  why?  How  will  the  first  and
second  advents  differ  as  regards  the  Jewish  nation?    P.  297,

Ha-

(so)  How  does  the  Apostle  in  Romans  11  describe  the
loss  and  recovery  of  natural  Israel?  P.  298,  ^  i ;  P.  299,
Hi.

(51)  Is  the  fact  that  Israel  lost  the  chief  blessing  any
proof  that  the  Jews  are  to  have  no  future  favors?  In  what
manner  were  the  spiritual  favors  kept  hidden  until  the  due
time  to  be  revealed?    P.  299,  H  2.

(52)  What  are  the  words  of  St.  Paul  with  respect  to
the  two  "elect"  classes  and  their  relation  to  each  other?
P.  300,  H  I.

(53)  Describe  the  two  parts  of  the  literal  city  of  Jerusa-
lem.   What  did  these  symbohze?    P.  301,  ^  2,  3.

(54)  What  does  the  Psalmist  declare  regarding  the  nec-
essary qualifications  of  all  who  shall  be  permitted  to  enter
into  that  Holy  City?    P.  301,  U  i.

(55)  What  are  the  requirements  for  all  who  would  be
heirs  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  in  either  phase?    P.  301,  ^  4.

(56)  What  is  the  erroneous  idea  respecting  the  manner
in  which  the  world  will  receive  Christ's  Millennial  Kingdom?
What  will  be  the  nature  of  the  "iron  rule"  of  that  Kingdom?
P.  302,  H  I.

(57)  Why  will  many  feel  rebellious  against  the  perfect
rule  of  the  New  Government?    P.  303,  If  i.

(58)  However,  what  facts  will  the  masses  of  mankind
ultimately  learn  to  appreciate?    P.  303,  \  2.

(59)  Give  an  illustration  of  the  manner  in  which  the
Kingdom  of  Heaven  will  be  under  the  direct  control  of
Christ  as  God's  Vicegerent.    P.  303,  ^  2.

(60)  Will  the  Kingdom,  when  delivered  over  to  the
Father,  cease  to  be  the  Kingdom  of  God?   P.  304,  H  i.


The  Divine  Plan


(61)  What  will  be  the  difference  between  mankind  now
and  at  the  end  of  the  Millennial  A^q,  as  respects  standing
before  God's  law  of  exact  Justice?  P.  305,  |f  i.

(62)  Explain  how  the  Kingdom  of  God  will  be  an  ever-
lasting Kingdom  at  the  close  of  the  Millennial  Age.  P.  305,

H  2.

(63)  What  Scriptural  distinction  is  made  between  the
Kingdom  prepared  for  mankind  and  the  Kingdom  and  Glory
prepared  for  the  Church,  as  respects  their  time-location  in
the  Father's  Plan.  Will  Christ's  glory  and  power  cease  with
the  Millennial  Age?    P.  305,  If  3.

(64)  In  whatsoever  phase  of  the  Kingdom  our  interests
center,  for  what  may  all  earnestly  long  and  pray?    P.  306,

H  I.


STUDY  XV.

THE  DAY  OF  JEHOVAH.

(1)  What  is  the  "Day  of  Jehovah,"  and  why  is  it  so
called?    P.  307,     I,  2.

(2)  \yhat  other  names  are  Scripturally  applied  to  this
same  period  of  time,  and  why?    P.  308,  1[  i.

(3)  What  responsibility  has  the  world  incurred  through
the  witness  of  the  true  Church  of  Christ?  How  may  the
Day  of  Jehovah  be  regarded  as  resulting  from  two  causes,
natural  and  supernatural?    P.  308,  H  2.

(4)  What  has  been  God's  message  to  the  Church  and  to
the  world,  respectively,  and  how  have  both  messages  been
regarded?    P.  309,  H  i.

(5)  What  has  always  been  the  attitude  of  the  depraved
mind  with  respect  to  the  rights  of  others?    P.  310,  If  i.

(6)  How  did  this  change  from  original  godlikeness  to
subsequent  selfishness  come  about?    P.  310,  ^  2.

(7)  During  past  Ages,  in  whose  hands  have  been  found
the  wealth  and  consequent  power  to  rule  the  masses?  And
how  are  these  conditions  being  changed?    P.  311,  ^  1.

(8)  What  are  the  advantages  of  wealth?   P.  311,  U  2.

(9)  How  has  the  general  increase  of  intelligence  operated
upon  the  people?    P.  311,  H  3;  P.  312,  ff  i.

(10)  What  are  the  signs  of  the  times  today,  and  toward
what  opposite  extremes  are  both  rich  and  poor  being  forced
by  circumstances?    P.  312,  H  2.

(11)  In  considering  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament
concerning  Egypt,  Babylon  and  Israel,  should  we  expect  to


Of  the  Ages


45


find  a  symbolic  and  ant<itypical  as  well  as  a  literal  fulfilment?
P-  313.  H  I-

(12)  How  does  the  Apostle  James  describe  this  great
Time  of  Trouble?  And  what  exhortation  is  given  to  the
"brethren"?  Are  there  any  present  indications  of  the  near
approach  of  this  Day  of  Jehovah?    P.  313,  2.

(13)  What  constituted  Israel's  "Day  of  Vengeance,"  and
what  is  the  appropriateness  of  the  prophecies  concerning  the
great  Time  of  Trouble  being  addressed  to  that  nation  and  to
Jerusalem,  more  or  less  directly?    P.  315,  If  i.

(14)  How  does  the  Prophet  Zephaniah  describe  the  Day
of  Vengeance?  (Zeph.  i  7-9,  14-18.)    P.  315,  1[  2;  P.  316,  I  i.

(15)  In  what  manner  will  the  whole  earth  be  devoured
by  fire?    (Zeph.  3 :8,  9-)    P.  316,  H  2.

(16)  How  do  we  know  that  this  is  symbolic  and  not
literal  fire?    P.  317,  H  i  and  footnote.

(17)  What  do  the  symbols  earth,  mountains,  heavens  and
seas,  fire  and  brimstone  represent  in  Scriptural  usage?  P,
318,  H  I.

(18)  Explain  St.  Peter's  prophecy  concerning  the  Day
of  Wrath.    (2  Pet.  3  :6,  7,  10-13.)    P.  318,  H  2,  3-

(19)  What  other  office  did  some  of  the  Apostles,  notably
Peter,  Paul  and  John,  exercise?  And  how  has  the  Lord
used  this  gift  for  the  edification  and  guidance  of  the  Church?
P.  319,  If  I.

(20)  How  does  the  Prophet  Malachi  describe  the  Day
of  Vengeance?    P.  319,  If  2.

(21)  What  does  St.  Jude  say  about  the  opportunity  for
pulling  some  out  of  this  consuming  fire?    P.  320,  If  i.

(22)  What  does  the  Prophet  Malachi  declare  concerning
the  day  of  the  Lord's  coming  and  the  effect  of  this  symbolic
fire  upon  the  Lord's  people?    (Mai.  3:1-3.)    P.  320,  ^f  2.

(23)  How  does  St.  Paul  describe  the  effect  of  this  refin-
ing process  upon  believers  in  the  Day  of  the  Lord?  (i  Cor.
3:12-15.)    P.  320,  Tf  3  :  P-  321,  II  i_.

(24)  In  what  other  way  is  this  great  Time  of  Trouble
described  by  St.  Paul?    (Heb.  12:26-29.)    P.  321,  If  2.

(25  How  does  the  Psalmist  give  a  vivid  description  of
the  great  Day  of  the  Lord,  using  the  symbols,  fire,  storm
and  darkness?  (Psa.  50:3;  97:2-6;  46:6;  110:2-6;  46:1-5.)
And  how  are  the  same  conditions  re-stated  under  other
symbols  in  Psa.  46:6-10?    P.  322,  ^  i  to  P.  324,  top.

(26)  What  testimony  is  given  in  Revelation  to  prove  that
the  Day  of  the  Lord  will  be  destructive  to  every  form  of


46


The  Divine  Plan


evil  yet  not  a  time  of  literal  burning  of  the  earth?  (Rev.
11:17,  18;  19:15,  16.)  How  does  the  Prophet  Joel  describe
the  same  events  under  similar  figures,  and  why  are  so  many
various  symbols  used  in  depicting  the  Day  of  Wrath?  P.
324.  H  I,  2.

(27)  Who  are  the  two  rival  parties  in  this  great  battle
of  the  Day  of  the  Lord?  What  is  the  present  situation  and
the  future  outlook,  as  viewed  by  these  opposing  elements
of  society?    P.  325,  If  i.

(28)  Why  is  it  difficult  under  present  conditions  for  both
parties  to  see  alike,  and  how  do  the  wealthy  naturally  feel
about  the  matter?    P.  325,  ^  2.

(29)  On  the  contrary,  how  do  the  laboring  classes  reason?
P.  326,  H  I.

(30)  Is  it  so  much  the  present  conditions,  as  the  fear  of
future  distress  that  animates  organized  labor?    P.  327,  H  i.

(31)  What  is  the  ultimate  tendency  of  many  real  bless-
ings unless  restrained  by  wise  and  equitable  laws?  And
what  conditions  have  delayed  this  injurious  result  until  the
present?    P.  328,  ^  i.

(32)  For  example,  what  is  the  two-fold  effect  of  the
production  of  labor-saving  agricultural  implements?  What
similar  changes  have  been  wrought  in  other  departments
of  labor?    P.  328,  ^  2.

(33)  What  is  the  present  peculiar  situation  in  the  relation
of  over-production  to  lack  of  employment?    P.  328,  U  3.

(34)  What  remedies  are  being  urged  by  >  the  wage-
workers?    P.  329,  If  I,  2.

(35)  What  argument  is  used  by  labor  against  the  "wa-
tering" of  railroad  and  other  stocks?    P.  330,  ^  i.

(36)  What  is  the  declared  object  of  all  labor  unions?

P.  331,  H  I.

(37)  What  happy  results  might  be  obtained,  if  the  Golden
Rule  could  be  put  into  practice  by  both  parties  to  this  con-
troversy? And  why  is  this  impossible  under  present  con-
ditions?   P.  331,  1[  2.

(38)  What  is,  therefore,  the  natural  cause  of  the  Day  of
Vengeance,  and  what  will  be  its  terrible  climax?    P.  332,  i.

(39)  What  will  be  the  ultimate  effect  of  this  Time  of
Trouble  upon  the  minds  of  men,  and  how  will  it  prepare  their
hearts  to  receive  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven?    P.  333,  ^  i.

(40)  What  should  be  the  attitude  of  all,  both  in  the
Church  and  in  the  world,  who  realize  the  state  of  things
which  shall  shortly  come  to  pass?    P.  333,  H  2.


Of  the  Ages


47


(41)  What  figures  of  speech  are  used  in  Scripture  to
describe  the  manner  of  approach  of  the  Day  of  Vengeance?
(Zeph.  2:2;  I  Thess.  5:2,  3.)    P.  334,  I  i.

(42)  What  attempted  remedies  will  be  administered  to
the  body  politic  by  society's  physicians  in  the  time  of  her
travail,  and  with  what  result?    P.  335,  If  i.

(43)  Speaking  plainlj',  what  will  be  the  effect  of  the  efforts
of  the  masses  for  deliverance  from  the  grasp  of  Capital?
P.  335.  H  2.

(44)  How  does  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  Egj'pt  and
from  the  plagues  that  came  upon  the  Egyptians  seem  to  illus-
trate the  coming  emancipation  of  the  world  at  the  hands  of
the  antitypical  Moses?    P.  336,  If  i.

(45)  What  is  the  relation  of  the  Day  of  the  Lord  to  the
Plan  of  the  Ages?    P.  336,  If  2.

(46)  How  would  an  earlier  development  of  labor-saving
machinery  have  resulted?    P.  336,  If  3.

(47)  What  unanswerable  argument  proves  that  this  is
God's  "due  time"  for  introducing  a  new  order  of  things?
P.  337,  II  I.

(48)  Why  is  the  lifting  of  the  veil  of  superstition  and
ignorance  most  opportune  now?    P.  338,  ^  i.

(49)  How  will  the  position  of  the  saints  differ  from  that
of  all  others  during  the  great  Time  of  Trouble?    P.  338,  U  2.

(50)  What  is  the  first  duty  of  the  saints  toward  the  world
at  this  time,  and  how  can  they  let  their  "light  shine"  to  the
best  advantage  ?    P.  338,  If  3 ;  P-  339.  H  i-

(51)  Why  should  the  saints  take  no  part  in  the  present
struggle  for  wealth?    P.  339,  tf  2.

(52)  Is  it  because  the  saints  have  no  ambition  that  they
are  contented  in  the  midst  of  the  most  unfavorable  surround-
ings?   P.  339,  II  3.

(53)  ^Vhy  are  some  of  the  Lord's  people  discontented
at  present?    P.  340,  If  i.

(54)  What  exhortation  by  St.  Paul  is  most  appropriate
for  the  saints  at  this  time?    P.  340,  H  2,  3.

(55)  By  what  example  and  counsel  may  the  Church  be
most  helpful  to  the  world  at  present?    P.  341,  H  i,  2.

(56)  In  what  way  may  the  saints  best  fulfil  their  mission
as  ambassadors  of  peace?    P.  341,  H  3;  P.  342,  If  i.

(57)  W'ith  which  of  the  opposing  classes  should  the
Lord's  people  sympathize?  And  in  general  what  attitude
should  they  take  with  respect  to  this  Battle  of  the  Day  of
God  Almighty?    P.  342,  If  2.


48


The  Divine  Plan


STUDY  XVI.


CONCLUDING  THOUGHTS.— DUTY   TOWARD  THE
TRUTH.— ITS  COST,  VALUE,  PROFIT.

(1)  Give  a  brief  resume  of  what  we  have  learned  of
the  existence  of  a  personal,  intelligent  Creator,  and  of  His
revelation  to  man?    P.  343,  U  i.

(2)  What  has  been  learned  in  general  respecting  the  Ages
past  and  the  Age  shortly  to  dawn  upon  the  world?  P.  343,  ^  2.

(3)  What  have  we  seen  regarding  the  sending  of  God's
Son  to  redeem  the  condemned  race,  and  of  the  two  elect
classes  that  have  been  selected  during  the  past  Ages  to  con-
stitute the  two  phases  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven?  What
have  we  learned  about  the  "Three  Ways"?    P.  344,  ^  i.

(4)  What  have  we  understood  concerning  the  world's
Day  of  Judgment?    P.  345,  H  i.

(5)  What  has  been  learned  respecting  the  Second  Advent
and  the  glorious  conditions  of  Messiah's  reign?    P.  345,  ^  2.

(6)  What  effect  should  the  knowledge  of  these  things
have  upon  the  consecrated  children  of  God?  In  what  manner
has  the  Lord  fulfilled  His  promise  that  He  will  "give  strength
unto  His  people"?    P.  346,  ^  i.

(7)  What  will  it  cost  to  obtain  this  knowledge  with  its
consequent  strength?    P.  346,  2.

(8)  Is  the  giving  of  necessarj'  time  and  energy  to  this
study  all  that  will  be  required  of  the  consecrated?    P.  347,  If  i.

(9)  Are  we  willing  thus  to  follow  on  to  know  more  and
more  of  the  Divine  character  and  plan?  If  so,  what  is  the
best  method  to  be  pursued  ?    P.  347,  H  2.

(10)  What  is  our  opinion  of  the  value  of  the  Divine  Plan
of  the  Ages,  as  we  understand  it?  Does  it  appeal  to  us  as
of  human  invention?    P.  348,  ^  i.

(11)  What  claim  is  made  for  this  system  of  Biblical  in-
terpretation, which  has  never  been  sustained,  or  even  at-
tempted by  any  other  system  of  theology?    P.  348,  H  2.

(12)  While  the  Bible  is  thus  opening  up  and  disclosing
wondrous  things  to  the  meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  how  has
the  light  of  the  present  affected  the  various  creeds  and  tradi-
tions of  men?  What  is,  therefore,  the  resfonsibility  of  those
whom  the  Lord  in  His  providence  has  "called  out  of  darkness
into  His  marvelous  light"?    P.  349.


THE  END


"GO  YE  ALSO  INTO  THE  VINEYARD."


"He  that  reapeth  receiveth  wages,  and  gathereth  fruit."

— John  4:36.

All  interested  in  the  subject  of  this  volume,  and  considering  its
presentations  to  be  "  meat  in  due  season,"  will  feel  more  or  less  con-
strained to  become  servants  of  the  truth,  and  to  bear  the  "  things  new
and  old  "  to  yet  others  of  the  "  household  of  faith."  Your  measure  of
zeal  for  such  service  will  of  course  measure  your  activities  in  its  service,
and  determine  how  much  of  time,  influence,  means,  etc.,  you  will  de-
vote to  its  spread.  We  are  glad  to  cooperate  with  all,  that  those  who
love  much  may  do  much,  and  that  those  who  love  some  may  do  some-
thing, in  the  name  of  the  great  Shepherd  and  in  the  interest  of  his
sheep.

To  this  end  we  wish  you  to  know  that  special  provision  has  been
made  whereby  you  may  be  a  co-laborer  in  this  work,  regardless  of
whether  you  have  financial  means  to  invest  or  not.  We  have  quite  a
variety  of  excellent  tracts,  which  we  supply  free  and  in  large  quantities
for  judicious  circulation.  We  also  publish  twice  a  month  a  16  page
journal.  The  Watch  Tower,  and  desire  that  our  list  should  bear  your
name,  if  you  are  interested.  If  interested  in  this  volume  you  will  un-
doubtedly be  interested  in  the  journal,  which  is  edited  by  the  same
pen,  and  we  are  prepared  to  supply  you  with  it  upon  your  own  terms;
— you  may  have  it  on  credit  if  it  is  not  convenient  to  pay  for  it  in
advance,  and  if  never  able  to  pay  for  it  we  will,  upon  application,
cancel  the  indebtedness.  If  you  have  no  prospect  of  being  able  to
pay  for  it  you  will  be  welcome  to  it  free  as  one  of  the  "  Lord's  poor,"
on  application,  and  upon  renewal  of  the  same  yearly.  If  you  can  afford
to  pay  the  price  is  .$1  (4s.)  a  year.

We  have  various  helps  for  Bible  study,  which  we  supply  to  all  who
are  on  our  Watch  Tower  list  at  extremely  low  prices — these  include
various  translations  of  the  Bible.  Concordances,  etc.,  and  especially  the
Scripture  Studies  series, — "  The  Bible  Keys."


COLPORTEURING  AND  LOANING  THE  STUDIES.

Some  have  numbers  of  friends  to  whom  they  take  pleasure  in  sup-
plying the  Studies  gratis;  others  keep  a  quantity  at  hand  which  they
constantly  loan  out  amongst  their  friends,  after  the  manner  of  a  cir-
culating library;  and  still  others  enter  the  Colporteur  work,  as  being
one  of  the  most  favorable  opportunities  to  them  for  serving  the  truth
to  others,  travelling  from  town  to  town  introducing  the  "  Bible  Keys,"
soliciting  orders  and  delivering  the  books.  Our  Society  does  all  in  its
power  to  facilitate  these  various  methods  of  circulating  the  truth,  en-
couraging each  to  serve  the  cause  to  the  extent  of  his  zeal  and  ability,
according  to  his  own  preference;  assisting  in  the  matter  very  materially
by  supplying  the  books  at  remarkably  low  prices.  See  page  2  of  The
Watch  Tower  for  wholesale  rates  to  subscribers,  and  if  the  Colpor-
teur work  appeals  to  you,  write  for  "  Hints  to  Colporteurs."

We  shall  be  glad  to  hear  from  you,  and  to  cooperate  with  you,  and
we  assure  you  that  you  will  find  a  blessing  in  every  sacrifice  you  may
make  on  behalf  of  the  truth.    Very  truly,    Your  fellow-servants,

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,  LONDON,   MELBOURNE,  BARMKN-ELBERPBLD^
OREBRO,  CHRISTXANIA


<^  THINGS  YOU  OUGHT  TO  KNOW


CHRISTIAN  BIBLE  STUDENTS


THE  SATISFACTORY  PROOFS  THAT-


„^  — The  Bible  is  a  divine  revelation — reasonable  and  trustworthy,
revealing  a  systematic  plan  full  of  Justice,  Wisdom  and  Love.
*^  — "The  Key  of  Knowledge"  of  the  Scriptures,  long  lost  (Luke  iS>

11:52),  is  i'ound,  and  gives  God' s  faithful  people  access  to  the
^     "Hidden  Mystery."— Col.  1:26.  ^
<^  — The  Lord  Jesus  and  his  faithful  are  to  be  not  only  priests
^     but  kings.  ^
^  — This  Kingdom  is  to  come  and  God's  will  be  done  at  the  ''S^
*^     Second  Advent.  4&

— God's  plan  is  to  selecfl  and  save  the  Church  in  the  Gosp:l  age,
^'      and  to  use  this  Church  in  blessing  the  world  in  the  Millennium.
•gfr  — A  ransom  for  all  implies  an  opportunity  for  restitution  to  all.  4^>
— The  Day  of  Judgment  is  1, 000  years  long — the  world's  trial  day.
— Spiritual  and  human  natures  are  distindl  and  separate.
*^  — "The  narrow  way"  of  self-sacrifice  will  cease  with  this  age.  4&
— "The  highway"  of  righteousness  without  suffering  will  be  5
open  to  all  the  redeemed  race  in  the  Millennium.  — Isa.  35 : 8, 9.
<^  — "The  kingdoms  of  tiiis  world"  are  but  (or  an  ordained  period  ^
and  must  then  give  place  to  the  "Kingdom  of  Heaven" —
"  Thy  Kingdom  Come."
^  Especially  You  Ought  to  Know

^  — Why  God  has  permitted  evil  for  six  thousand  years,  and

*^  — The  relationship  of  God's  people  to  this  "Reign  of  Sin  and  4^

^     Death "  and  to  the  results.  ^

These  subjet^s  and  many  others  of  deep  interest  to  all  of  God's
peoplearediscussedfuUy  and  in  language  easy  of  comprehension  in

«^  "Tlje  ¥>lan  of  the  Ages"  ^

(In  English,  German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian,  Italian,  French,  Greek,  ^
TP*  Hungarian,  Spanish,  Polish,  Hollandish,  Finnish  ;  also  Braille,  for  *g*

^fij^  the  blind.    Arabic  and  Turko-Armenian  editions  in  preparation.)

%%0  PAGES— CLOTH   BOUND,  33  CENTS,  POSTPAID  ;   DELIVERED  BY  COLPOR.


TBUKS,J5  cents;  MAGAZINE  EDITION '(eng.  AND  GER.),  5  CENTS  POSTPAID.
Q-,  ADDRESS  ORDERS  TO  PmLISHRRS  5

^  INTERNATIONAL  ^

^  BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION  ^

BROOKLYN,  LONDON,    MELBOURNE,  BARMBN-ELBERFBLD,
OREBSO,  CHRISTIANIA  '


^  THINGS  YOU  WANT  TO  KNOW  -J^

^       CHRISTIAN  BIBLE  STUDENTS
f

THERE  ARE  EVIDENCES  THAT-  ^

— Sut  thousand  Years  from  Adam  ended  ia  A.  d.  1872.
*^  — The  Date  of  our  Lord's  Birdi  was  Odcber,  b.  c.  2.  ^
<^  — ^The  Date  of  Amiunciation  to  Maty,  Dec.  25th,  B.  c.  3.  ■J^

— ^The  Date  of  our  Lord's  Baptism  was  Odlober,  A.  d.  29.

— The  Date  of  our  Lord's  Crucifixion,  April,  A.  D.  33.
^  — ^The  "Seventy  Weeks"  of  Israel's  favor  ended  A.  D.  36,

— The  Jewish  Age  "Harvest,"  was  40  years,  A.  D.  30  to  70.
*^  — ^The  Christian  Age  •'Harvest,"  40  years,  A.  d.  1S74-1914.
<^  — ^The  Jewish  Jubilees  were  Typical  of  the  "Time  of  Restitu-  4^
<^     tion  of  all  Things."— Acfls  3  : 19-21.  ^
^  — ^The  Typical  Jubilees  Mark  the  Date  of  their  Antitype.
^  —The  "Times  of  the  Gentiles"  will  end  with  A.  D.  1914,  ^
^  — ^The  Jewish  Age,  in  its  Length,  its  Ceremonies,  etc. ,  Tjrpified
*^     the  Realities  of  the  Christian  Age  and  its  Length.
<^  — Elias  or  "Elijah  the  Prophet"  was  a  Type.— How  fulfilled.
<^ —The  Antichrist  Has  Come!— What?  When?  Where?  ^

S    ^

*^  TTiesf  subje<:2s  and  many  others  deeply  interesting  to  "the  ^
<^  Household  of  Faith"  and Meat  in  due  season"  to  all  who

love  and  study  God's  Word,  can  be  had  in  4^

n]e  ia  at  ^and"
*^     (In  Engliih,  German,  SwedUh,  Dano-Norwegian,  French  and  Greek.)

*^     380  PAGES — CLOTH  BOUND,  35  CENTS,  POSTPAID  ;  DEUVBKBD  BT  COLPOR-

^  \  TEURS,  35  CENTS.  ^


ADDRESS  ORDERS  TO  PUBLISHERS

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION


^^^^^  ^^^^'^


^  THINGS  VOU  OUGHT  TO  KNOW  ^
^   xs   ^

^        CHRISTIAN  BIBLE  STUDENTS  ^

^  DO  YOU  KNOW  THAT  ^

•Weare  now  living  in  "the  Time  of  the  End"  of  this  Gospel  age?  ^
Our  epoch  is  "the  Day  of  God's  Preparation"  for  the  Millen-  ^


^     nial  age  ?

^  — The  "Days  of  Waiting"  are  ended  and  the  "Cleansing  of  the  ^

Sandluary" — the  Church, — the  separating  of  its  Wheat  and
^     Tares,  is  now  in  progress?  ^
^  — This  is  the  reason  for  the  beginning  of  the  Return  of  Divine  ^
^     Favor  to  Fleshly  Israel — blinded  for  centiuies — to  permit  the  ^
gathering  of  an  elecfl  class  from  among  the  Gentiles?  ^
^  — This  favor  is  gradually  taking  shape  and  known  as  Zionism  ?  ^
— Immanuel's  Kingdom  is  now  in  process  of  establishment  ?  ^
— The  Great  Pyramid  in  Egypt  is  a  Witness  to  all  these  events  ^
^     of  the  agOG  and  of  our  day — testifying  in  symbols?  ^
— The  Pyramid's  downward  passage  under  "A  Draconis"  sym-  ^
bolizes  the  course  of  Sin?    Its  lirst  Ascending  Passage  sym-
^     bolizes  the  Jewish  age?  Its  Grand  Gallery  symbolizes  the  ^
^     Gospel  age?    Its  Upper  Step  symbolizes  the  approaching  per-  ^
^     iod  of  tribulation  and  anarchy ,"Judgments,"upon  Christendom?  ^
S      Its  King's  Chamber  the  Divine  Nature,  etc.,  of  the  Overcom-  ^
^     ing  Church— the  Christ,  Head  and  Body  ?    Its  Ante-Chamber  ^

the  Correction  in  Righteousness  of  the  «  Great  Company "
^     etc.?    Its  Queen's  Chamber  those  of  Israel  and  the  world  who  ^
"       attain  Restitution  ?  ^


Allth<se  interesting  topics  with  ten  Pyramid  iilustrations
can  be  had  in

"  Thy  f^ingdon]  Coiqe  "

(In  English,  German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian  and  Greek,)


ADDRESS  ORDKRS  TO  PUBLISHBflS

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,   LONDON,  MELBOORNE,  BARMEN-ELBERFELD,
OREBRO,  CHRISTIANIA


THINGS  ALL  NEED  TO  KNOW  ^
 B<rr  WHICH

"NONE  OF  THE  WICKED  WILL  ^
||  UNDERSTAND"  T

 DAN.  12  :  lO.

^  "  THE  WISE  SHALL  UNDERSTAND  "  THAT—  ^

^  — The  Gospel  age  is  to  close  with  a  "  Day  of  Vengeance."

 It  will  affecfl  the  whole  world  but  specially  "  Christendom."

<^  — All  Political,  Social,  Financial  and  Religious  systems  will  fall.  4^
^  — These  judgments  must  begin  with  the  House  of  God  and  ex-
^     tend  to  all.  ^

— This  period  is  noted  by  the  Prophets  as  "the  Day  of  Jehovah."
^  — It  is  symbolically  styled  "a  Dark  Day,"  a  "Day  of  clouds,"  etc.
^  — Its  trouble  is  symbolically  likened  to  a  Hurricane,  to  a  Flood,
*^  to  a  Fire,  etc.,  these  strong  figures  being  used  to  give  an  ap-  ■S^
<^  preciation,  yet  to  hide  the  real  nature,  of  thaf'Time  of  Trouble
^  such  asNever  Has  Been  since  there  was  a  Nation." — Dan. 1 2: 1.
*^  — Preparations  for  this  symbolic  "Fire"  and  "Tempest"  are  now

well  under  way  and  shortly  will  rage  furiously.
^  — It  will  be  a  contest  between  the  Masses  and  the  Qasses.
*^  — Many  see  it  coming  and  trust  to  various  schemes  to  avert  it.  •S^
^  — But  all  worldly  Schemes  and  Panaceas  will  fail  utterly.
^  — God's  Kingdom,  the  only  hope  for  Church  and  World,  is  sure,

— Man's  extremity  will  prove  to  be  God's  opportunity — in  the
establishment  of  God's  Kingdom — Christ's  Millennial  King-
^     dom  which  will  establish  righteousness  by  force. — Rev.  2 :  26,
^     27  ;  Dan.2  : 34,  35,  44,  45.  •5f>

^  ^
^       these  subject  are  simply  yet  forcefully  treated,  and  Matthew

SAih  Chapter  elucidated,  in  ^
^  ^        ^  •         ^  ^

^  "The  t)ay  of  Veijgeance"


(In  English,  German,  Swedish  and  Dano-Norwegian.)
660  PASBS— CLOTH  BOUND,  35  CENTS,  POS.-PAIO;  OBUT>lUU> BT  COLPOB-


ADDRESS  ORDERS  TO  PUBUSHBU

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,  LONDON,  MELBOURNE,  BARMEN-ELBERFELD,
OREBRO,  CHRISTIANIA.


^  THE  AT-ONE-MENT  IS  BELIEVED  IN  ^

«S*   " —  k>

^        ALL  CHRISTIAN  BIBLE  STUDENTS  J

Nevertheless,  but  few  even  of  the  best  informed  could  explain
*^  either  the  fad  or  the  philosophy  of  the  At-One-Ment  ^

<^  between  God  and  man.

^  ALL  SHOULD  KNOW  ^

— What  the  Scriptures  declare  respe<fling  the  great  Author
«^     The  At-one-ment,  Jehovah  God  ^
And  concerning  the  great  Mediator  of  the  At-one-ment,  our  ^
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  ^
<^  — Respedling  the  necessity  for  the  At-one-ment  ^>
And  the  necessity  tliat  the  "Only  Begotten"  must  be  "made  2'
<^     flesh,"  and  then  die,  and  then  rise  from  the  dead  in  order  to
^     effedl  the  At-one-ment.  4^

— Respe<5ling  the  office  and  work  of  the  holy  Spirit  in  connedlion
<^     with  the  At-one-ment

<^     And  the  important  part  of  the  At-one-ment  not  yet  finished —  .^>
which  awaits  the  Second  Coming  of  our  Lord  in  his  Kingdom

<^  — Respe(5ling  the  central  do<flrine  of  At-one-ment,  namely,  the
^  Hansom — what  it  was ; — why  it  wae  and  is  the  center  or ' '  hub' '
*^     around  which  and  into    hich  all  Bible  dodlrines  fit.
^  —How  this  docfh-ine  -.3  the  test  of  the  truth  or  falsity  of  all  doc-  ^
^      trines ;  so  that  once  unaerstood  clearly  it  is  a  guard  against  'ig
*^     error  in  every  form.  '^S^
<^  — Respecfling  man,  the  subje<fl  of  the  great  At-one-ment,  his
nature ;  his  sin ;  his  penalty ;  his  deliverance  through  Christ ;
*^     his  future  possibilities  through  acceptance  of  the  At-one-ment.

*^  Ali  these  interesting  and  very  important  themes  are  lucidly  dis-
<^  cussed  in  simple  language,  and  corroborated  by  four-

teen  hundred  Scripture  citations,  in

<^    "The  At.®ne«^'Iegt  Cetweeq  God  ar)d  NJeir)"  4^

<^  (In  English,  German,  Swedish  and  Greek.)  4^

^JL      507  PAGES — CLOTH  BOUND, 35  CENTS  POSTPAID;  DELIVBKBO  BY  COLPOR-
TBVRS,  40  CENTS

#    ^


ADDRESS  ORDERS  TO  PUBLISHERS


^  INTERNATIONAL  ^

*^  BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION  ^

BROOKLYN,  LONDON,    MELBOURNE,  BARMEN-ELBERFKLD,
OREBRO,  CHRISTIANIA

^  ^  ^^^^^^^^^


c|t                MANY    CHRISTIANS  4*

ARE  4^
IN   GRIAT  PERPLEXITY  ON  TOPICS  TREATED

SCRIPTURAXLY   IN  A  VOLUME  ^

ENTITLED  ^


THE  NEW  CREATION.'


^  — It  throws  new  and  helpful  light  on  the  Creative  Week  of  Gen-  ^
^  esis.  ^
— Recognizing  the  true  Givirch  of  Qirist,  begotten  of  the  Spirit  ^
<^  as  the  New  Creation,  it  proceeds  to  explain  Scripturally  the  4^
<^  steps  of  Grace  Divine — ^Justification,  Sanctification,  and  Deliv.  4^
^    erance  in  the  First  Resurrection.

^  —It  takes  up  in  order  the  duties  and  obligations  of  the  New  Cre-
ation — toward  the  Lord,  toward  each  other,  toward  earthly
friends  and  neighbors,  toward  parents,  children,  husbands,'^

*^    wives,  etc.

*^  —The  Lord's  Memorial  Supper  or  Sacrament  is  discussed  and  ^*
<^  explained :  what  it  is  and  what  it  is  not  should  be  clearly  dis-
^  cemed  by  all  of  God's  people.  ^
^  — Baptism  is  the  topic  of  an  entire  chapter.  The  many  mis-
Q.  takes  of  nearly  all  denominations  are  pointed  out  in  kindly
spirit,  and  then  the  true  Baptism  is  set  forth  in  convincing
*^     style, — indisputable,  incontrovertible.

*^  —The  foes  and  besetments  of  the  New  Creation  are  carefully
<^     considered,  and  the  Scriptural  method  of  overcoming  them ;
<^    also  the  present  and  the  future  inheritance  of  the  saints.  >^
(English,  German  and  Swedish.)
740  rAGES— CLBAR  TYPB.  CLOTH  BOUNi;.  35  CENTS.  POSTPAIO  ;  DEUVXS.-
ED  BY  COLPORTKURS,  40  CENTS


ADDRESS  ORDERS  TO  PUBLISHERS,

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BJLOOKLYN,  LONDON,  MELBOURNE,  BARMEN-ELBERFSLD,
OREBRO,  CHRISTIANLA


THE   WATCH  TOWER

HERAT.n  OF  OHEIST'3  PRBSENOE.

This  'jonraal,  edited  by  the  author  of  "Studies  in  the  Scritt-
UREs,"  should  regularly  visit  all  who  have  the  slightest  interest  in
the  topics  discussed  in  this  and  the  other  volumes  of  the  "Script.
URE  Studies."  It  is  issued  twice  a  month,  16  pages,  at  one  dollar
(4s.)  a  year  in  advance.

That  none  of  the  interested  may  be  without  it,  the  arrangement  is
that  those  who  need  may  have  it  on  credit  on  application,  while
those  too  poor  to  pay  may  receive  it  regularly /r<r;  by  stating  the
facts  and  making  request  each  May.  All  new  tracts  are  sent  to
The  Watch  TowER_list,  which  it  is  desired  shall  represent  all  in-
terested in  present  truth,  the  "  harvest "  message.

German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian,  and  French  editions  of  Thb
Watch  Tower  are  also  published  regularly.

INTERNATIONAI,
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,   LONDON,   MELBOURNE,  BARMEN  -  ELBERFELD,
OREBRO.  CHRISTIANIA

This  Society  never  solicits  donations,  but  it  uses  voluntary  con-
tributions as  wisely  and  economically  as  possible  in  the  propagation
of  Christian  knowledge  along  the  lines  presented  in  "Studies  in
THE  Scriptures."  It  yearly  circulates  tons  of  tracts  and  papers
free,  through  the  mails  and  through  voluntary  agents.

It  justifies  that  portion  of  its  name  which  relates  to  the  Bible—
(not  by  publishing  Bibles,  nor  by  circulating  them  gratuitously,  but)
— by  supplying  Bibles  and  Bible-study  helps  at  wholesale  prices;
and  often  below  the  usual  wholesale  rates.  We  mention  a  few  of
these  on  succeeding  pages,  of  course  ranking  "Studies  in  the
Scriptures"  as  the  most  important  helps  or  "Bible  Keys,"  and  Thb
Watch  Tower,  semi-monthly,  their  efficient  supplement.

Readers  who  desire  to  cooperate  in  the  circulation  of  "  Studies  in
THE  Scriptures"  will  be  supplied  at  cost  prices,  and  can  have  tracts
ad  libitum.   Write  us  respecting  this  I

PEOPLES  PULPIT  TRACTS

TKEATrNQ  LITE  TOPICS.  SUPPLIED  FEEB.
Samples  will  be  sent  free  to  any  one  requesting  them,  and  quan*
tities  for  free  circulation  will  be  supplied  free  to  all  subscribers  to
The  Watch  Tower,  they  being  considered  working  nSembers  of
the  Society,  whether  they  specially  contribute  to  its  funds  or  not.
Send  for  free  samples.


THE  EMPHATIC  DIAGLOTT.


This  work,  widely  and  favorably  known,  is  a  Greek  New  Testa-
ment, with  a  literal,  word-for-word,  English  translation,  under  the
Greek  text.  It  also  gives  an  arranged  English  translation  in  a  side
column.  Furthermore,  it  indicates  the  grammatical  emphasis  of  the
Greek  text,  so  important  yet  so  little  appreciated,  and  not  shown  at
all  in  the  common  version.

This  very  valuable  work,  published  under  the  author's  copyright  by
the  Fowler  &  Wells  Co.,  New  York  City  until  now  (the  year  1902).
has  been  sold  by  them  at  $4.00  in  cloth  and  $5.00  in  half-leather  bind-
ing. For  several  years  a  friend,  an  earnest  Bible  student,  desirous  of  as-
sisting the  readers  of  our  Society's  publicatiQ|ns,  has  supplied  them
through  us  at  a  greatly  reduced  price;  now  he  has  purchased  the
copyright  and  plates  from  the  Fowler  &  Wells  Co.,  and  presented  the
same  to  our  Society  as  a  gift,  under  our  assurance  that  the  gift  will
be  used  for  the  furthering  of  the  Truth  to  the  extent  of  our  ability,
by  such  a  reduction  of  the  price  as  will  permit  the  poor  of  the  Lord's
flock  to  have  this  help  in  the  study  of  the  Word.

Reduced  Prices. — These  will  be  sold  with  The  Watch  Tower
only.  In  cloth  binding  $1.50  (6s.  3d.) — includes  postage  and  one
year's  subscription,  new  or  renewal,  to  W.  T.  On  thin  paper,  in
full  morocco  leather,  divinity  circuit,  red  under  gold  edges,  silk  sewed-
leather  lined,  $2.50  (10s.  6d.) — includes  postage  and  one  year's  sub-
scription to  W.  T.

YOUNG'S  ANALYTICAL  CONCORDANCE.

—GREEK,  HEBREW  AND  ENGLISH—

This  work  is  at  once  a  Greek  and  Hebrew  Lexicon,  giving  the
meaning  of  the  original  terms  in  English,  also  a  Concordance,  giving  all
the  words  of  Scripture,  and  the  words  which  they  translate.  The  value
of  the  work  is  becoming  more  apparent  daily,  as  theorists  attempt  to
palm  off  private  interpretations  under  the  guise  of  a  better  definition
of  the  original."

In  this  superb  volume  every  word  is  arranged  under  its  own
Hebrew  and  Greek  original,  exhibiting  ,311,000  references  and  30,000
various  readings.  Its  size  is  large  quarto:  1094  pages.  Our  price  is
$6.00, delivered,  by  mail  or  express,  and  the  purchsser  may  order  any
four  volumes  of  Scripture  Studies  cloth  bound,  as  a  premium.  This
is  the  "  Author's  Edition,"  and  the  latest  revision.  For  prices  in
Great  Britain,  apply  to  the  British  Branch.

STRONG'S  EXHAUSTIVE  CONCORDANCE.

—GREEK,  HEBREW  AND  ENGLISH.—

An  excellent  work  similar  to  yet  differing  from  "  Young's."  Not
many  will  have  use  for  both.  Some  prefer  one,  some  the  other.  In
cloth,  $3.00 ;  half  leather,  $5.00 ;  postage,  65  cents.  For  prices  in  Great
Britain,  apply  to  the  British  Branch.

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,  LONDON,   MELBOURNE,  BARMBN-ELBBRFBLO
ORBBRO,  CHRISTIANIA


WHAT  SAY

THE  SCRIPTURES

ABOUT....

Spiritism?

PROOFS  THAT  IT  IS  DEMONISM.
 ALSO —

"the  spirits  in  prison"  and  why  are  they  these?

The  necessity  for  this  little  brochure  lies  in  the  fact
that  Spiritism  is  showing  an  increased  activity  of  late,
and  meeting  with  considerable  success  in  entrapping
Christians  who  are  feeling  dissatisfied  with  their  pres-
ent attainments  and  craving  spiritual  food  and  better
foundation  for  faith.

The  aim  is  to  show  the  unscripturalness  of  Spirit-
ism, and  to  point  those  who  hunger  and  thirst  for
truth  in  the  direction  of  God's  Word — the  counsel  of
the  Most  High.  "  Thou  shalt  guide  me  with  thy
counsel,  and  afterward  receive  me  to  glory." — Psa.
73  :24.


119  pages;  in  paper  covers,  10  cents  (5d.)


ADDRESS  : —

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,  LONDON.    MKLBOURNB,  BARMSN-EI.BERFBU\
OREBRO,  CHRISTIANIA


WHAT  SAY  THE  SCRIPTURES

ABOUT  HELL?


AN  EXAMINATION  OF  EVERY  TEXT  OF  SCRIPTURE  IN  WHICH  THE
WORD  "  HELL  "  IS  FOUND.


A CORRECT  understanding  of  the  subject  of  this  booklet  is  almost
a  necessity  to  Christian  steadfastness.  For  centuries  it  has  been
the  teaching  of  "  orthodoxy,"  of  all  shades,  that  God,  before  creat-
ing man,  had  created  a  great  abyss  of  fire  and  terrors,  capable  of  con-
taining all  the  billions  of  the  human  family  which  he  purposed  to
bring  into  being;  that  this  abyss  he  had  named  "hell;"  and  that
all  of  the  promises  and  threatenings  of  the  Bible  were  designed  to
deter  as  many  as  possible  (a  "  little  flock  ")  from  such  wrong-doing
as  would  make  this  awful  place  their  perpetual  home.

While  glad  to  see  superstitions  fall,  and  truer  ideas  of  the  great,
and  wise,  and  just,  and  loving  Creator  prevail,  we  are  alarmed  to
notice  that  the  tendency  with  all  who  abandon  this  long  revered
doctrine  is  toward  doubt,  scepticism,  infidelity.  Why  should  this  be
the  case,  when  the  mind  is  merely  being  delivered  from  an  error?—
do  you  ask?  Because  Christian  people  have  so  long  been  taught
that  the  foundation  for  this  awful  blasphemy  against  God's  character
and  government  is  deeplaid  and  firmly  fixed  in  the  Word  of  God—
the  Bible — and  consequently,  to  whatever  degree  their  belief  in  "hell"
is  shaken,  to  that  extent  their  faith  in  the  Bible,  as  the  revelation  of
the  true  God,  is  shaken  also;— so  that  those  who  have  dropped  their
■belief  in  a  "hell,"  of  some  kind  of  endless  torment,  are  often  open
infidels,  and  scoffers  at  God's  Word.

Guided  by  the  Lord's  providence  to  a  realization  that  the  Bible
has  been  slandered,  as  well  as  its  divine  Author,  and  that,  rightly
understood,  it  teaches  nothing  on  this  subject  derogatory  to  God's
character  nor  to  an  intelligent  reason,  we  have  attempted  in  this
booklet  to  lay  bare  the  Scripture  teaching  on  this  subject  that
thereby  faith  in  God  and  his  Word  may  be  reestablished,  on  a  better,
a  reasonable  foundation.  Indeed,  it  is  our  opinion  that  whoever  shall
liereby  find  that  his  false  view  rested  upon  human  misconceptions  and
misinterpretations  will,  at  the  sarne  time,  learn  to  trust  hereafter  less
to  his  own  and  other  men's  imaginings,  and,  by  faith,  to  grasp  more
firmly  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  able  to  make  wise  unto  salvation;
and  on  this  mission,  under  God's  providence,  it  is  sent  forth.

PRICE  10  CENTS    [sd.]   PER  COPY. — 88  PAGES.

Special  wholesale  rates  to  colporteurs  and  those  who  desire  to  aid
in  circulating  these  booklets  widely.

ADDRESS  : —

INTERNATIONAL
BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,  LONDON,    MELBOURNE,  BARMBN-ELBERFBLE^

OREBRO,  CHRISTIANIA


PEOPLES  PULPIT

Monthly.  Twelve  Cents  a  Ybar.

Club  Rates:— 3  copies  to  one  address,  25  cts.  :
12  COPIES,  $1.00  ;  25  COPIES,  $1.50  :  50  copies,  $3.50 ;
100  COPIES,  $4.00  ;  300  copies,  $10.00.  Samples  Free.

Some  of  the  interesting  topics  published  in  previous  iisues
of  Peoples  Pulpit  are : —

Where  Are  the  Dead?
Calamities— Why  Permitted?
When  God  Was  Alone.
Creed  Smashings  Necessary  for  Federation.
The  Immortality  of  the  Soul.
The  Rich  Man  in  Hell.
What  Is  the  Soul?

Copies  will  be  supplied  free,  on  application.  Thus  many  are  co-
workers with  us  and  with  God  iu  scattering  the  Truth— "the  hail"  (Isa.
28:  17.)  Hundreds  of  thousands  are  being  circulated  thus,  the  funds  being
supplied  by  voluntary  contributions  from  those  whose  hearts  and  heads
have  been  refreshed  by  these  "  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  which  shall  be
unto  all  people."

BOOKLETS.

JEWISH  HOPES — Restoration  Prospects.   78  pp.   English  only.

WHAT  SAY  THE  SCRIPTURES  ABOUT  HELL  ?  88  pages.  Eng-
lish, German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian,  French,  Greek
and  Syriac.

WHAT  SAY  THE    SCRIPTURES  ABOUT  SPIRITISM  ?     128  pages.

English,  German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian,  French  and
Greek.

TABERNACLE  SHADOWS  OF  BETTER    SACRIFICES.  Illustrated

— 130  pp.  English,  German,  Swedish,  Dano-Norwegian
and  Greek.

THY  WORD  IS  TRUTH.  A  REPLY  TO  INGERSOLL.  48  pp.  Eng-
lish only.

THE  BIBLE  VS.   THE    EVOLUTION   THEORY.     48  pp.  English,

German,  Swedish,  French  and  Finnish.
THE  PARousiA  OF  OUR   LORD.   78    pp.    English,  Swedish,

French,  Spanish  and  Italian.
EPISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.   Illustrated — 64  pp.  Yiddish  only.

The  above  booklets  are  supplied  at  sc  {2%d.)  each,  50c.
(%)  per  dozen.

ADDRESS  ORDERS  TO

INTERNATIONAL  BIBLE  STUDENTS  ASSOCIATION

BROOKLYN,

I,ONDON,  MEI,BODRNE,  BARMEN-ELBERFEIyD,
OREBRO,  CHRISTIANIA.


Date  Due

1
