=== 1 | chapter 1 ===
According to Scriptural Law, [the obligation to separate] the terumot1The plural term is used in this halachah and in many instances in this text, because there are two types of terumot: a) "the great terumah," i.e., the terumah separated initially, and b) terumat ma'aser, the terumah the Levites separate from the tithes that are given them. See Hilchot Matanot Aniyim, ch. 6, for details regarding the separation of these allocations. and the tithes2Here also the plural term is used because there are several tithes: the first tithe given to Levites, the second tithe which must be brought to Jerusalem, and the tithe for the poor. See Hilchot Matanot Aniyim, loc. cit. applies only in Eretz Yisrael.3Kiddushin 36b states that all the mitzvot involving the produce of the earth apply only in Eretz Yisrael. [It applies] whether the Temple is standing or not.4Although the agricultural laws apply even when the Temple is not standing, there is a restriction to the time when they apply according to Scriptural Law. The entire Jewish people must be located in our holy land, as stated in Halachah 26. (See also Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel 10:8-9.) The prophets ordained that these obligations should be observed in Babylon as well, because it is adjacent to Eretz Yisrael and the majority of the Jewish people journey to and from there.5Even though Babylonia is further away than the other lands mentioned in this halachah, it had a larger Jewish community and there was far more contact between its populace and the Jewish community of Eretz Yisrael. Hence, the prophets gave it precedence over the other lands (Radbaz). The Sages of the early generations6The Sages of the generation that followed Ezra [Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura (Yadayim 3:3). ordained that they also be observed in the lands of Egypt and the lands of Ammon and Moab, because they are on the peripheries of Eretz Yisrael.
Whenever Eretz Yisrael is mentioned, the intent is the lands conquered by the King of Israel or a prophet with the consent of the entire Jewish people. This is called "a conquest of the community."7See also Hilchot Melachim 5:6. If, however, an individual Jew, a family, or a tribe go and conquer a place for themselves - even in the land given to Abraham8The Rambam speaks of the land being given to Abraham, not merely being promised to him, since from the time God said that the land was his, spiritually, it became his possession. Moreover, as the Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 5:1) states, from Abraham's time onward, even though the land was still possessed by the Canaanites, the Jews were already its legal owners. See also Bava Batra 119b. - it is not considered as Eretz Yisrael in the sense that one is obligated to observe all the mitzvot there.9I.e., the agricultural mitzvot that must be observed in Eretz Yisrael. For this reason, Joshua10A king and a prophet. and his court divided the entire Land of Israel into tribal portions11I.e., since Joshua and his court had made this division, when the tribe went to conquer its portion, it was acting on behalf of the entire Jewish people. even though it was not conquered [entirely] at that time. In this way, when every tribe would ascend and conquer its portion, it would not be considered as merely an individual conquest.
The lands which [King] David conquered outside of the Land of Canaan, e.g., Aram Naharaim, Aram Tzovah, Achlab,12These regions are located in contemporary Syria. and the like, even though he was a King of Israel and he was acting with the consent of the High Court,13The wars to conquer these lands are classified as voluntary wars, and a voluntary law requires the consent of the High Court (Hilchot Melachim 5:1). is not considered as the Land of Israel with regard to all matters, nor is it like the Diaspora, i.e., Babylonia and Egypt with regard to all matters. Instead, it was removed from the category of the Diaspora, but did not enter the category of Eretz Yisrael.Why was its level considered lower than that of Eretz Yisrael? Because David conquered them before he conquered all of Eretz Yisrael.14See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 6:11) where he criticizes King David for this approach, quoting the Sifri (Parshat Ekev) that states that he did not act in accordance with the Torah. Since the designation of the land as Eretz Yisrael is through Divine fiat as expressed through the Torah. Accordingly, a conquest that is not in accord with the Torah cannot bring about such a designation (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. V, p. 9). Instead, there were still members of the seven nations there. If, however, he had conquered Eretz Yisrael entirely, in all of its boundaries, and afterwards conquered15With the consent of the High Court. other lands,16Even lands outside of the homeland promised to Abraham (Radbaz). his entire conquest would have been equivalent to Eretz Yisrael with regard to all matters.17And the agricultural laws would have to be observed there. The lands which [King] David conquered are called Syria.
There are dimensions of [the laws that apply to] Syria that resemble [the laws that apply in] Eretz Yisrael18In addition to those points the Rambam mentions below, among the other examples of this principle are: its air is not considered as a source of impurity (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit 11:6); it is permitted to have a gentile compose a deed of purchase for land there on the Sabbath so that one will acquire the land (Hilchot Shabbat 6:11). and there are dimensions of [its laws] that resemble [those which apply] in the Diaspora.19Among the examples of the relevant laws: its earth is considered as a source of ritual impurity (Hilchot Tuma'at Meit, loc. cit.); a servant from Eretz Yisrael sold there is granted his freedom (Hilchot Avadim 8:6). A person who purchases landed property [in Syria] is comparable to one who purchases [land] in Eretz Yisrael with regard to terumot, tithes, and the Sabbatical year.20See Halachah 15. All [the laws that apply] in Syria are of Rabbinic origin.21For according to Scriptural Law, it is not part of Eretz Yisrael.
All of the lands that [the Jews] who ascended from Egypt took possession of were sanctified in the first consecration [of the land]. When they were exiled, that sanctity was nullified.22In Hilchot Beit HaBechirah 6:16, the Rambam states: "It was no longer Eretz Yisrael," i.e., none of the halachic obligations apply there. [The rationale is that] the initial consecration came about because of the conquest. [Hence,] its consecration was effective for the time [it was under their rule], but not for all time.23Since it was established by conquest, it could be nullified by conquest. See Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, loc. cit. The Radbaz explains that when the Jews ascended from Egypt, they did not make a statement, consecrating the land. Therefore its holiness could be nullified. When, by contrast, the descendants of the exiles ascended [from Babylon] and took possession of a portion of the land,24As Yevamot 16a states: "Much of the land that was conquered by [the Jews who] ascended from Egypt was not conquered by [the Jews who] ascended from Babylon. they consecrated it a second time.25Nevertheless, since the entire Jewish people did not return together with Ezra, this consecration is only of Rabbinic origin. [This consecration] is perpetuated forever, for that time and for all time.26And thus at present, Ezra's consecration of the land is still effective.In his gloss to Hilchot Beit HaBechirah, loc. cit., the Kessef Mishnah finds these statements difficult to accept because of the following questions:a) On what basis is chazakah considered a more effective means of acquisition than conquest?b) After the initial conquest of Eretz Yisrael, the Jewish people manifested their ownership over it and thus, effected a chazakah. If so, why is Ezra's chazakah, which was not preceded by conquest, more effective than the chazakah which followed the original conquest? Why should the conquest detract from the consecration of the land?To explain: As mentioned above, the Jewish people's ownership of the land began with God's promise of the land to Abraham. The sanctity of the land, by contrast, did not begin until the Jewish people actually took possession of it, upon their reentry into the land after the exodus from Egypt and the journey through the desert. At that time, they were commanded to conquer the land and take it forcefully from the Gentiles (see Numbers 32:29,Deuteronomy 3:21, et al). Since God made the consecration of the land dependent upon its conquest by the Jewish people, it follows that conquest by a Gentile nation can nullify its holiness.In contrast, Ezra was not commanded to reconquer Eretz Yisrael, but to settle it. In this instance, God made the sanctity of the land dependent on the Jewish people manifesting their ownership over it. In other words, the sanctity came from manifesting the true reality: that Eretz Yisrael is a Jewish land. Accordingly, since Eretz Yisrael remains our land, regardless of how many times it has been conquered by Gentiles, the sanctity effected by that manifestation of ownership also continues eternally (Likkutei Sichot, Vol. XV, pp. 102-109).[The Sages] left those places that had been settled by [the Jews who] ascended from Egypt, but were not settled by those who ascended from Babylon in their previous [halachic status] and did not exempt them from [the obligations of] terumah and tithes so that the poor could rely upon them in the Sabbatical year.27And receive the tithe of the poor. Our holy teacher28Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi. released Beit Shan29The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that Beit Shan was released only from those obligations that are of Rabbinic origin. from those places which [the Jews] who ascended from Babylon did not take hold of. He decided that Ashkelon should be exempted from the tithes.30The Kessef Mishneh relates that Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi released these cities from the obligation of the tithes, because they were not populated by Jews and were not close to the area settled by Jews.
Thus the entire earth is divided into three categories in relation to those mitzvot involving the land: Eretz Yisrael, Syria, and the Diaspora. Eretz Yisrael itself is divided into two categories: a) those portions settled by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia, and b) those portions that were settled only by the Jews who ascended from Egypt.The Diaspora is divided into two categories: a) Egypt, Babylon, Ammon, and Moab in which the mitzvot are observed according to the decrees of the sages and the prophets and the other lands in which [the obligations of] the terumot and the tithes are not observed.
What are [the boundaries of] the land settled by the Jews who ascended from Egypt? From Rekem which is in the east of Eretz Yisrael until the Mediterranean Sea. From Ashkelon31Ashkelon - and similarly, the other cities the Rambam refers to - is located near, but not exactly on the same site - as the city presently called by that name. With regard to Ashkelon in particular, there is discussion of the issue by the commentaries, for some sources (see Radbaz and Kessef Mishneh) explain that it was part of the land conquered by the Jews who ascended from Egypt. It was not, however, conquered by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia. which is in the south of Eretz Yisrael until Acre which is in the north. As one proceeds from Acre to Kziv,32I.e., proceeding northward. the area to one's right, on the east, can generally be assumed to be of the Diaspora - it is impure as is the lands of the nations33Our Sages decreed that merely touching the earth of the Diaspora is sufficient to impart ritual impurity. See Hilchot Tuma'at Meit, ch. 11. and is exempt from [the mitzvot of] the tithes and the Sabbatical year - unless it is known that it was part of Eretz Yisrael. The area to one's left, to the west, can generally be assumed to be part of Eretz Yisrael - it is pure [from the impurity associated with] the lands of the nations and is obligated with regard to [mitzvot of] the tithes and the Sabbatical year - unless it is known to be part of the Diaspora.34I.e., as depicted in the map drawn by the Rambam to accompany the Mishneh Torah, the borders of Eretz Yisrael ascend northward from Acre to Kziv, but there is a strip of land in the center that did not become part of Eretz Yisrael. With regard to the entire area that slopes downward from the Samnum Mountains:35Our text is based on authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah as cited in the Rav Shabsie Frankel edition. The standard printed text refers to the Umenum Mountains. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Sh'vi'it 6:1).In the map the Rambam drew to depict this matter, the Samnum Mountains are located in the southeastern corner of Eretz Yisrael, near Ashkelon. Most of the other commentaries understand this term as referring to the Umenum Mountain range in Northern Lebanon. The inner [portion]36I.e., to the south. is Eretz Yisrael, the portion outside the Samnum Mountains is the Diaspora.With regard to the islands in the sea, we consider their [status dependent] on an [imaginary] line extended from the Samnum Mountains until the River of Egypt.37According to the Radbaz, this refers to Wadi el Arish and not the Nile. Most other commentaries, however, identify "the River of Egypt" as the Nile. Those within this line are part of Eretz Yisrael. Those outside this line are part of the Diaspora. This is a depiction of the matter.38I.e., the Rambam included the accompanying map so that the matter would be clearly understood.. This reflects his thrust throughout the Mishneh Torah: to provide his readers with an applicable text without any ambiguity.
Which area did the Jews who ascended from Babylonia settle in? [The area] from Kziv inward toward the east. They did not, however, take possession of the area from Kziv outward until Amana which is Samnum until the river, i.e., the River of Egypt.39Thus it appears that the entire coastal range of Eretz Yisrael was not settled by the Jews who ascended from Babylon. And they did not take possession of Kziv itself.
What constitutes Syria? From Eretz Yisrael and below40The term "below" in this context is problematic. It does not mean "south," because significant portions of Syria are more northerly than Eretz Yisrael. Some commentaries understand it as meaning in height, because as Kiddushin 69b states, Eretz Yisrael is higher than other lands. parallel to Aram Naharaim and Aram Tzovah, the entire region of the Euphrates until Babylonia, e.g., Damascus, Achalev, Charan, Minbag, and the like until Shinar41Shinar itself, however, is part of the Diaspora, as evident from Halachah 1. and Tzahar. These are considered like Syria. Acre, by contrast, is considered part of the Diaspora, like Ashkelon.42As mentioned above, there are commentaries who consider Ashkelon to be part of the land conquered by the Jews who ascended from Egypt, but not that conquered by the Jews ascending from Babylonia. Some also place Acre in this category. These are the boundaries of Eretz Yisrael.
When a gentile purchases land in Eretz Yisrael, he does not cause it to be absolved from [the observance of] the mitzvot.43See the following halachah for the practical application of this principle. Instead, its holiness is still intact.44Gittin 47a derives this concept from Leviticus 25:23: "The entire land is Mine." Implied is that the land belongs to God and His ownership cannot be absolved through conquest by any earthly power.This ruling was a point of question for the Rambam. As indicated by the notes of Rav Kappach to his translation of the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 4:9; Gittin 4:9, et al), the Rambam changed his mind concerning the issue several times and amended his text of the Commentary to the Mishnah accordingly. At first, he stated the opinion quoted here, then adopted the opposite view, that a gentile's acquisition does cause the agricultural obligations to be absolved, and finally returned to his original position. The Tur and the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:3-4) follow the Rambam's ruling here. See also Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel 4:29 where this issue is also discussed. Therefore, if a Jew purchases this land from [the gentile], it is not considered as a private conquest.45In which instance, the agriculture laws would not be applicable, as stated in Halachah 2. Instead, he should separate the terumot and the tithes and bring the first fruits. All these [obligations] are Scriptural in origin, as if it was never sold to a gentile. When a gentile acquires land in Syria, his acquisition has the power to absolve [the land] from the obligations of tithes and the Sabbatical year,46The entire obligation to observe the agricultural laws in Syria is Rabbinic in origin (Halachah 4) and our Sages did not enforce their decrees in this instance. as will be explained.47Halachot 15-19.
[The following laws apply with regard to] produce belonging to a gentile that grew on land that he purchased in Eretz Yisrael. If all the work involving the produce was completed in the possession of a gentile and the gentile straightened the edges of the grain heap,48I.e., completed the work involved in preparing them. See Hilchot Ma'aser 3:13. they are exempt, because [the verse mentioning the obligation to separate terumah, Deuteronomy 18:4] mentions "your grain," [thus excluding] the grain of a gentile.49From the interpretation of the term by the Sages (Bechorot 11b), the intent seems to be that not only that the grain must belong to a Jew, but that he must perform the work to complete its preparation for use.If a Jew purchases [the produce] after it was harvested, but before the tasks involved with it were completed and they were completed by a Jew, all [of the agricultural obligations apply with regard to the produce] according to Scriptural Law.50I.e., for the produce to be obligated in the agricultural laws according to Scriptural Law, it must belong to the Jew and the Jew must complete the work involved with preparing it. If only one of these conditions was met, the obligations must be fulfilled only because of Rabbinic decree. See Halachah 13. He must separate the great terumah and give it to a priest and [separate] the terumat ma'aser and sell it to a priest.51The terumat ma'aser is sold to the priest and not given to him for the reason explained shortly afterwards by the Rambam. It cannot be kept by the owner, because he is forbidden to partake of it. Instead, it is consecrated and must be eaten by a priest in a state of ritual purity (Siftei Cohen 331:10). The first tithe belongs to him,52I.e., he must separate the first tithe to fulfill the agricultural obligations incumbent upon the produce, but is not obligated to give it to the Levites. There is no difficulty in him keeping the tithes, because, as the Rambam explains, he is not obligated to give them to the Levite and there is no prohibition against him partaking of them, because they are not consecrated at all and any person may partake of them, even when he is not in a state of ritual purity. because he can tell a Levite with regard to the tithes and a priest with regard to the terumat ma'aser: "I am coming in the stead of a person53The gentile. from which you could not have collected anything."54Had the gentile completed the tasks associated with preparing the grain, he would not have been under any obligation to make any of these separations. Hence, although the Jew is obligated to separate the various allocations, the obligation is primarily a ritual one and not a financial one. With the exception of the great terumah, he is not obligated to accept any loss and may keep the first tithes for himself.Why do we say that he should not give the terumat ma'aser to a priest as [he gives him] the great terumah?55I.e., like the first tithe, the terumat ma'aser must be separated, but it need not be given to the priest. Because with regard to terumat ma'aser, it is written: "When you take the tithes from the children of Israel...."56There is, by contrast, no such verse stated with regard to the great terumah. Hence, it is not considered the property of the owner, but instead, must be given - and not sold - to a priest. [Implied is that from] untithed produce that you purchase from a Jew, you should separate terumat ma'aser and give it to a priest, but from untithed produce that you purchase from a gentile, you need not give the priest the terumat ma'aser you separate from it. Instead, you sell it to the priest and take the money.
[The following laws apply if] a gentile sold his produce to a Jew while it was connected to the earth. If [he sold it] before it developed to a stage when he is obligated to separate tithes57See below and Hilchot Ma'aserot 2:5 for a definition of this concept. and the work [associated with it] was completed while it was owned by the Jew, [the Jew] is responsible for all of the agricultural obligations and should give the terumot and the tithes to their [appropriate] owners.58I.e., the tithes to a Levite and the terumot to a priest. It is as if the produce grew on land belonging to the Jew from the outset. If [the gentile] sold [the produce] after it developed to a stage when he is obligated to separate tithes, he should separate terumat ma'aser and the tithes and give them to their [appropriate] owners according to the [acceptable] reckoning.What is implied? If he purchased grain that had been sown from a gentile after it reached a third of its growth and the work associated with its completion was performed while it was in the possession of a Jew, he should separate the terumot and the tithes, as we explained.59I.e., as explained in the previous halachah and notes, the terumot and the tithes must be separated even if they - or a portion of them - are kept by the owner. He should give two thirds of the tithes to a Levite.60He may keep one-third of the tithes as his own. The rationale is that since the produce reached one third of its growth in the possession of the gentile, the Jew is not liable to give away the terumat ma'aser and the tithes for that portion of the crop. With regard to that portion, the concepts stated in the previous halachah apply. With regard to the remaining two thirds, it is considered as produce owned by a Jew and is obligated in all agricultural laws. [With regard to the] terumat ma'aser, he should give two thirds to the priest and sell him one third.61As stated in the previous halachah, he must give the great terumah to the priest without receiving any return whatsoever.
[The following laws apply if] a Jew sold his produce to a gentile before it developed to a stage when he is obligated to separate tithes and the work [associated with it] was completed by the gentiles, it is exempt from the terumot and the tithes.62It is as if the produce grew in the possession of the gentile from the outset in which instance, they are exempt from all agricultural obligations, as stated in Halachah 11.The Ra'avad objects to this ruling based on the principle stated in Halachah 10: "When a gentile purchases land in Eretz Yisrael, he does not cause it to be absolved from [the observance of] the mitzvot. Instead, its holiness is still intact." The Radbaz explains that this principle applies only when the gentile purchases the land, but not when he purchases merely produce. The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:6) quotes the Rambam's view. If [he purchased it] after it developed to a stage when the tithes are obligated to be separated, even if the gentile completed the work associated with it, all of the agricultural obligations are incumbent upon it according to Rabbinic decree.63I.e., if the produce is later sold to a Jew, the Jew must separate the terumot and the tithes. The rationale is that since the produce grew in a Jew's possession, it is considered as Jewish produce.Similarly, if a gentile completed [the work associated with] produce belonging to a Jew,64Our translation is based on the interpretation of Rav Yosef Corcus as quoted by the Kessef Mishneh. He explains that, based on the exegesis of Deuteronomy 18:4 by Bechorot 11b (see Halachah 11 and notes), as long as the work is completed by a gentile, the fact that the produce belongs to a Jew is not significant. since the work associated with them was completed by a gentile, the obligation for terumot and tithes is incumbent upon them, but it is only Rabbinic in origin.65In one of his responsa, the Rambam writes (based on Menachot 67a) that this decree was enacted lest Jewish landowners have gentiles complete the work associated with the crops to avoid having to separate the tithes.
If a gentile sold produce that was still connected to the earth after it reached the stage when the tithes are obligated to be separated and [another] gentile straightened the edges of the grain heap in the possession of a Jew, [the produce] is not obligated in the terumot or the tithes.66I.e., even according to Rabbinic Law. Since the produce reached the stage when the tithes are obligated to be separated in the possession of a gentile and a gentile straightened the edges of the grain heap,67I.e., performs the task which completes the work associated with the produce at which time the obligation to separate the terumot and tithes takes effect. [the fact] the produce belongs to a Jew [is not significant].68I.e., it is as if the produce belonged entirely to the gentile and the laws stated in Halachah 11 apply.
When a person purchases a field in Syria, he is obligated by Rabbinic decree to separate terumot and tithes like one who purchases [a field] in Jerusalem69The Rambam is referring to the wording of Challah 4:11: "One who purchases [land] in Syria is comparable to one who purchases [land] in the suburbs of Jerusalem." according to Scriptural Law, as we explained.70Halachah 4. If, however, a person [merely] purchases produce from a gentile - whether it was harvested or [still] connected to the earth - he is exempt, because [the produce] does not come from his land.71Since the entire obligation to separate the terumot and tithes in Syria is Rabbinic in origin, our Sages applied it only when the Jew owned the land itself. Since the obligation to separate tithes when one purchases produce alone is merely Rabbinic in origin even in Eretz Yisrael, our Sages did not apply it in Syria. [This applies] even if [he purchases the produce] before it develops to a stage when the tithes are obligated to be separated [and] even though a Jew straightened the edges of the grain heap.72I.e., performs the task which completes the work associated with the produce at which time the obligation to separate the terumot and tithes takes effect.
[The following laws apply when a person] purchases land in Syria to which produce is attached. If it reached a stage when the tithes are obligated to be separated while in the possession of a gentile, it is exempt.73I.e., it is considered as if it was the gentile's produce entirely. [Conversely,] if it did not reach a stage when the tithes are obligated to be separated [in his possession],74The previous growth of the produce is not significant. [the Jewish purchaser] is obligated to tithe it, since he purchased it together with the land.
When a Jew is working as a sharecropper for a gentile in Syria, his produce is exempt from the tithes, because he does not own the land itself at all. A gentile's purchase of land in Syria causes it to be absolved from [the obligation of] the tithes, as we explained.75Halachah 10. The same laws apply when one rents a field, but stipulates that the payment will be made in produce,76Our translation is based on the Rambam's definition of the term chocher in Hilchot Sechirut 8:1. enters into a sharecropping agreement as a mekabel,77Both the terms aris and mekabel refer to sharecropping agreements. The difference between them is that an aris is working for the owner of the field for a percentage of the crops (see Hilchot Shluchin 8:5), while a mekabel is renting the field from the owner for a percentage of the crops (Hilchot Sechirut 8:2). or rents a field for money from a gentile in Syria, he is absolved [from the obligations of] terumot and tithes.78The motivating principle behind these laws is that renting the field is not equivalent to purchasing it, for the land itself does not become his (Avodah Zarah 15a).In Eretz Yisrael, by contrast, a person entering any one of these types of agreements would be obligated to separate the tithes (Radbaz).
[The following law applies when] a Jew purchases a field from a gentile in Syria before [the crops] reached a third of their development and sells it to a gentile after the crops reach a third of their development. If a Jew purchases it a second time,79See the Kessef Mishneh who debates whether, to be obligated, the Jew must purchase the field or it is sufficient for him to purchase the produce alone without purchasing the land. It appears that he concludes that if one does not purchase the field, he is exempt as indicated by Halachah 15. he is obligated [to separate] the terumot and the tithes,80The Radbaz states that the Jew may not deduct from the tithes the portion of the produce that grew in the gentile's possession. Since it incurred the obligation for tithes while in the Jew's possession and was completed by him, everything else is not of consequence. because [the field] incurred that obligation in the possession of a Jew.81I.e., when it reached a third of its development.
When a Jew owns land in Syria and he hired a sharecropper and the sharecropper sent him produce,82As payment of the produce due the owner from his field. he is not obligated to separate [the terumot and tithes], for it is possible to say that [the sharecropper] purchased [the produce he gave him] from the marketplace.83I.e., we allow for the possibility that the sharecropper sold the produce from the field and then purchased other produce to pay the owner his due. The rationale for this leniency is that since the obligation to tithe in Syria is Rabbinic in origin, as long as we are not definitely certain that it applies, we rule leniently. In Eretz Yisrael, he would have to separate the tithes (Radbaz). [This applies] provided this species is available in the marketplace.
There is an obligation [to separate] the terumot and the tithes [from crops grown on land owned in] partnership with a gentile.What is implied? When a Jew and a non-Jew purchased a field in partnership - even if they divided the field while the grain was standing,84In such a situation, there is room to say that the principle of bereirah applies. Bereirah means that retroactively, it is considered as if the division that was ultimately made was made at the outset (see Hilchot Ma'aser 7:1). To explain within the context of the present situation: Were a portion of the field to belong to the gentile, there would be no obligation to separate the tithes from the grain that grew in that portion. To apply the principle of bereirah would mean that, after the division of the crops, it is clarified that at the outset, the portion of the field where the crops given to the gentile grew belonged to him. There is a debate among the Sages whether the principle of bereirah can be applied and with regard to halachah, the accepted general principle is that in question of Scriptural Law, it does not apply. Thus in Eretz Yisrael, where the obligation to tithe is one of Scriptural Law, we do not accept this principle and maintain that the Jew has a share in the grain given to the gentile and hence, it is under obligation to be tithed. and needless to say, if they divided it after it was collected in a grain heap85In this instance, all authorities agree that the principle of bereirah is not applied. - tevel86Produce which is forbidden because the terumot and the tithes were not separated from it. and ordinary produce are mixed together in each and every stalk of grain in the gentile's share.87Hence if a Jew purchases that produce, he must separate the terumot and the tithes. [This applies] even if the gentile straightened the edges of the grain heap and thus the obligation is Rabbinic in origin,88In such an instance, there is room to say that the principle of bereirah should be applied, because the obligation to separate the tithes is Rabbinic in origin. Nevertheless, since the fundamental obligation is Scriptural, we rule stringently even with regard to this dimension which is Rabbinic (Radbaz). as explained.89Halachah 13.
When does the above apply? In Eretz Yisrael, where [the obligation to] tithe is Scriptural in origin, and according to Scriptural Law, the principle of bereirah does not apply. If, however, he purchased a field in Syria, since [the obligation to] tithe there is Rabbinic in origin, even if they divided a grain heap, the portion of the gentile is exempt entirely.90When quoting these laws, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:11) states that in the present age, when the obligation to separate terumot and tithes in Eretz Yisrael is Rabbinic in origin (see Halachah 26), the laws applying to produce grown in Syria also apply to produce grown in Eretz Yisrael.
When produce from Eretz Yisrael is taken to the Diaspora, it is exempt from the obligations of challah, the terumot, and the tithes, [for one of the prooftexts requiring the separation of these gifts, Numbers 15:18]91And from that verse which speaks of the obligation to separate challah, we learn that one is also obligated to separate the terumot and the tithes. states: "[the land] to which I am bringing you." [Implied is that] these obligations exist there alone. In the Diaspora, one is exempt.92The Ra'avad differs and maintains that the exemption from the obligation to tithe applies only according to Scriptural Law. According to Rabbinic Law, all authorities agree that one is obligated, for this produce is comparable to that of Ammon and Moav. The Radbaz does not accept this perspective, stating that there is no source which maintains that a Rabbinic obligation exists. The Radbaz does, however, qualify the Rambam's ruling, explaining that it applies only when the work that makes the produce obligated to be tithed is completed in the Diaspora. If this work is completed in Eretz Yisrael, the obligation to separate the tithes has already been incurred and they must be separated even if the produce was later taken to the Diaspora. For this reason, in most instances, terumah and tithes must be separated from produce that is grown in Eretz Yisrael in the present age and later exported to the Diaspora. This, however, applies to fruits only, not vegetables as stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 6. If [the produce] was taken to Syria, one is obligated by Rabbinic decree.Conversely, we are obligated [to separate] challah from produce from the Diaspora that was brought into Eretz Yisrael, as [suggested by the phrase] "to which." [Implied is that] one is liable [to make these gifts] there, whether the produce is from Eretz Yisrael or the Diaspora. If the obligation [to separate challah or the tithes] was established [because of the actions] of a Jew after the produce entered Eretz Yisrael, there is an obligation of Rabbinic origin to separate the tithes.93The Kessef Mishneh questions why the obligation to separate the tithes is only of Rabbinic origin. Since the concept is based on the exegesis of the same Biblical term as mentioned above, if the work that made the produce obligated to be tithed was performed in Eretz Yisrael, why is the obligation not Scriptural in origin? The Kessef Mishneh answers that since the prooftext mentions "the bread of the land," one can conclude that the obligation applies only to produce grown in the Holy Land itself. Alternatively, the Kessef Mishneh suggests that indeed if the work that makes the produce obligated to be tithed is completed only in Eretz Yisrael, the obligation is indeed Scriptural in origin. This ruling is quoted by the Siftei Cohen 331:22.
When earth from the Diaspora is brought to Eretz Yisrael by ship, if the ship's [bottom] comes in contact with the earth [of Eretz Yisrael],94Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 2:2). terumah and tithes must [be separated from produce] growing on [the earth in the ship] and the Sabbatical laws must be observed as if [the produce] was growing in Eretz Yisrael itself.95Even if it does not have a hole, since wood is porous, it is as if the earth on the ship is connected to the earth in Eretz Yisrael.
When a tree is standing in the Diaspora and its foliage leans into Eretz Yisrael or it is standing in Eretz Yisrael and its foliage leans into the Diaspora, [the determination of its status] depends on its roots.96I.e., if the trunk is located in Eretz Yisrael, the tithes must be separated from the produce. If it is located in the Diaspora, they need not.The Rambam LeAm notes that the laws in this halachah must be qualified on the basis of Halachah 22. For if as stated there, everything depends on where the work that makes the produce obligated in the tithes is completed, of what difference does it make where the produce grows. That text explains that if the person separates tithes from produce that grew in the Diaspora before the work that makes the produce obligated in the tithes is completed, even if that work is completed in Eretz Yisrael, the tithes separated are not significant. For at the time, they were separated, there was no obligation to tithe the produce. If some of its roots were in Eretz Yisrael and others were in the Diaspora - even if they were separated by glistening stone, [it is considered as if] tevel and ordinary produce are mixed together [throughout the entire produce].
[The following rules apply when] a plant in a flowerpot with a hole has not sprouted roots [outside the flowerpot]. If its roots were in Eretz Yisrael and its foliage in the Diaspora, [the determination of its status] depends on its foliage.97Generally, if there is a hole in the bottom of a flowerpot, it is considered as if the plant is connected to the earth beneath it. Nevertheless, in this instance, Gittin 22a teaches that we follow the foliage of the plant and not the position of the hole in the flower pot.
In the present era, even in the areas settled by the Jews who ascended from Babylonia, even those [settled] in the era of Ezra,98Who brought about a consecration of Eretz Yisrael that is effective until the present day, as stated in Halachah 5. [the obligation to separate] terumah does not have the status of a Scriptural commandment, merely that of a Rabbinic decree. [The rationale is that] the Scriptural [commandment to separate] terumah applies only in Eretz Yisrael and only when the entire99More precisely, the majority of the Jewish people, for the majority is considered equivalent to the entire whole. Jewish people are located there. [This is derived from the phrase]100There is no such phrase in the Torah stated with regard to terumah or the tithes. The commentaries explain that Ketubot 25a makes such a statement with regard to the mitzvah of challah based on Numbers 15:18 and the laws regarding terumah are derived from it. See also a parallel ruling in Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel 10:8. "When you enter...." [Implied is that] the entire [Jewish people] must enter [the land], as they did when they took possession of the land originally101The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that the obligation to separate terumah has the status of a Scriptural commandment in the present age. In his Kessef Mishneh, Rav Yosef Caro elaborates in support of the Rambam's position and in his Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:2), he rules accordingly. and as will happen in the future when they take possession of the land a third time.102In the era of Mashiach. At that time, the observance of all the agricultural laws will return to Scriptural status, as stated in Hilchot Melachim 11:1. In contrast, the second time [the people] took possession of the land, in the time of Ezra, only a portion entered.103Indeed, we find several sources (Yoma 9b) where our Sages criticized the majority of the people for remaining in Babylonia. Hence, they were not obligated according to Scriptural Law.104The commentaries point to Ezra 2:62-63 as indicating that in the era of the Second Temple, terumah was still observed with the status of a Scriptural mitzvah. For Ezra and Nechemiah restricted the priests whose lineage was not affirmed from partaking of it. Nevertheless, it can be explained that at that time, they were expecting the majority of the people to return and then, the status of the mitzvah would revert to that of Scriptural origin. Lest confusion arise concerning these priests were this to occur, they enforced these restrictions. Similarly, it appears to me that the same concept applies with regard to the tithes.105See Hilchot Ma'aser 1:7 which points to several dimensions of the equivalence between terumah and the tithes. In the present era, this obligation [as well] has the status of a Rabbinic decree like terumah.106Although in Halachah 1, the Rambam writes that the Scriptural status of terumah and the tithes is not dependent on the Temple, there is no contradiction to this halachah. If the majority of the Jewish people are located in Eretz Yisrael, these mitzvos have the status of Scriptural Law, even if the Temple is not standing. Conversely, even if the Temple is standing, if the majority of the Jewish people are not located in Eretz Yisrael (as was the case in the Second Temple era), the status of these commandments is Rabbinic (Radbaz).

=== 2 | chapter 2 ===
[We are] obligated [to separate] terumah from food1To exclude herbs grown as dyes and the like. This is derived from the fact that the prooftext cited states: "And you shall eat" [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:1)]. [designated] for human [consumption],2In contrast to animal fodder (Shabbat 68a). that is guarded,3By its owner, rather than left ownerless (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, loc. cit.). and that grows from the earth.4This excludes mushrooms whose roots do not enter the earth. It is a positive commandment5Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 126) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 507) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. to separate the first portion [of such crops] for a priest, as [Deuteronomy 18:4] states: "You shall give him the first portion of your grain, your wine, and your oil." Just as grain, wine, and oil are [agricultural produce that] is food that is designated for humans, grows from the earth, and has an owner - as indicated by the term "your grain,"6I.e., grain that someone calls his own. - so, too, [we are] obligated to [separate] terumot and tithes from any analogous [agricultural produce].7I.e., the Rambam considers grain, wine, and oil as examples, teaching that all similar produce must be tithes. Other commentaries (the Ra'avad, gloss to Hilchot Ma'aser 1:9; Rashi, Berachot 36a) maintain that, according to Scriptural Law, we are obligated to separate terumot and the tithes from only these three types of produce. They maintain that the obligation to separate the tithes from other types of produce is Rabbinic in origin. See also Halachah 6.
[We are] obligated [to separate] terumah and tithes from vetch,8Beans that are used as animal fodder. even though it is not [usually] food for humans, since it is eaten [by humans] in a year of famine. [We are] obligated [to separate] tithes from siyah, hyssop,9This is the common translation for the term aizov. In his notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Sh'vi'it, ch. 8, note 6, Rav Kappach identifies the Arabic term used by the Rambam as "oregano." and koranit10In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 3:3), the Rambam identifies these species as types of hyssop that grow wildly in gardens and courtyards. that are sown for human consumption. Similar laws apply to analogous species.If they were sown as animal fodder, even though the person changed his mind and thought to use them for human [consumption] while they were still connected to the ground, they are exempt. For the intent [of the owner] while [the produce] is growing is of no consequence.11This is a principle applicable in other halachic contexts as well. See Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 3:3.[The following rules apply if] these herbs grow in a courtyard on their own. If the produce growing in the courtyard is guarded,12E.g., it has a fence or the like around it. [we are] obligated to [separate the tithes], for most probably it is for human consumption. If the produce within is not guarded, it is exempt.
Seeds of garden vegetables that are not eaten, e.g., turnip seed, raddish seed, onion seed, and the like are exempt from terumah and tithes, because they are not used for human consumption. [We are,] by contrast, obligated [to separate] terumah and tithes from caraway seed.13For it is used for human consumption. The Radbaz maintains that the obligation is Scriptural in origin.
Blossoms of chilba,14A pungent herb. mustard seed, white beans, capers, and the caper bark15Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 4:6). are exempt, because they are not considered as produce.When does the above apply? When they were sown for seed. When, however, they were sown for their produce, there is an obligation [to tithe].16The Radbaz maintains that the obligation is Rabbinic in origin. Similarly, there is an obligation [to tithe] caper berries, because they are produce.
When coriander was sown for seed, its vegetable is exempt from terumah and the tithes.17Since it was sown as seed, the vegetables that grow are of no consequence. If it was sown as a vegetable, we must separate terumot and tithes from both the vegetables and the seed.18For even the seed can be used for human consumption. Similarly, when shevet19In his notes to the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah, ch. 3, note 4), Rav Kappach identifies this as dill. is sown for seed, its vegetable is exempt from terumah and the tithes. If it was sown as a vegetable, we must separate terumot and tithes from both the vegetables and the seed. The seed capsules need not be tithed. If he sowed it for the sake of the seed capsules, he must separate terumot and tithes from the vegetables, the seed, and the seed capsules. Similarly, when cress and wild cress20See Rav Kappach's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 4:5). were sown as a vegetable, we must separate tithes from both the seed and the vegetables.What is meant by [the statement] we must separate tithes from both the seed and the vegetables? That if he gathered the vegetables to eat them, he must separate terumah and the tithes and [only] then, eat. When [he allows the plant] to dry [and produce] seeds which he gathers, he must make these separations from the seed.
Even though vegetables are used for human consumption, the obligation to tithe them is only Rabbinic in origin.21The obligation to make these separations from other fruits, by contrast, is Scriptural in origin. See Halachah 1 and notes. [The rationale is that] with regard to the tithes, [Deuteronomy 14:22] speaks of "the yield of your planting." Now the term tevuah [translated as "yield"] refers to grain and the like. Vegetables are not included as tevuah.Similarly, it appears to me22The Rambam's use of this expression in this instance has raised questions. Generally, he employs this expression to refer to laws that he derives through his powers of deduction without a previous Rabbinic source. In this instance, however, this concept is explicitly stated in the Jerusalem Talmud (Challah 4:4) and in the Babylonian Talmud (Zevachim 76a). that this also applies with regard to terumah, for with regard to terumah, it is stated: "your grain, your wine, and your oil." Implied is that the obligation is applied to all species resembling those.23And vegetables are not comparable to these species. Instead, terumah which is separated from vegetables is a Rabbinic decree like their tithes.
We do not separate terumah and tithes from vegetables in the Diaspora, even in the places where we said that tithes should be separated,24See Chapter 1, Halachah 1, which states that tithes should be separated in Babylon, Ammon and Moab. Nevertheless, since there is no Scriptural obligation to tithe vegetable, our Sages did not impose such an obligation in the Diaspora. Thus even when vegetables from Eretz Yisrael are exported to the Diaspora in contemporary times, there is no need to separate terumah and tithes. Similarly, vegetables that come from the Diaspora to Eretz Yisrael, even though there is earth in their roots,25And thus they will continue growing in Eretz Yisrael. they are exempt26According to Scriptural Law. Even though there is an obligation on other produce as stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 22, our Sages did not extend this obligation to vegetables. and nothing was decreed concerning them.27By the Sages.When grain or legumes are sown for their vegetables, the person's intent is not considered of consequence because of the prevailing conception of most people. [Hence,] their vegetables are exempt and [we are] obligated [to separate] terumah and tithes from their kernels.
Even though tiltan28An herb identified as chilbah, a sharp and pungent herb used in Eretz Yisrael today. is not considered as fit for human consumption when it becomes hard,29And thus there are certain laws (see Chapter 11, Halachah 9; Chapter 12, Halachah 7) that deal with chilbah as if it were not fit for human consumption. since most people eat it at the beginning [of its development],30When it is still soft and edible. [we are] obligated [to separate] terumah and tithes from it.31The Ra'avad takes issue with the Rambam, noting that in Halachah 4, he ruled that chilbah blossoms are exempt. The Kessef Mishneh explains that there is no contradiction, for there is a difference between chilbah and chilbah blossoms.
The following are exempt from terumah and tithes: Leket, shichachah, pe'ah, individual grapes that separate from a cluster, and underdeveloped grape clusters.32As explained in Hilchot Matanot Aniyim, all of these are portions of one's crops that must be given to the poor. Since they are ownerless, they are exempt according to Scriptural Law, as indicated by Halachah 1.The Rambam's statements are based on Challah 1:3. That mishnah does not, however, mention individual grapes that separate from a cluster and underdeveloped grape clusters. Nevertheless, since they are also presents given to the poor from our produce, the same laws apply to them. This applies even if [a poor person] collects them in a grainheap.33Although the Jerusalem Talmud (Kilayim 6:2) equates a granary with a grainheap, the Babylonian Talmud (Berachot 40b) mentions only a granary (Kessef Mishneh). If, however, he collects them in a granary in the field, it is established that there is an obligation for tithes upon them and terumah and tithes must be separated from them.34As evident from the continuation of the Rambam's statements, the obligation is Rabbinic in origin, lest an observer think that the harvesting process will have been completed by the owner of the field without the agricultural obligations being met. See Berachot, loc. cit. If, however, he collects them in a granary in a town, they are exempt, for the matter is spoken about and everyone knows that [the produce] is leket, shichachah, and pe'ah.
One is obligated [to separate] terumah and tithes from leket, shichachah, and pe'ah [left] by a gentile35A gentile is not required to leave these presents for the poor. Hence, if he does leave them, they are not given that status. Nevertheless, they are not considered as ownerless, but rather as a present given by the gentile to the poor (Radbaz). Hence, the produce is considered as produce from a gentile acquired by a Jew. If the Jew completes the work associated with the produce, terumah and the tithes must be separated from it [Chapter 1, Halachot 10-11; see also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah 4:9)]. unless he declared them ownerless. Similarly, if grain and olives did not reach a third of their growth, they are exempt from terumah and the tithes.36Because the produce is not considered significant until it reaches that size (Siftei Cohen 331:28).How can one know [whether produce has reached a third of its growth]? When [the kernels] would grow if they were sown,37Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 1:3). it is known that it has reached a third of its growth. If a person transgressed and separated [terumah] from grain and olives before they reached a third of their growth, [the separated produce] is not terumah.38If a separation was made from produce that was exempt for produce that was liable, a new separation must be made and none of the prohibitions applying to terumah are associated with the produce separated originally.
Similarly, produce that is declared ownerless is exempt from terumah and tithes. [This applies also to produce] declared ownerless by a gentile.39Although declaring property ownerless is in certain matters equivalent to taking a vow (Hilchot Nedarim 2:14) and the laws of vows do not apply to a gentile, when a gentile declares property ownerless, his declaration is effective. This concept is not accepted by all authorities and some even suggest alternate versions of the Mishneh Torah. Nevertheless, it is borne out by the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Pe'ah, loc. cit.). Nevertheless, if one planted [crops] on a field that was declared ownerless, he is obligated [to separate] terumah and tithes [from the crops].40For the crops themselves are not ownerless (Radbaz).
When a person declares standing grain ownerless, takes possession of it, and then transgresses and separates terumah,41He is considered to have transgressed, because, according to law, there is no obligation to separate terumah from such produce. Even though the original owner himself took possession of the field, there is no difference between it and other ownerless crops. See Hilchot Matanot Aniyim 5:27. the laws of terumah apply to the produce separated.42Since while the grain is standing, separating a portion as terumah would not be effective, if it was declared ownerless at that time, that declaration does not prevent the separation of terumah afterwards from being effective [Jerusalem Talmud (Ma'aserot 1:1)]. If, however, he declared sheaves [of grain] ownerless, takes possession of them, and transgresses and separates terumah, the laws of terumah do not apply to the produce separated.43Since terumah separated from sheaves is effective (even though all the work associated with preparing crops is not completed), if the sheaves are declared ownerless, that declaration prevents the separation of terumah from being effective (ibid.). Similarly, whenever a person separates [terumah] from produce from which terumah is not obligated to be separated, the laws of terumah do not apply to the produce separated.Similarly, with regard to tithes, produce which the majority of people do not ordinarily sow in their gardens and fields, but instead, can be assumed to have grown ownerless are exempt from terumah and tithes. [This includes] garlic that makes one cry, onions of Rikpah,44Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 5:7) where he explains that these species of garlic and onion are so pungent that they cause people to cry. He does, however, allow for the possibility that the Hebrew terms refer to names of places. a pearled Cilcilian bean, Egyptian lentils,45These types of beans and lentils are of abnormal shape and grow wild (ibid.). and the like.
[The following laws apply if] produce from which we are obligated to separate terumah becomes mixed with produce which is exempt,46And a separation between the two cannot be made. e.g., olives gathered by the poor47From which terumah need not be separated. become mixed with olives reaped [by the owner], underdeveloped grape clusters48These types of beans and lentils are of abnormal shape and grow wild (ibid.). become mixed with grapes that were harvested. If the person has other produce,49From which he is obligated to separate terumah, but from which he did not separate it as of yet. he separates [terumah from it] for the produce upon which the obligation lies according to the appropriate reckoning.50I.e., if five pounds of grapes from which there was an obligation to separate terumah become mixed with other grapes, we separate an amount of terumah sufficient for five pounds of grapes from an additional source of grapes. With regard to the measure of terumah appropriate to give, see the following chapter. If this is all the produce the person has, he should separate terumah and terumat ma'aser for the entire mixture,51This is speaking about an instance where wine was made from the grapes and oil from the olives. Hence every drop contains a mixture of produce from which terumah is obligated to be separated and produce upon which there is no obligation. as if there was an obligation to separate terumah from the entire amount.52He cannot merely separate the appropriate amount from the mixture, because one may not separate terumah (or tithes) from produce upon which there is no obligation for produce upon which there is an obligation. Since in every drop that he separates, there is a portion upon which there is no obligation, that separation is not effective (Siftei Cohen 331:28). As the Rambam writes in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 3:9), one must be stringent and separate terumah and terumat ma'aser for the entire amount, because one is liable for death at the hand of heaven for partaking of produce from which these allocations were not made properly.In that source, the Rambam adds that the owner must buy the olives or the grapes to be given to the poor from them before he takes possession of the entire mixture. He should separate the first and second tithes for the produce upon which the obligation lies according to the appropriate reckoning.53The Siftei Cohen 331:29 and the Turei Zahav 331:7 explain that the intent is that one should separate the tithes for the entire amount, but give the Levite only the tithe for the amount upon which the obligation originally lay. In this manner, he will not have separated the tithes from produce upon which there is no obligation and yet will not have given the Levite more than would have had to.
Terumah [must be given] to a priest whether it is in a state of ritual purity or not. Even if all the grain or the wine became impure before [terumah] was separated, he is obligated to separate the terumah that is impure and give it to a priest, as [Numbers 18:8] states: "And behold I have given you the watch over My terumah,"54In the verse, the noun terumah uses a plural form alluding to two types of terumah: pure terumah and impure terumah. See also Hilchot Ma'aser 6:2. i.e., whether it is pure or impure. The pure [terumah] may be eaten by the priests and they can benefit from the impure [terumah] by burning it.55It is forbidden to partake of it. If it is oil, it can be kindled [as fuel for a lamp]. If it is grain or the like, it can be used as fuel for an oven.56It may not, however, be given to animals as animal fodder. See Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 90) which states that it is a mitzvah to burn impure terumah. Impure terumah from fruits that will not be useful as fuel must be buried.
Similarly, if terumat ma'aser became impure - or if the tithes became impure, he must separate [terumat ma'aser] in impurity and give it to a priest to benefit from by using it as fuel.
Anyone who separates the great terumah or terumat ma'aser should recite a blessing before separating it, just as one recites a blessing over the observance of all the mitzvot, as we explained in [Hilchot] Berachot.57As stated in Hilchot Berachot 11:2, 6, 12, a blessing should be recited before the observance of every positive commandment.
Terumah - even impure terumah - should not be taken from Eretz Yisrael to the Diaspora.58If the terumah is pure, it should not be taken to the Diaspora, because the very earth of the Diaspora is considered as impure by Rabbinic decree (see Hilchot Tuma'at Meit, ch. 11) and the terumah will become impure. Even if the terumah was already impure, it should be burnt in Eretz Yisrael. See Sh'vi'it 6:5. We should not bring terumah from the Diaspora to Eretz Yisrael.59Lest the priests seek to leave Eretz Yisrael to collect it [Jerusalem Talmud (Sh'vi'it 6:6)]. If it was brought [from the Diaspora], it should not be eaten, because it is impure because [of contact with] the earth of the nations.60I.e., by Rabbinic decree. It should not be burnt, lest people say: "We saw terumah that did not become impure being burnt." It should not be returned to the Diaspora, lest people say: "Terumah may be taken [from Eretz Yisrael] to the Diaspora." Instead, we leave it until it becomes impure because of a known source of impurity61i.e., it is forbidden in the Diaspora, because of the doubt that perhaps it came into contact with a corpse. Nevertheless, we do not burn it until we know certainly that it became impure. or until the day before Pesach if it was leaven,62For all leaven must be burnt at this time. and then it will be burnt.

=== 3 | chapter 3 ===
There is no minimum requirement for the great terumah according to Scriptural Law, as [implied by Deuteronomy 18:4]: "The first of your grain," i.e., even the slightest amount. Even one kernel of grain fulfills the requirement for the entire grain heap. Idealy, one should separate only according to the measures specified by our Sages. In the present age, when [the terumah] will be burnt because of impurity, a person may separate even the smallest amount as an initial and prefatory measure.1Since the produce will ultimately be burnt, there is no purpose in setting aside more than the very minimum. The Radbaz notes that the priests are also given the opportunity to benefit from impure terumah, because they use it as fuel. Why then shouldn't they be given a full measure of impure terumah? He explains that since this is not the primary use of terumah, our Sages did not feel that for the minimal benefit the priest receives from burning the terumah, it was necessary to require the people to separate a larger amount.
What is the measure that our Sages established? A generous measure is one fourtieth [of the crop]. The average [measure] is one fiftieth and a parsimonious measure is one sixtieth.
Idealy, we may separate one sixtieth [of the crop] as terumah from species to which the priests do not pay attention, e.g., carobs2As stated in Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:3, there are certain species of carobs which are generally not eaten by humans. There is no obligation to separate terumah from them according to Scriptural Law. Here we are speaking about carobs from which one is obligated to separate terumah according to Scriptural Law. Nevertheless, since they are not considered important by the priests, there is no need to separate more than the minimal amount. and kilisin beans.[Similarly,] we [may separate] one sixtieth [of the crop as terumah] in the following situations: terumah separated from produce grown from terumah,3As explained in Chapter 11, Halachot 21 and 27, when produce that is terumah is sown, according to Scriptural Law, the produce which grows is ordinary produce and terumah and tithes must be separated from it. Nevertheless, our Sages were stringent and declared that the entire crop should be considered as terumah and sold to the priests (at a price substantially less than that of ordinary produce). Since the owners are required to consider the entire crop as terumah, our Sages did not require them to separate more than a sixtieth to be given as terumah (Tosefta, Terumot, ch. 5). terumah that is mixed [with tevel],4Tevel is produce from which terumah and tithes were not separated. As indicated by Chapter 13, Halachah 1, if there are more than 100 times the amount of tevel as terumah, it is necessary to remove the amount of terumah that became mixed with the tevel and then separate the terumah. Since the person is already separating the amount of terumah from the mixture, our Sages did not require him to separate a large quantity of terumah from the tevel. As noted in Chapter 13, Halachah 2, more stringent laws apply when terumah becomes mixed with less than 100 times the amount of other produce. or impure terumah that became impure against one's will or inadvertently,5The Radbaz questions: Why is it not sufficient to separate the slightest amount as terumah as is the practice in the present age (Halachah 1)? He explains that in the present age, all terumah will become ritually impure. Hence, there is no need to give a significant amount at all. In the time of the Talmud, by contrast, significant amounts of terumah that is pure must be separated. If an inconsequential amount of impure terumah would be separated, people might refrain from giving an appropriate amount of pure terumah. terumah taken from consecrated crops,6I.e., crops that were consecrated after the work involving their harvest was completed (at which time the obligation to separate terumah became incumbent upon them), but from which terumah was not actually separated. There is no need to separate terumah from crops that grew in a field belonging to the Temple treasury. terumah [separated in] the Diaspora, terumah from ketzach, kilisin, carobs,7Note, however, Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:3. poor quality wild figs, red barley kernels, and the like,8I.e., all of these species are types of produce that are not usually considered valuable. and produce grown in a flower-pot that does not have a hole.9This leniency is granted for the obligation to separate terumah from such produce is merely Rabbinic in origin. Hence it is sufficient to separate one-sixtieth as an initial measure.Similarly, when guardians separate [terumah] from the produce of orphans, they should separate one sixtieth.10Because special consideration is given to the orphans' property.
One should not11In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 1:7), Rambam states that separating terumah in this manner is "forbidden." The commentaries question whether his use of different wording in this halachah indicates a change of position or not. separate this terumah with a measure, a scale, or by number, because [the Torah] did not specify a measure for this [allocation]. Instead, one makes an estimation and separates one fiftieth12This is the average measure. Our translation follows authoritative manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. The standard printed text reads "one sixtieth." according to his conception.13The Jerusalem Talmud (Terumah 1:7) derives this from Numbers 18:27: "And your terumah will be considered for you...." Venechshav translated as "considered" shares the root chashav meaning "thought" or "estimate." Implied is that terumah should be given by estimation. Although this verse is speaking about terumat ma'aser which must be separated by exact measure (see Halachah 10), we follow the principle (see Rashi, Pesachim 24a): If a concept explicitly stated with regard to terumat ma'aser cannot be applied to it, we assume that it is referring to the great terumah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. One may, however, separate terumah from [produce that is] measured, weighed, or counted.14I.e., one measures the produce and then separates terumah by estimation (ibid.). He should not separate terumah using a basket or a container whose measure is known.15For that is obviously equivalent to separating with a measure. He may, however, separate terumah by [filling] half or a third of their measure. One should not separate terumah [by using] half [a measure of] a se'ah, because its half is also a measure.
When a person separates a large measure of terumah,16I.e., a measure above that stated by the Sages. as long as he leaves a certain portion as ordinary produce,17I.e., he did not designate the entire crop as terumah. [the separated portion] is terumah. If, however, he said: "All of this produce is terumah," his statements are of no consequence.18For Numbers 15:21 speaks of giving "from the first of your kneading." Implied is that one must give "from the first," but not all the first [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 4:5, based on the Jerusalem Talmud)].If a person intended to separate one tenth [of his crop] as terumah, but it happened that he actually set aside one sixtieth, [the separated portion] is terumah.19For he had intended to give this amount of produce - and more - as terumah (Kessef Mishneh). And when giving terumah, one's deed must be aligned - at least partially - with his intent. Since the terumah is acceptable, there is no need for the person to supplement the amount separated and give the amount he originally intended (Radbaz). If, however, he intended to give the sixtieth as terumah, but it happened that he actually set aside one fiftieth, [the separated portion] is not terumah.20For he had not intended to give this amount as terumah (ibid.).
When a person sets aside terumah and it happened that he gave one twentieth [of his crop],21I.e., without either desiring to give this amount or having a desire to give a lesser amount. Note the gloss of the Radbaz who suggests that there is a printing error in the text. [the separated portion] is terumah.22The fact that he gave a larger measure than usual as terumah does not disqualify his gift. If he set aside terumah and it happened that he gave one sixtieth [of his crop] and hence, he added more produce for the sake of terumah,23So that he would not be giving a parsimonious measure. the tithes must be separated from that additional amount.24Although normally, there is no obligation to separate tithes from terumah, since the portion he separated originally fulfilled his obligation, it immediately became necessary to separate tithes from the remainder of the produce. The priest must separate them and only then may he partake of it.25He must observe all the obligations required when partaking of terumah.If a person set aside terumah26With the intent of giving the measure required by our Sages. and it happened that he gave one sixty-first [of his crop], [the separated portion] is terumah, but he must set aside a second portion to complete the measure that he originally intended to give. This additional measure may be set aside with a measure, a scale, or by number.27Although initially, one should not give a measured amount of terumah as stated in Halachah 4, in this instance, he is required to give a measured amount so that he will give the amount that he originally intended. He should set aside [the terumah] only from the produce that is encompassed [in the same area] as is true with regard to the initial separation [of terumah].28As is required by Halachah 17, as an initial and preferable measure.
When a person separates a portion of the terumah [that he originally intended to separate], that portion does not have the status of terumah.29In contrast to the situation described in the previous halachah, in this instance, the person originally intended to separate more. Hence, what he separated is not considered as terumah. Nevertheless, the terumah from that portion30Since the separation was not effective, that portion is considered as tevel and terumah must be separated from it. Since it was set aside as a separate portion, the terumah should be separated from it and not from other produce. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 4:1).The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's interpretation of that mishnah and maintains that the separated produce is in fact terumah. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's interpretation. should be separated from it and not from other produce.
When a person separates a portion of terumah from one grain heap and a portion of terumah from a second grain heap of the same species, he should not separate terumah from one grain heap for the other.31For as mentioned above and in Halachah 17, preferably, one should separate terumah from the grain for which it is being separated and not from other grain.[The following rules apply when a person] says: "The terumah for this grain heap is in its midst." If he specified a place - on the north side or the south - he has designated terumah and is obligated to separate terumah from that [portion of the grain heap]. If he did not specify a place, his statements are of no consequence.32And he may separate terumah from other produce. The rationale is that terumah is called "the first." Implied is that it must be set aside from produce that is not "first" and in this instance, that has not been done (Siftei Cohen 331:45).
If [a person separating terumah] said: "The terumah for this grain heap is this33I.e., he designated a certain portion of the first grain heap as terumah. and the terumah for this grain heap is like that one,"34I.e., the terumah for the second grain heap should be separated in a way entirely parallel to the separation from the first. It should be taken from an equivalent place and have the measure. Our translation is based on the version of the Mishneh Torah possessed by the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh and their interpretations of that text. There are other slightly different versions of the text. at the place where the terumah for the first grain heap ended, the terumah for the second grain heap also ended.
Terumat Ma'aser35As stated in Halachah 12, after a tenth of the produce is given to the Levites, they must separate a tenth of that tenth and give it to the priests as terumat ma'aser. may not be separated by estimation.36I.e., in contrast to "the great terumah," as mentioned in Halachah 4.As stated in the notes to that halachah, a verse ostensibly referring to terumat ma'aser (Numbers 18:27  states: "And your terumah will be considered for you...." Venechshav translated as "considered" shares the root chashav meaning "thought" or "estimate." Implied is that terumah should be given by estimation. Nevertheless, according to the Jerusalem Talmud (Terumah 1:7), that verse refers to the great terumah and not to terumat ma'aser (Radbaz). [Instead,] one must be precise in its measure, even in the present age,37When it will be destroyed because of impurity. because its measure is explicitly stated in the Torah.
[Produce] that is usually measured in volume, should be measured in volume. [Produce] that is weighed should be weighed and if it can [easily] be counted, it should be counted. If it could [easily] be counted, weighed, or measured in volume, it is praiseworthy to count it,38I.e., separating the terumat ma'aser after counting it is praiseworthy [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 4:6)]. more praiseworthy to measure its volume, and most praiseworthy to weigh it.39For in this way, the measurement is most precise.
The mitzvah [to separate] terumat ma'aser is for a Levite to separate it from the tithe [given] him, as [Numbers 18:26] states: "When you take the tithe from the children of Israel...."40Sefer HaMitzvot (positive commandment 129) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 396) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah. An Israelite may separate terumat ma'aser and give it to a priest41I.e., the Torah's requirement is for the Israelite to give the tithes to the Levite and for the Levite to separate one tenth of the tithes as terumat ma'aser. Nevertheless, if the Israelite desires to fulfill this mitzvah, he has the option. It is not considered as if he is usurping the Levite's right.The Radbaz notes that the source for this concept (Gittin 30b) also implies that terumat ma'aser can be separated by estimation and finds it somewhat problematic to derive one concept from that source, but not the second. Nevertheless, he concludes that this is in fact the Talmud's conclusion. and then give the tithes to a Levite after separating the terumat [ma'aser] from it, i.e., a tenth of a tenth.
When an Israelite separates the first tithe while the crop is still stalks [of grain] and gives it to the Levite before it was threshed and before he separated the great terumah, the Levite is not required to separate the great terumah from it after he threshes it, only terumat ma'aser.42Berachot 47a derives this concept from the exegesis of Numbers 18:26 which speaks of taking "a tenth from the tithe." Implied is that only a tenth is separated from the tithe and nothing more.If, however, the Israelite threshed [the crop]43And completed all the other tasks to make it obligated for tithing. and separated a tithe of the grain and gave it to the Levite before he separated the great terumah, the Levite is obligated to separate the great terumah and terumat ma'aser, since [the crop] has already been [separated into kernels of] grain, the obligation [to separate] terumah has fallen upon it, as [implied by the phrase]: "The first of your grain."44I.e., once produce has been reduced to kernels of grain, the obligation to separate terumah takes effect. Hence, the Levite must separate terumah from the tithe as well as terumat ma'aser.
When a Levite took grain while it was in stalks, he should not give the terumah to the priest in stalks. Instead, we penalize him [and require him] to thresh [the crop], winnow it, and give the priest a tenth of a tenth of the kernels of the grain.45I.e., he is penalized by being required to perform the work necessary to process the stalks of grain until they are reduced to kernels. He is not required to give him a tenth of the straw or the chaff.46For the obligation to tithe is incumbent only on the food and not on the other parts of the plant. If he set aside terumat ma'aser while the crop was in stalks as it was given to him, he must crush it and give the priest the kernels and the straw.47He is required to perform the tasks necessary to process the grain for the reasons mentioned above. Nevertheless, he must give the priest the chaff because he designated it as terumah while it was in its stalks. That sacred designation does not depart from the chaff when the kernels are separated from it.Why did they penalize him and make him crush it? Because he accepted the tithe while it was in the stalks and thus precluded the separation of the great terumah.
When an Israelite tells a Levite: "My father told me: 'I have ma'aser for you in my possession,' we are not concerned about [the possibility of] it containing terumat ma'aser. [We are confident] that his father separated the terumat ma'aser. Therefore he commanded him that the [entire] tithe should be given to the Levite.48I.e., his statements indicate that his father desired that the entire tithe be given to the Levite. Hence, we assume that he already separated the terumat ma'aser.If [the Israelite] told [the Levite]: "My father told me: 'I have a kor49The mention of a measure indicates that he expects the Levite to separate the terumat ma'aser required for this measure.The Ra'avad challenges the Rambam's ruling, noting that it is the opposite of the standard text of the Talmud (Gittin 30b). The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh state that the version of the Talmud possessed by the Rambam differed from the standard version and indeed, possesses an advantage over it. of ma'aser for you in my possession,' we are concerned about [the possibility of] it containing terumat ma'aser.
Terumat ma'aser that is an eighth of an eighth [of a log]50This measure, a kortov, is slightly less than 5 cc. according to Shiurei Torah and approximately 9.5 cc. according to Chazon Ish. should be brought to a priest. For less than that, [we do not trouble him] to bring it to a priest.51Because such a small amount is of little value.On the basis of the Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot 11:4), the Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that even the slightest amount of pure grain should also be brought to a priest if there was a definite obligation to tithe. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh acknowledge the validity of Ra'avad's questions, but offer possible resolutions for the Rambam's approach. Instead, he may throw it into the fire and burn it.52He must, however, separate it. Otherwise, it is forbidden to benefit from the tithes. With regard to wine and oil, by contrast, even the smallest amount [of terumat ma'aser] should be brought to a priest53For even a small amount of these substances is of value for a priest (Radbaz). provided it is definitely terumat ma'aser and ritually pure.54If it was not ritually pure, it would be of little benefit to the priest, for he could use it only as fuel. Hence we do not require that it be brought to him. If it was ritually impure or if it was demai,55Produce from which we are uncertain whether the tithes had been separated and hence, require that the tithes be separated again. Since the tithes are being separated merely as a safeguard and thus it is possible that there is no Scriptural obligation from this crop, we do not trouble him to bring a priest a very small amount. if it does not contain [the above] measure, he is not required to trouble himself with it. Instead, he should burn it.
We should separate the great terumah only from [produce] in the same location.56Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:9). Note the contrast to terumat ma'aser as stated in Halachah 20. What is implied? A person had 50 se'ah in one room57We have chosen this translation for bayit based on the gloss of the Kessef Mishneh to Halachah 18 where he explains that when one grain heap is in a room and another in the loft of the same building, they are considered as being in the same place. This interpretation enables us to understand an otherwise difficult passage in the Tosefta, Terumot 3:9. and 50 se'ah in another,58Everything that is in the same room is considered as being in the same location even if the two piles of produce are not touching each other (Radbaz; see the following halachah). he should not separate two se'ah from one room for the entire 100 se'ah, for he would be separating produce from one location for produce from another.[After the fact,] if one separated terumah from one location for produce in another, the separation is effective,59The Siftei Cohen 331:49 explains the rationale for the above restriction and why it is not binding after the fact. As mentioned above, according to Rabbinic Law, one must separate between one fortieth and one sixtieth of the crop as terumah and that separation must be made by estimation. Hence, in order to make an appropriate estimation, one must be in the same place as the produce. Nevertheless, since according to Scriptural Law, one fulfills his obligation with even one grain, after the fact, such a separation is not disqualified. 
 provided the produce separated [as terumah] is protected. If, however, a person possessed jugs of oil and/or wine and saw that they were breaking, should he say: "These are terumah for the produce in my home,"60And thus try to receive something of value for the wine and/or oil that will be spilled. his words are of no consequence.61Since the jugs are breaking, we considered them as having been broken already and the produce as having been spilled. When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:25) states that in the present age, when terumah is destroyed regardless because of its impurity, even when the jugs are breaking, the separation is effective.
When produce is scattered in a room or there are two granaries in the same room,62Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:9). Note the contrast to terumat ma'aser as stated in Halachah 20. one may separate terumah from one for the entire amount.63Since they are in the same room, they are considered as being in the same place. When sacks of grain, spheres of dried figs, or jugs of figs are in the same place, one may separate from one for the entire amount. With regard to jugs of wine, until one has sealed their lids closed, he may separate terumah from one for the entire amount.64It is considered as if they were all mixed together [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 3:12)]. After they have been sealed, he must separate terumah from each one individually.65Each closed jug is considered as a separate entity, even though they are all in the same room.
When a person was gathering bunches of vegetables and leaving them in [his] garden, he may separate terumah from one for the entire amount.66For the entire garden is considered as a single entity. If he brings another type of produce between them, he must separate terumah from each one individually. If he brought several species together in a container, e.g., cabbage on top, cabbage on bottom, and another species in between, he should not separate terumah from the top head for the bottom head.67Since there are other species between them, they are not considered as of the same group.If he collected five piles in one granary, he may separate terumah from one for the entire amount68The fact that they are in the same granary causes them to be considered as a single entity. provided the fundamental collection is intact.69I.e., provided he has not begun removing produce from the granary. If the fundamental collection is not intact, he must separate terumah from each one individually.
Terumat ma'aser may be separated even if [the produce] is not in the same location. [This is implied by Numbers 18:28]: Separate terumah "from all of your tithes."70The Rambam is not quoting the verse as it appears in the Torah. [Implied is that] even if there is one [collection of] tithes in one city and another [collection of] tithes in another city, one may separate terumat [ma'aser] once for all of them. Torah scholars separate even terumat ma'aser only from [produce] in one location.71The Siftei Cohen 331:48 describes this as the most choice way of observing the mitzvah. The Radbaz emphasizes that this is a stringency that Torah scholars have accepted upon themselves and, according to the Rambam, is not even a Rabbinic obligation. The Ra'avad explains that an Israelite need not separate terumat ma'aser from produce that is in one place, but a Levite must. The Kessef Mishneh does not accept that position and quotes sources in support of the Rambam's view.
When a Levite possessed [produce from] the first tithe from which terumat ma'aser was not separated and he left it so that he could continuously separate terumat ma'aser [for other crops] from it while it is still tevel, his actions are viable. [This is derived from Numbers 18:24]: "For the tithes of the children of Israel [from] which they will separate terumah...." Implied is that [the tithes] can be transformed into terumat [ma'aser] in their entirety.
If one separated terumat ma'aser first and then left [the produce] so that one could continually separate terumat ma'aser for other produce from it until it becomes terumat ma'aser in its entirety, at which he would give it to a priest, his actions are of no consequence.72And it is as if terumat ma'aser has never been separated for the produce for which he intended that it serve that purpose. [This is derived from ibid.:29]: "The sacred portion from it." Implied is that when its sacred portion is in it,73I.e., terumat ma'aser has not yet been separated. it can be made terumat [ma'aser] for other [crops]. If its sacred portion is no longer in it, it cannot be made terumat [ma'aser] for other [crops]. Similarly, when a person sets aside crops to separate the great terumah from them, they must be tevel with regard to terumah.74I.e., terumah has never been separated from them. See Chapter 5, Halachah 12. If a person sets aside crops to separate the tithes from them, they must be tevel with regard to the tithes.75I.e., the tithes have never been separated from them. See Hilchot Ma'aser 1:7.
When terumah and the tithes are separated, we separate them in proper sequence.What is implied? Before everything, one separates bikkurim.76The first fruits. Afterwards, [he separates] the great terumah, the first tithe, then the second tithe or the tithe for the poor.77I.e., either one or the other. For in the year the second tithe is separated, the tithe for the poor is not separated. If a person separated the second [tithe] before the first, or the tithes before terumah, or terumah before bikkurim, his actions are effective despite the fact that he has transgressed a negative commandment.78Sefer HaMitzvot (negative commandment 154) and Sefer HaChinuch (mitzvah 72) include this commandment among the 613 mitzvot of the Torah.What is the source which teaches that a negative commandment is involved? [Exodus 22:28] states: "Do not delay your fullness offering or your priestly heave-offering."79"Your fullness offering" refers to bikkurim for they are separated when the produce becomes full. "Your priestly heave-offering" refers to terumah. Thus the bikkurim precede terumah. See also Terumot 3:6-7. [Implied is a command] not to delay [the separation of produce] that should come first. Lashes are not given [as punishment for the violation] of this prohibition.80Temurah 4b explains that this prohibition is considered as correctable by the fulfillment of a positive commandment, for one may make separations in the proper order. See the gloss of Radbaz.
When a person desires to separate the great terumah and terumat ma'aser at the same time, he should separate 1/33.33 of his crop.81I.e., three hundredths of his crop. An average donation of terumah is one fifitieth, two hundredths. And terumat ma'aser is one tenth of the first tithe, another hundredth. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:2). He should say: "One hundredth of [the produce] that is here - i.e., on the side of the produce which I set aside - is ordinary produce.82This refers to the portion that will be separated as terumat ma'aser. Initially, it is to remain as ordinary produce, so that the prohibition against making the separations in improper sequence is not violated. See Ra'avad. The remainder of what I separated is terumah for the entire crop. The tithes which are necessary to be separated for these hundred portions83I.e., including that which was separated as terumah. of ordinary produce are at the side of [the produce] that I separated. The remainder of what I separated aside from the terumah is terumat ma'aser on the entire amount."84In this way, he will have separated terumah, the tithes, and terumat ma'aser in proper sequence.

=== 4 | chapter 4 ===
A person may appoint an agent to separate terumah and the tithes for him, as [Numbers 18:28] states: "So shall you separate, also you." [The wording implies] the inclusion of an agent.1By saying "also you," the verse implies that there is someone other than you - an agent - that may also separate terumah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumah 1:1)]. A gentile may not be appointed as an agent, because [the phrase] "also you" [implies an equation between you and your agent]. Just as you are a member of the covenant, your agent must be a member of the covenant.2This is a general principle applying not only with regard to terumah. A gentile cannot serve as an agent for a Jew in any matter (Kiddushin 41b).
There are five [types of individuals] who should not separate terumah and [even] if they do, [the produce] they separated is not considered as terumah: A deaf-mute,3As the Rambam explains in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumah 1:2) although the term cheresh refers to someone who cannot hear, in a halachic context, the intent is someone who also cannot speak. He is referred to as a cheresh because it is his inability to hear that prevents him from learning how to speak. a mentally or emotionally unstable person, a minor,4These three individuals are considered as incapable of controlling their affairs. Hence they are not obligated in the observance of the Torah and its mitzvot. Just as they are not responsible for themselves, they cannot discharge the responsibilities of others. a gentile who separated terumah from produce belonging to a Jew, even with his permission,5For as stated above, a gentile cannot act as an agent for a Jew. and a person who separates terumah from produce that does not belong to him without the owner's permission.6If he is granted the owner's permission, he is considered as his agent and the separation is effective as stated above. If, however, a person separates terumah from his own produce for the produce of others, the produce is terumah and [the colleague's] produce has been prepared for use. The satisfaction [of allocating the terumah] belongs [to the person who separated it and he may] give to whichever priest he desires.
[The following rules apply when a person] separates terumah [from a colleague's produce] without permission or descends into his colleague's field and gathered produce without permission so that he could take them [for himself], but separate some as terumah. When the owner comes and says: "You should have taken better ones,"7Our translation is based on Rashi's commentary (Bava Metzia 22a). if there are better ones than those separated as terumah, the separation is effective,8According to this approach, the statement "You should have taken better ones" is understood simply. The owner in truth desired that the person give the priest the best produce possible as terumah. because [the owner] did not object.9Thus we consider it as if the person acted with the owner's consent and thus functioned as his agent. Since a mitzvah is involved and ultimately, he consented, we assume that this was his intent from the outset (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). Also, implied is that the owner was willing to allow the person to take a certain amount of the produce as his own. Note the Turei Zahav 331:15 who maintains that the Rambam's ruling runs contrary to the simple meaning of the passage in Bava Metzia, loc. cit., and rejects the resolutions offered by the Kessef Mishneh. Note, also, the contrast to Hilchot Ishut 5:8. If there are not better ones, his separation is not effective, for his statements were made as an objection.10I.e., we assume that he was speaking facetiously. If the owner came and gathered produce and added it to the quantity separated,11We interpret that as an expression of consent to the other person's actions. whether he possesses better produce or not, his separation is effective.
There are five12Terumah 1:4 also mentions a person who had a seminal emission. He is prohibited, because he is not allowed to recite a blessing until he immerses himself in a mikveh. The Rambam does not mention such a person here, because - as stated in Hilchot K'riat Shema 4:8; Hilchot Tefilah 4:4-6 - Ezra's decree restricting a person who had a seminal emission from prayer and Torah study was never fully accepted and ultimately, nullified by the Rabbis. In the present age, such a person should recite blessings even though he has not yet immersed. who should not separate terumah, but if they do, their separation is effective:a person who is deaf, but not mute, because he cannot hear the blessing,13This category is not mentioned in the mishnah, loc. cit. The Rambam mentions it, based on the principle (see Hilchot Berachot 1:7) that a person who recites a blessing should recite it in a manner that enables him to hear it. a mute who can hear, but not speak and a person who is naked, because they cannot recite the blessing,14A person who cannot speak is physically incapable of reciting the blessing. A person who is naked is forbidden to recite the blessing, because his personal state is not considered as appropriate for the recitation of a blessing (see Shabbat 23b). and a person who is drunk15This is speaking about a person who is slightly intoxicated, but still able to function. If a person is intoxicated to the extent that is not at all in command of his mental faculties, he is considered as one who is intellectually incapable and his separation is of no consequence whatsoever. See Hilchot Mechirah 29:18. and a blind person, because they cannot make distinctions and separate the most attractive portion [as terumah].16And as an initial and preferable measure, the finest portion of the produce should be separated as terumah (see Chapter 5, Halachah 1). When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:32) states that in the present age, when the terumah is ultimately destroyed, we are not precise in separating the finest portion of the crops as terumah. Hence, it is also acceptable if individuals in the latter two categories also separate terumah.
When a minor reaches the age when his vows may be of consequence17I.e., a male minor who is twelve years old and a female minor who is eleven years old, provided they know the significance of vows, or a male of thirteen and a female of twelve who have not manifested signs of physical maturity, . - even though he has not manifested signs of physical maturity and he has not attained majority - separates terumah, his separation is of consequence.18In one of his responsa, however, the Rambam writes that as an initial preference, it is not desirable for a minor to separate terumah until he manifests signs of physical maturity. [This applies] even with regard to terumah mandated by Scriptural Law. [The rationale is that] their vows and their consecration [of property] is valid according to Scriptural Law, as explained in [Hilchot] Nedarim.19Hilchot Nedarim 11:1-5.
When a person tells his agent: "Go and separate terumah for me" and he goes to separate terumah, but [the principal] does not know whether he [actually] separated terumah or not, [even] when he discovers that terumah was separated from the granary, we do not assume that [he] separated terumah. For with regard to prohibitions, we apply the principle:20Eruvin 31b; Gittin 64a,b et al. "An agent can be assumed to have carried out his mission," only when that leads to a stringency, not when it leads to a leniency.21I.e., we are uncertain whether we can rely on the fact that an agent will carry out his mission. Hence, if his doing so would lead to a prohibition, we rule stringently and assume that he carried out his mission (see Hilchot Ishut 9:6). If, however, his doing so would lead to a leniency, we do not make such an assumption.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:34) quotes the Rambam's ruling. The Tur and the Rama, however, rule that in such a situation, we can assume that the agent carried out his mission, for failing to do so would create a spiritual stumbling block for the principal. [Instead,] we suspect that another person separated the terumah without his permission.22In which instance, the separation of terumah would not be effective, as stated in Halachah 2.
When a person tells his agent: "Go and separate terumah," he should separate according to the temperament of the owner. If he knows that he is parsimonious, he should separate one sixtieth. If he was generous, he should separate one fortieth. If he does not know his temperament, he should make the average separation, one fiftieth. If he intended to make the average separation, but it turned out that he separated one fortieth or one sixtieth, his separation is effective.23In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 4:4), the Rambam writes that if the agent gave more or less than the average measure unintentionally, his separation is effective. In contrast to the situation described in Chapter 5, Halachah 5, here the agent is acting with the principal's permission. Hence, even if he deviated from the amount he could be expected to give, his act is of consequence. If he intended to add to the average separation, and he separated even one forty-ninth,24Our translation is based on authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah. The standard published text has a slightly different version. his separation is not effective.25The Radbaz interprets this as meaning that the agent knew the amount the principal would prefer giving and intentionally gave more. Since he intentionally set aside a measure that differs from the principal's wishes, he is considered as acting without permission.
There is an obligation to separate terumah and tithes from produce belonging to partners, for [Numbers 18:28] speaks of "your tithes," [using a plural term,] implying even from two people.Partners do not have to receive permission from each other. Instead, whenever anyone separates terumah, the separation is effective. [The following rules apply when] one of them separated terumah and then the other came and separated terumah, because he did not know that his colleague had separated it. If they relied26Our translation is based on the glosses of the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh. Other definitions have been offered in different sources. on each other, the terumah separated by the second is not of consequence.27Because the mitzvah was completed by the terumah separated by the first. Had the second known that the first had made the separation, he would not have separated terumah. Thus the separation of the second was made in error. If they did not rely on each other, but the first one separated an appropriate amount, the separation of the second one is of no consequence.28Had the second known that the first separated the appropriate amount, he would not have separated the terumah. Hence, here also, we say that the separation of the second was made in error. If the first did not separate the appropriate amount, the separation of the second one is also of consequence.29And it completes the requirement made by our Sages (Kessef Mishneh).When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:35) emphasizes that in the present age, when it is sufficient to separate even the slightest amount as terumah, the first person's separation is always sufficient and the second's separation is never of consequence.
[The following rules apply when a person] tells his agent, his attendant,30Our translation is based on the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 3:4). his servant, or his maid-servant to separate terumah and they went to separate the terumah, but he nullified their agency before they made the separation. If the agent did not deviate [from the principal's instructions], his separation is effective.31Even though the principal nullified the agency. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit), the Rambam explains the rationale for his ruling. The nullification of the agency was brought about through speech and speech does not have the power to effect such a change.The Ra'avad and the Tur question the Rambam's decision, for seemingly, just as the appointment of the agent was made through speech, the nullification of his agency can also be made through speech. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh note that in fact, the Rambam himself accepts this concept in Hilchot Ishut 9:20 with regard to appointing an agent to consecrate a woman as one's wife. Both of these commentaries quote possible rationales to distinguish between the separation of terumah and the consecration of a woman.The Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:36) quotes the Rambam's ruling, while the Rama cites that of the Ra'avad and the Tur. If he did deviate, e.g., the principal told him: "Separate from the northern side," and he separated from the southern side, since he nullified the agency previously, the separation is not effective.32Here too, the Tur questions the Rambam's wording. Seemingly, since the agent deviated from the principal's instructions, the agency is nullified even if the principal did not state that he was nullifying it. The Radbaz explains that a deviation as slight as the side of the produce from which terumah should be separated would not be sufficient to nullify the agency unless the principal had already expressed his willingness to do so.
[The following rules apply when] a sharecropper separates terumah and the owner [of the land] objects. If he objects before he completes the separation of the terumah, the separation is not of consequence.33The Radbaz notes that, in all instances, he is allowed to separate the tithes for his own portion of the crops. If he objected after the separation, the separation is of consequence.34The Siftei Cohen 331:67 states that his separation is effective, because we can assume that he appointed him as an agent.Guardians may separate terumah from the property of orphans.35The Kessef Mishneh refers to the Rambam's ruling, Hilchot Nachalot 11:9:

Guardians should separate terumah and the tithes from the [crops of] orphans so that they can provide them with food. For we may not feed orphans forbidden substances. They may not, however, tithe or separate terumah from produce so that it will be ready for use [by others]. Instead, they should sell it as tevel. Those who desire to make it ready for use will do so.

The separation of terumah by a thief, a robber, and a man of force36One who compelled a person to give him or sell him produce. is effective.37From a comparison to the following clause, we assume that this clause is speaking about a situation where the owners already despaired of receiving their produce again. Since the separation of terumah changed the status of the crops, the thief or robber acquires them because of the owner's desperation and their change of status. Since the thief is now the owner, his separation is effective. If the owner is pursuing them,38With the intent of retaking his produce. the separation is not effective.39Since the owner has not given up hope for the recovery of the produce, it has not left his possession. Thus the thief is not separating terumah from produce that belongs to him.
A child, a worker, a servant, and a wife should separate terumah for [produce] that they are eating, but not for the entire [crop].40Since this produce was given to them to eat, we assume that license was also given for them to separate terumah from it. For a person should not separate terumah from [produce] that does not belong to him.When a son eats together with his father41Since he is eating together with his father - in contrast to the child mentioned in the previous halachah - we assume that his father gives him license to separate the terumah. and a woman [makes] dough,42Since she is given the responsibility of preparing the dough, she is also given the license to separate terumah from it. they may separate terumah, because they have license to do so.
Workers do not have license to separate terumah without the consent of the owner with the exception of those who tread grapes in the vat. [They are given this license because] if they desired to make the wine impure, they could do so immediately. Since the wine was thus given over to their domain and they were entrusted with it, they are considered as agents. If they separate terumah, the separation is effective.43Since we are all impure in the present age, this law no longer applies and it is not cited by the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:42) together with the first part of the halachah.
When a worker is told by the owner: "Bring my granary in and separate terumah," but he separates and then brings the granary in, his separation is effective.44Although he has deviated from the principal's words, we still consider him as an agent. The rationale is that the principal did not make an explicit statement that he was particular that the worker take these steps in this order. Indeed, the common practice is to separate terumah before one brings in the granary. This represents the Rambam's understanding of the Tosefta, Terumot 1:9 (Kessef Mishneh).
When a gentile separates terumah from his own produce, according to Scriptural Law, the separation is not effective, because he is not obligated to do so.45See Chapter 1, Halachah 11. This ruling could be understood as a reversal of the Rambam's position in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 3:9). There he writes that although the gentiles are not obligated to fulfill the mitzvot, if they do, their deeds are effective and they receive a reward. (See Hilchot Melachim 10:10). [Our Rabbis] decreed that his separation should be effective, because of the wealthy,46See Chapter 1, Halachah 13. [i.e., they were fearful] lest the money belong to a Jew and he say that it belongs to a gentile to make it exempt.We cross-examine the gentile who separates terumah. If he says: "I separated it so that it should be like a Jew's," we give it to a priest. If not, it should be entombed, for perhaps his intent was [to dedicate it] to heaven.47And hence it is considered like consecrated property and we are forbidden to benefit from it.When does the above apply? In Eretz Yisrael. Our Sages did not, however, issue a decree if a gentile separates terumah in the Diaspora.48Rabbinic decrees are considered as safeguards and generally, we do not make a safeguard for a safeguard. Hence, since the need to separate terumah in the Diaspora is only a Rabbinic decree, we do not add an additional Rabbinic decree and consider the gentile's separation effective (Radbaz). We tell him that he is not obligated to do this and the produce is not terumah at all.
When a person [makes a separation and] intends to say terumah, but instead says tithes, or intends to say tithes, but instead says terumah, his statement is of no consequence unless his mouth and his heart are in accord.49For the separation of terumah is equivalent to a vow and when making a vow, one's intent and one's statements must be in accord (Siftei Cohen 331:75).If one separates terumah in his mind without uttering anything verbally, the separation is effective, as [implied by Numbers 18:27]: "And your terumah will be considered50Venechshav translated as "considered" shares the root chashav meaning "thought," thus leading to the interpretation (Beitzah 13b) that terumah can be separated through thought alone. See also the notes to Chapter 3, Halachah 4. for you as the terumah of the granary." Through thought alone, it becomes terumah.
[The following rules apply when a person] separates terumah with a stipulation. If the stipulation is fulfilled, the separation is effective. If not, it is not effective.51This principle is derived from the law stated in the following halachah (Kessef Mishneh).When a person separates terumah and/or the tithes and then regrets [his act], he may approach a sage and ask for its repeal as other vows are repealed.52See Hilchot Nedarim 4:5. The produce then reverts to being ordinary produce as it was before53Based on Nedarim 59a, the Kessef Mishneh explains that this halachah applies only when the terumah has not yet been given to a priest or the tithes to a Levite. If these portions have already been given, there is no way the separations can be retracted. until he makes a separation a second time, [setting aside] either the same produce he separated initially or other produce.
[The following rules apply when a person] separates terumah from a cistern of wine, saying: 54I.e., he lets down a utensil into the cistern, allows it to fill, and makes the stipulation cited. Making the stipulation is desirable so that if the terumah falls back into the cistern - because the container breaks or because the wine spills from it - it does not cause the remaining wine to become meduma (mixed with terumah). As indicated by the following halachah, it is preferable to do this - instead of separating the terumah after the container has been lifted from the cistern, so that the terumah and the produce from which it is being separated will be in the same location (see Chapter 3, Halachah 17). "Behold [the contents of] this [container] are terumah on the condition that it ascends intact [from the cistern]," [for the condition to have been met, the container] must ascend intact from being broken or spilt. [The stipulation does not cover the wine] becoming impure.55Since this is not a frequent occurrence, we do not assume the person had it in mind when he made the stipulation. If [the container] is broken [and the wine] spills back into the cistern, it does not cause the mixture to become meduma.56The term meduma refers to a mixture of terumah and ordinary produce, as explained in Chapter 13, Halachah 2. In this instance, although the wine in the container flows back into the cistern after it was designated as terumah, since that designation was made conditionally and the condition was not fulfilled, the wine separated is not considered as terumah. Hence the mixture is not meduma. If [he lifted the container from the cistern and] put it in a place where if it breaks or rolls, it will not reach the cistern, [should the wine later spill into the cistern], it causes the mixture to become meduma, because the stipulation was fulfilled.
When does the above apply? With regard to the great terumah.57For, as mentioned above, the terumah and the produce from which it is being separated should be in the same location. With regard to terumat ma'aser, by contrast, [different rules apply] because it is permitted to make this separation from produce that is not in the same place.58See Chapter 3, Halachah 20. [Hence as soon as the container] ascends [from the cistern], his stipulation is considered to have been fulfilled and [the wine separated] is terumat ma'aser, even though [afterwards, the container] breaks or [the wine] spills.59The rationale for the Rambam's ruling can be explained as follows: Terumat ma'aser can be separated when the produce is not in the same place as the produce for which it is being separated. Hence, were the person making the separation to be concerned that the produce separated as terumat ma'aser might fall into the cistern, he should have made the separation outside the cistern. The fact that he did not do so, nor make a specific statement acknowledging this possibility in his stipulation shows that this was not the intent motivating his stipulation. Hence, as soon as the container ascends from the cistern, his condition is met, even if the wine spills back in afterwards. Needless to say, this applies if [the terumat ma'aser] becomes impure.
When a person says: "The produce in the upper portion [of this container] is terumah and that in its lower portion is ordinary produce" or "The produce in the upper portion [of this container] is ordinary produce and that in its lower portion is terumah," his statements are effective.60I.e., even though physically, the produce was not separated, since a separation was made in the mind of the owner, it is sufficient and it is permitted to eat from the portion of the produce that is designated as "ordinary." For the matter is dependent on the thought of the person making the separation.
When a person separates terumah from [grain in] a granary, he must have the intent in his heart that [the produce separated] will be terumah for this grain heap, the stalks of wheat that were cut [and not threshed], [the grain] on the side of the grain heap, and [the kernels] in the straw.61In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aserot 5:4), the Rambam writes that the intent is that he should separate terumah for the entire crop, that which he sees and that which he does not see. When a person separates terumah from a vat [of wine], he must have the intent in his heart that he is separating terumah for [the wine absorbed] in the kernels and the peels.When a person separates terumah from a cistern of wine,62When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:50) speaks of a vat of oil. There are some who maintain that the wording in the Mishneh Torah should also read in that manner. Nevertheless, the authoritative manuscripts and early printings of the Mishneh Torah read as above. he must have the intent in his heart that he is separating terumah for [the wine absorbed] in the peat.63I.e., the dregs. In truth, the term gefet is used more frequently in connection with oil than with wine. [in all the above instances,] if he separates terumah without having a specific intent, all of the produce is included. For it is a condition of the court that [when one separates terumah, it] includes everything.64Hence, since we assume that every Jew desires to perform the mitzvot in keeping with our Sages' desires, it is as if the person separating the terumah had this intent in mind. Preferably, however, a person should consciously have such thoughts when separating terumah. When a person separates terumah from a basket of figs and other figs are found at the side of the basket, terumah need not be separated from them, because in his heart, a person has the intent to separate terumah for all the produce.

=== 5 | chapter 5 ===
We should separate terumah only from the most choice [produce], as [implied by Numbers 18:30]: "When you separate its most choice portion from it."1Chelbo, translated as "most choice portion," literally means "fat."When quoting this law, the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 331:52) states that in the present age, when terumah will be destroyed regardless, there is no need to separate the most choice portions as terumah.See also the Ramban's Hosafot to Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Mitzvah 7) which considers the adjuration against separating lower quality produce as terumah as one of the Torah's 613 prohibitions. If, however, there is no priest accessible,2And thus the terumah will not be able to be given to the priest immediately. one should separate terumah from produce that will last3I.e., since there is no priest immediately available, it is preferable to separate produce that will not spoil, so that ultimately, it can be given to a priest. even though there is more choice produce but it will not last.What is implied? A person should separate fresh figs as terumah for dried figs.4For fresh figs are tastier and considered as a higher grade produce. In a place where there are no priests, he should separate dried figs for fresh figs.5I.e., since there is no priest immediately available, it is preferable to separate produce that will not spoil, so that ultimately, it can be given to a priest. If he is accustomed to dry fresh figs, he may separate fresh figs as terumah for dried figs even in a place where there is no priest.6For he will dry the figs himself and prevent them from spoiling before they are given to the priest. In a place where there is a priest, by contrast, dried figs are never separated as terumah for fresh figs, even in a place where it is customary to dry fresh figs.
One may separate an entire onion as terumah even if it is small,7A whole onion is considered more important and choicer than a portion of an onion [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 2:5)]. but not half an onion, even if it is large in all places.8I.e., in places where a priest is present or those where he is not present, for a whole onion will keep longer than a cut one (ibid.). We do not separate one type of produce as terumah for another type of produce, as [implied by Numbers 18:30]: "As grain from the granary and as wine from the vat."9Implied is that the terumah and the produce for which it is being separated must be of the same species. If one made such a separation, it is not considered terumah.
Zucchini and cucumbers are considered as one species.10They are also considered as one species with regard to the prohibition against kilayim (Hilchot Kilayim 3:3). All of the types of wheat are one species. All of the types of figs,11I.e., light figs and dark figs. dried figs, and blocks of figs are one species. [In the above instances,] one may separate terumah from one type for the other. [By contrast,] all types of produce which are considered as a mixture of species may not be separated as terumah for each other, even when one separates the choicest produce as terumah for produce of lesser quality.What is implied? A person has 50 se'ah of wheat and 50 se'ah of barley in one building. If he separates two se'ah of wheat [as terumah] for the entire amount, his separation is not effective.12Because wheat and barley are different species. Moreover, it is considered as if terumah has not been separated even from the wheat alone. The rationale is that separating terumah is considered equivalent to taking a vow and if a portion of a vow has been nullified, the entire vow is nullified. When types of produce are not considered as a mixture of species, one may separate the better type as terumah for the lesser type, but not the lesser type as terumah for the better type. If one did separate [the lesser type of produce as terumah for the better type, after the fact,] the separation is effective with one exception. Zunin13A coarse species of wild wheat.may not be separated as terumah for wheat, because it is not used as food for humans.
We do not separate terumah from produce for which all the work [in preparing it] was completed14At which point the obligation to separate terumah and the tithes falls upon it (see Chapter 1, Halachah 11, and notes). for produce for which the work [in preparing it] is incomplete, from produce for which the work [in preparing it] is incomplete for [other] produce for which the work [in preparing it] is incomplete, nor from produce for which the work [in preparing it] is incomplete for produce for which all the work [in preparing it] was completed.15The commentaries note that the order of the clauses employed by the Rambam deviates slightly from the order of his source, Terumot 1:10. [This is also derived from the above prooftext:] "As grain from the granary and as wine from the vat."16The Rambam and previous Rabbinic sources cite several prooftexts for this law. Nevertheless, the Siftei Cohen 331:80 maintains that the law is a Rabbinic decree and the prooftexts are merely asmachteot, allusions cited for support. For that reason, after the fact, the separation is effective. [Implied is that terumah should be separated from produce] for which [all work] was completed for similar produce. If, however, one separated terumah [in any of the above instances], the separation is effective [after the fact].17See Halachot 18-20 for more particulars concerning this issue.
When should terumah be separated from a granary? When the kernels are separated.18When the grain has been threshed and winnowed and then the kernels separated from the chaff. Different commentaries suggest a slight change in the Rambam's wording which would cause the produce to be considered as complete at an earlier stage. If a person separated part [of the grain], he may designate the kernels he separated as terumah for the produce that was not separated. When one brings stalks of grain into his home to eat husked grain, he should separate terumah while the grain is in the stalks.19Because they will not be processed any further.
When should terumah be separated from a vat? When [the treaders] have walked horizontally and vertically over the grapes.20For then, the wine has been separated from the grapes.When should one separate terumah from olives? When [the beam of the press] is placed upon them.21For then, the oil has been separated from the olives.
We should not separate terumah from ritually pure produce for produce that is not ritually pure.22The Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot 2:1) derives this concept from the prooftext cited above: "As grain from the granary and as wine from the vat." It is impossible that a vat will be partially pure and partially impure, so, too, terumah and the produce for which it is being separated must be either pure or impure." If, however, one separated terumah [in this manner], the separation is effective [after the fact].It is a halachah conveyed to Moses at Sinai that when a portion of a cake of dried figs has become impure, we may separate terumah from the pure portion of it for the impure portion of it as an initial preference.23In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 2:1), the Rambam explains the rationale for this law. Since the cake of figs is made from several discrete elements, it is not considered as a single entity with regard to the laws of ritual impurity. Hence, the fact that one portion has been touched by a source of ritual impurity does not cause another portion to become impure. Nevertheless, since it is one body of produce, terumah can be separated from one portion for the other. This applies not only to a cake of dried figs which appears as one mass, but also to a bundle of vegetables and even a mound of wheat.24In these instances as well, since the whole is made up of discrete entities, the fact that they are connected or somewhat associated is not of consequence (ibid.; see also Hilchot Tuma'at Ochalin 6:14). If a portion of it became impure, one may separate terumah from the pure portion for the impure portion.If, however, there were two cakes of dried figs, two bundles of vegetables, or two mounds of wheat, one impure and one pure at its side, as an initial preference, one should not separate terumah from the produce that is pure for the produce that is impure.25For the two are not considered as being "in the same place" (min hamukaf). After the fact, however, the separation is acceptable. One may, however, separate terumat ma'aser from produce that is pure for produce that is impure as an initial preference. [This is derived from Numbers 18:29:] "its sacred portion from it." [Implied is that] one should take from the sacred portion in it.26The verse indicates that when one is separating terumat ma'aser, it is possible that there be a "sacred." i.e., pure, portion, and a portion that is not "sacred," i.e., impure, and the pure should be separated for the impure. As stated at the conclusion of ch. 3, the produce separated as terumat ma'aser need not be located together with the produce for which it is being separated.
We may not separate produce that is ritually impure as terumah for produce that is ritually pure.27The Radbaz states that this is a Rabbinic decree instituted so that the priest will not suffer a loss. If one made such a separation inadvertently, the portion separated is terumah.28For according to Scriptural Law, the separation is effective. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 2:2), the Rambam explains that this is speaking about a situation where initially, at the time the obligation to separate terumah took effect, the produce separated as terumah was pure. If, however, it became impure before the work associated with its preparation was completed, even if it was inadvertently separated as terumah, the separation is not effective. If one made the separation intentionally, he did not fulfill the obligation for the remainder [of the produce], but [the produce] separated is terumah. He must separate terumah a second time.When does the above apply? When he did not know of the impurity. If, however, he knew of the impurity, but erred in that he thought it was permitted to separate produce that is ritually impure as terumah for produce that is ritually pure, he is considered as if he acted intentionally.29And he must make another separation. Similar laws apply with regard to terumat ma'aser.
We may not separate produce that is still attached to the earth as terumah for produce that has already been detached.30The Sifri derives this from the exegesis of Numbers 18:26: "And you shall separate from it...." Since the produce is still attached to the earth, it is not considered as the same type as the produce which is detached. Nor may produce that has already been detached be separated as terumah for produce that is still attached to the earth.What is implied? A person had produce that was detached and said: "This produce will be terumah for this produce which is attached to the earth" - and even if he said "...when [the attached produce] is detached,"31To reconcile the apparent contradiction between the Rambam's ruling here and that in the following clause, the commentaries explain that here we are speaking of attached produce that does not belong to the person who wishes to separate terumah. Ordinarily, if a person separated terumah from produce belonging to him for produce that does not belong to him, his separation is valid, as stated in Chapter 4, Halachah 2. In this instance, however, since the attached produce does not belong to him and he has no control of when it will be detached, he does not have the potential to designate his own produce as terumah for it. his words are of no consequence. [This ruling also applies] if he possessed two rows [of produce] and said: "The produce of this row which is detached will be terumah for this row which is attached," or "The produce of this row which is attached will be terumah for this row which is detached."[Diferent rules apply should] he say: "The produce of this row which is detached will be terumah for this row when it will be detached," if [the produce] is [later] detached - since it is within his potential to detach it32This is his own produce which he is allowed to detach. - when they are both detached, his words are binding, provided both [types of produce] had attained at least a third of their standard size33For until produce reaches this size, there is no obligation to separate terumah, as stated in Chapter 2, Halachah 10. Therefore, even if one separated terumah for it, the separation is not effective. at the time he made his statements.
We may not separate fresh produce as terumah for dried produce, nor dried produce as terumah for fresh produce. If, however, one made such a separation, it is effective.34The Siftei Cohen 331:83 states that this is a Rabbinic decree, enacted as a safeguard so that one will not separate produce from one type over another. Hence, after the fact, the separation is effective.What is implied? One reaped a type of vegetable one day and then reaped the same [type of vegetable] the following day. One may not separate one as terumah for the other unless this vegetable remains fresh for two days. Similarly, if a vegetable usually remains fresh for three days, e.g., cucumbers, all [of that type of vegetable] that are harvested for three days may be joined together and terumah may be separated from one for the other. When a type of vegetable remains fresh for only one day and one harvested some in the morning and some in the evening, one may separate one as terumah for the other.
One may not separate produce from the present year as terumah for produce of the previous year,35To clarify the point under discussion in this halachah: As indicated by the concluding phrase of the halachah, "produce from the previous year" does not necessarily mean produce that is a year old. Instead, every Rosh HaShanah, the year of the agricultural cycle changes with regard to vegetables (Rosh HaShanah 14b). As the Rambam proceeds to explain, a Scriptural decree causes such produce to be considered as a discrete entity, distinct from the same type of produce harvested in the present year. nor may one separate produce from the previous year as terumah for produce of the present year. If one made such a separation, it is not effective,36Even after the fact. as [indicated by Deuteronomy 14:22]: "From year to year."37In its entirety, the verse reads: "Tithe all the crops of your sowing produced by the field, year by year." Implied is an exclusion: that the produce of each year is a separate entity. Although the verse refers to the tithes, the same principles also apply to terumah.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 1:5), the Rambam cites a different prooftext for the derivation of this principle.Thus if one harvested a vegetable on the day preceding Rosh HaShanah before sunset and harvested another after sunset, one may not separate terumah from one for the other. For one is considered "old" and the other, "new."Similarly, if one harvested an esrog38In that era, esrogim were eaten as fruit, not only used for the mitzvah on Sukkot. on the day before the fifteenth of Shvat on the evening before sunset and harvested another one after sunset [that day], one may not separate terumah from one for the other.39An esrog is singled out, because unlike other fruit, the time when it is picked - and not the time it reaches the stage of development when we are required to separate the tithes - determines the year of the agricultural cycle we follow. See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 1:1-4. [The rationale is that] the first of Tishrei is the Rosh HaShanah for tithing grain, legumes, and vegetables and the fifteenth of Shvat is Rosh HaShanah for tithing [of the produce] of trees.
We may not separate produce from Eretz [Yisrael] as terumah for produce of the Diaspora, nor may produce of the Diaspora be separated for produce from Eretz Yisrael,40In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 1:5), the Rambam explains that this concept is derived from Leviticus 27:30: "All the tithes of the land from the plantings of the land." Implied is that both the tithes and the produce must be from "the land," from Eretz Yisrael. Although the verse speaks of the tithes, the principle derived is also applied to terumah. nor may produce of Eretz Yisrael be separated for produce from Syria, and nor may produce of Syria be separated for produce from Eretz Yisrael.41For according to Scriptural Law, Syria is also part of the Diaspora.Similarly, [we may not separate terumah] from produce for which terumah need not be separated, e.g., leket, shichachah, and pe'ah42See Chapter 2, Halachah 9. or from produce from which terumah was already separated for produce for which terumah must be separated. Nor may we separate terumah from produce for which terumah must be separated for produce for which there is no obligation.43In this instance, the fundamental point the Rambam is emphasizing is the following clause: that even if the terumah was separated, the separation is not of consequence. [Even] if the terumah was separated, the separation is not of consequence.
When a person separates terumah [for other produce] from produce that was designated as the first tithe, but from which its terumah44I.e., terumah ma'aser, the terumah that must be separated from the tithes. had not been separated45In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 1:5, Rav Kapach's edition), the Rambam explains that this is referring to a situation in which a Levite took produce that he had been given as tithes by an Israelite, but from which he had not separated terumat ma'aser and desired to use it to separate terumah for produce from his own field from which he is obligated to separate terumah. This is unacceptable, because there is no longer any obligation to separate terumah from the produce given as tithes, even though there is an obligation to separate terumat ma'aser from it.This explanation is somewhat unique. Most commentaries interpret the mishnah as referring to a situation where the person tithed his crop, but did not separate terumah from it. Nor did he separate terumat ma'aser. Afterwards, he desired to separate terumah for other produce from the tithes. The Rambam's interpretation avoids several difficulties that arise according to the other approach. or from produce which was designated as the second tithe46Produce separated as the second tithe must be eaten in Jerusalem in a state of ritual purity. It is not considered as the person's private property. or that had been consecrated,47Since it is consecrated, there is no obligation to separate terumah or the tithes from it. but which had not been redeemed, the separation is not effective.48In all these instances, the produce that is being separated is holy and is not the owner's individual property. (For even the tithes which the Levites own have a dimension of holiness to them, because of the terumat ma'aser that has not been separated.) The Ra'avad raises objections to the Rambam's ruling. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh respond to them. If, however, they would have followed the Rambam's explanation in his Commentary to the Mishnah as explained above, the difficulties would not arise.
We may not separate terumah from produce for which we are required to separate terumah according to Scriptural Law for produce for which we are required to separate terumah [only] according to Rabbinic Law,49According to Scriptural Law, there is no obligation to separate terumah from this produce. Hence, it is as if one is separating terumah from produce obligated in terumah for produce for which there is no obligation. The Kessef Mishneh explains that this general principle is derived from the law quoted in the following halachah. nor from produce for which we are required to separate terumah [only] according to Rabbinic Law for produce for which we are required to separate terumah according to Scriptural Law.50For this is as if one is separating terumah from produce for which there is no obligation to separate terumah, for produce for which such an obligation exists. If one separated terumah [in the above instance], the produce separated is considered as terumah,51This is a Rabbinic stringency. According to Scriptural Law, the separation is of no consequence at all. but he must separate terumah again [for the obligation incumbent on this produce to be fulfilled].52According to the Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, this applies only to the second clause. The laws regarding the situation described in the first clause are explained in Halachah 16.In the situation described in the second clause, the priest is allowed to partake of the produce, for although according to Scriptural Law, the separation is insignificant, there is no difficulty in having the priest partake of the produce for there is no obligation incumbent upon it.
A flowerpot with a hole is considered as [connected] to the earth.53Because the nurture from the power of growth in the earth is drawn to the earth in the flowerpot through the hole. This concept is relevant not only in this particular context, but in many others. How large must the hole be [for this law to apply]? Large enough for a small root to pass through it.54For then it can be considered to have derived nurture from the earth through its root. Hence, we are obligated to separate terumah from produce which grows within such a flowerpot according to Scriptural Law [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:10)]. This is smaller than an olive.[The following rules apply when a person] planted grain in a flowerpot that did not have a hole and it reached a third of its maturity.55If produce grows in a flowerpot without a hole, there is no obligation to separate terumah from it according to Scriptural Law (ibid.). Here a question arises, because the flowerpot was perforated afterwards. The Rambam clarifies that as long as the produce reaches a third of its growth, the point at which we are obligated to separate terumah, under conditions in which we are not obligated to separate terumah, an obligation is not incurred even though afterwards, those conditions change. See Halachah 9; see also Chapter 1, Halachot 11-13. Afterwards, he perforated [the flowerpot]56And thus enabled the produce to derive nurture from the earth. and the grain completed [its growth] while [the flowerpot] was perforated. It is, [nevertheless,] considered as if it grew in [a flowerpot] without a hole. [This ruling changes] only when [the flowerpot] was perforated before [the grain] reached a third of its maturity.
When a person separates terumah from produce which grows in the earth for produce that grows in a perforated flowerpot or from produce which grows in a perforated flowerpot for produce which grows in the earth, the separation is effective.57For in both instances, we are obligated to separate terumah from both sets of produce according to Scriptural Law.If he separates terumah from [produce growing] in a [flowerpot] that was not perforated for [produce growing] in a perforated [flowerpot], the produce separated is considered as terumah,58This is a Rabbinic decree, as stated in Halachah 14 and notes. but he must separate terumah again.59In order to fulfill the obligation of terumah as stated in Halachah 14.If he separates terumah from [produce growing] in a perforated [flowerpot] for [produce growing] in a [flowerpot] that was not perforated, the produce separated is considered as terumah. [Nevertheless, the priest to whom it was given] should not partake of it until [the owner] separates terumah and tithes for [the portion separated] from other produce.60The setting aside of the produce as terumah is not effective according to Scriptural Law. Hence, according to Scriptural Law, not only is this produce not terumah, it remains tevel, produce from which terumah and the tithes were not separated. Although our Sages ruled stringently and determined that it must be considered as terumah, they did not change its status as tevel. Hence, for the priest to partake of it, it is necessary that he separate terumah and tithes for it from other produce [see the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 5:10)].The terumah and the tithes for this produce must be separated from other produce, lest one think that what remains is ordinary produce and can be eaten be a person other than a priest (Tosafot, Yevamot 89b).
When a person separates terumat [ma'aser] from produce that is demai61The term demai refers to produce concerning which we are uncertain whether the tithes were separated from it or not. According to Rabbinic Law, we are required to separate terumat ma'aser, terumah which the Levites are required to separate from the tithes from such produce (see Hilchot Ma'aserot, Chapter 9). for other produce that is demai or from produce that is demai for produce from which we are certain that the tithes were not separated, the produce separated is considered as terumat [ma'aser].62By Rabbinic decree. According to Scriptural Law, the produce separated is not terumat ma'aser, because it is possible that previously tithes and terumat ma'aser had been separated from the produce that was demai. Were that to be the case, one would be separating terumat ma'aser from produce for which one is obligated to make a separation from produce for which no such obligation exists. See the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.). [Nevertheless,] he should separate terumah again for each type of produce individually.63Since it is possible that the separation of the terumat ma'aser is not effective, the owner must make a second separation.In this instance, the priest is allowed to partake of the produce given him. The rationale is that in the second instance, when one separates terumat ma'aser from produce that is demai for produce from which we are certain that the tithes were not separated, the priest is certainly allowed to partake of the produce given him. If terumat ma'aser had not been separated from such produce previously, it is being made at present. And if it had been made previously, according to Scriptural Law, the produce to be given the priest is ordinary produce that may be consumed.If the separation was made from produce that is demai for other produce that is demai, there is a difficulty, for it is possible that a separation had previously been made for the produce for which the terumat ma'aser is being separated, but not from the produce from which the separation is being made at present. Since such a separation is invalid according to Scriptural Law, in such an instance, the priest is being given produce from which tithes and terumat ma'aser have not been separated. Nevertheless, since the majority of the people do in fact separate tithes and the prohibition of demai is just a stringency, in this instance, our Sages were lenient (Rabbi Akiva Eiger).When he separates terumah from produce from which we are certain that the tithes were not separated for produce that is demai, the produce separated is considered as terumat [ma'aser].64This is a Rabbinic stringency as mentioned above. [Nevertheless, the priest to whom it was given] should not partake of it until [the owner] separates terumah and tithes for [the portion separated].65For as in the previous halachah, if the original separation of terumat ma'aser is not effective - as would be the case if a separation had been made from the produce classified as demai - there is an obligation to separate terumat ma'aser from the produce being separated as terumat ma'aser. Hence, until that separation is made, the priest is forbidden to partake of the produce given him.There is, however, a difference between this halachah and the previous one. In the previous instance, the separation had to be made from other produce, while in this instance, the separation can be made from the produce given to the priest. In the previous instance, care had to be taken because of the impression that might be created, i.e., an onlooker might not realize that there is a Rabbinic obligation to separate terumot and tithes from produce growing in a flowerpot that is not perforated. No such difficulty exists in this instance, because the obligations incumbent on demai are well known. See the gloss of Ra'avad to Hilchot Ma'aser 13:19.
We may not separate stalks of grain as terumah for kernels of grain, olives [as terumah] for oil, or grapes [as terumah] for wine.66This applies even if one separates a measure of produce sufficient to produce the said quantity of wheat, wine, or oil. If one made such a separation, it is not effective.67The Radbaz states that, after the fact, if a priest agrees to accept such produce, the separation is acceptable, for there are times when one will consider that preferable. This is a decree [enacted] lest one cause the priest to undertake the difficulty of treading [on the grapes] or pressing [the olives].One may, however, separate oil as terumah for olives that are being pickled68But have not been squeezed yet. or wine as terumah for grapes that are being dried as raisins. What does this resemble? To separating terumah from two species that are not considered kilayim, separating from the good for the bad.69This is permissible as stated in Halachah 3.Similarly, one may separate terumah from olives from which oil will be squeezed70In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 2:6), the Rambam explains that the Hebrew terms refers to olives that contain much oil and their oil is of high quality. for olives that will be pickled,71I.e., these olives have little oil. Hence, they are set aside to be used for pickling. Thus making such a separation would be considered as separating terumah from higher quality produce for lower quality produce which is permitted as stated above. but not from olives that will be pickled for olives from which oil will be squeezed.72For this is considered as separating terumah from lower quality produce for higher quality produce which is forbidden as an initial preference, as stated in Halachah 3. [One may separate terumah] from wine that has not been boiled for wine that has been boiled,73Boiling detracts from wine's flavor. Hence, one is separating terumah from higher quality produce for lower quality produce. but not from [wine] that has been boiled for [wine] that has not been boiled. [One may separate terumah] from [wine that is] clear74I.e., does not have dregs suspended in it. for [wine that is] not clear, but not from [wine that is] not clear for wine [that is] clear.[One may separate terumah] from a specific number of fresh figs for a specific number of dried figs75When a priest is present and he is being given the figs, fresh figs are obviously considered as more desirable than dried figs. and from a measure of dried figs for a measure of fresh figs,76For the measure of dried figs will be more compact than that of fresh figs. Thus the priest will be receiving a greater quantity of fruit. but not from a measure of fresh figs for a measure of dried figs, nor for a specific number of dried figs for a specific number of fresh figs. [The rationale for all the above is that] one should always separate terumah in a generous manner.77E.g., giving and produce of a higher quality or giving more ample portions.One may separate terumah from kernels of wheat for bread,78Kernels of wheat are considered as having an advantage over grain, because a) one can use them for whatever purposes one desires, and b) they store longer than grain. but not from bread for kernels of wheat according to the appropriate calculations.79i.e., how many kernels of wheat it would take to produce this quantity of bread. In all the above situations, if one separated terumah [when it was stated that one should not], the separation is effective.80As stated in Halachah 3. The Shulchan Aruch (loc. cit.:63) states that in the present era when the produce separated as terumah is discarded, there is no need to show these precautions.
We do not separate terumah from oil for olives that are being pressed, nor [do we separate terumah] from wine for grapes that are being tread, for this resembles separating terumah from produce for which all work has been completed for produce for which the work has not been completed.81See Halachah 4 above. In the situation described in that halachah, the person is not required to make a second separation, because our Sages felt that people understood that terumah should not be separated in such an instance and did not see the need for an additional safeguard. In this situation, since work with that produce has already begun, they felt that a safeguard was necessary (Rambam LeAm). Other commentaries offer different rationales for the difference in the rulings. If he did separate terumah [in such a situation], the produce separated is considered as terumah, but he must separate terumah from the olives and the grapes from them themselves.82I.e., after he completed pressing the olives or treading the grapes, he should separate terumah a second time for that oil or wine [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 1:8)].[When mixed with other produce,] the first creates a situation of dimua83A mixture of terumah and ordinary produce, as mentioned in Chapter 13, Halachah 2. alone.84I.e., even if it is not mixed with the produce separated a second time in contrast to the situation described in Halachah 22. The rationale is that, in this instance, after the fact, the first separation is effective, as stated in Halachah 4 above. One who eats it is liable for it, as one is liable [for partaking] of other terumah that is clearly defined as such.85See Chapter 6, Halachah 6. This does not apply with regard to the second terumah [separated].86For it is terumah only as a result of Rabbinic decree.
When a person separated oil as terumah for olives that he intended to eat or he separated olives for olives when he intended to eat the entire quantity and then changed his mind and decided to press the olives [for oil] and indeed pressed them after separating terumah for them, he is not required to separate terumah again.87For at the time the terumah was separated, the work associated with this produce was completed according to his intent at that time [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 1:9)]. Although he changed his mind, we do not penalize him for making such a decision (Radbaz). [This law also applies if] one separated wine for grapes that he intended to eat or grapes for grapes when he intended to eat the entire quantity and then changed his mind and decided to tread the grapes for wine and indeed had them tread upon after separating terumah for them.
We do not separate vinegar as terumah for wine,88For this is equivalent to separating produce of inferior quality for produce of superior quality which should not be done at the outset, as stated in Halachah 3. Nevertheless, if one made such a separation, after the fact, the separation s effective. but we may separate wine as terumah for vinegar, for wine and vinegar are one type of produce.89For when wine sours, it becomes vinegar. If one had the intent of separating wine for wine and it was discovered that what he separated was vinegar, the separation is not effective.90For his separation was made in error and the error lowers the quality of the terumah (Kessef Mishneh). If one had the intent of separating vinegar for vinegar and it was discovered that what he separated was wine, the separation is effective.91For in this instance, his error improves the quality of the terumah (Kessef Mishneh; Siftei Cohen 331:95).
[The following rules apply when a person] separates a barrel of wine as terumah for wine and it is discovered to be vinegar. If it was known to be vinegar before it was separated, the separation is not effective.92As in the previous halachah, this is speaking about an instance where the person had the intent of separating wine as terumah. If, however, he intended to separate vinegar, the separation is effective after the fact (Radbaz). If it became vinegar after it was designated as terumah, the separation is effective.93For at the time of the separation, wine was separated as the person intended. The fact that it soured afterwards is not his responsibility. If there is a doubt, the separation is effective,94Because of the doubt involved. Perhaps it had not become sour at the time it was separated and the first separation was effective. but he should make a second separation.95For perhaps it was sour before the first separation was made and thus the separation was not effective. The same laws apply when one separates squash as terumah and it is discovered to be bitter or one separates a watermelon as terumah and it has become spoiled96I.e., its contents are not fit for consumption [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 3:1)]. or perforated.97In which instance, we fear that the holes were made by a poisonous snake which deposited its venom in the watermelon. If he separated a barrel of wine as terumah and it was discovered to have been left open in which instance, it is forbidden to drink it,98Because of the danger involved. We fear that perhaps a poisonous snake or the like deposited venom in it (Hilchot Rotzeach UShemirat Nefesh 12:2). it is terumah, but he should make a second separation.99This appears to be speaking about a situation in which he is unsure when the snake drank from the wine before the terumah was separated or not.[In all these situations, when mixed with other produce,] neither of the two [portions separated as terumah] creates a situation of dimua alone.100I.e., since we are unsure which of the separations is effective, neither alone is considered as terumah. Nor is a person who eats only one of the two obligated to pay a fifth.101As is required when one partakes of terumah inadvertently, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 6.
What is implied? If one [of the two portions separated as terumah] fell into ordinary produce, it does not cause it to be considered as dimua. If the other [portion] fell into other produce, it does not cause it to be considered as dimua.102Although one of the two is obviously dimua, since we do not know which one, we rule leniently with regard to both. If, however, both fell into the same produce, it is considered as dimua according to the size of the smaller of the two.103In this instance, the terumah has obviously become mixed with the ordinary produce. Nevertheless, since we do not know which of the two is terumah, we require him to be concerned only with the smaller amount.Similarly, if a person other than a priest ate both of them, he should make restitution for the smaller one and its additional fifth.104As is required when one partakes of terumah inadvertently, as stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 6. What should he do with the two [portions separated]?105Although both must be considered as terumah, because he does not have a definite obligation to give either to a priest. He should give them to one priest and take the value of the greater portion from him.106For he is obligated to give at least the value of the smaller portion to the priest; for the remainder the priest must pay. Nevertheless, the price he pays for produce designated as terumah is less than that than he would pay for ordinary produce.
[The following rules apply when a person] checks a barrel [of wine]107To make sure that it had not become vinegar. and then leaves it to separate terumah [from it] on other [wine] until it becomes terumah in its entirety, [at which point,] he would give it to the priest.108I.e., the person took a barrel of wine and set it aside with the intent that he would consider an appropriate measure of wine from it as terumah for all the wine that he would continue to produce until the barrel became terumah in its entirety. After a certain time, he checked the barrel again and discovered that it had become vinegar.109Thus there is a question regarding the status of the produce that he separated previously. For if the barrel had become vinegar earlier, the separation of terumah would not be effective, as stated above. [We rule that the wine] certainly remained wine for three days after the inspection. [The obligations for terumah] have certainly been met for all of the wine for which he considered the wine in the barrel as its terumah during those [three days]. From that time afterwards, there is a doubt [whether the wine had already turned to vinegar] and a second separation [of terumah] must be made.110As explained above.
At three times [during the year], it is necessary to check the wine that one set aside to separate terumah from111I.e., the person took a barrel of wine and set it aside with the intent that he would consider an appropriate measure of wine from it as terumah for all the wine that he would continue to produce until the barrel became terumah in its entirety. lest it have become vinegar. They are: When the east wind blows after the Sukkos holiday, when grapes form,112When the flowers of the grape vine fall and the actual fruit begins to form. when fluid begins to enter the unripened grapes.113When the juice of the grape begins to collect within the fruit.Since these are times of change for grapes, there is also a possibility that wine will also be affected. [When one has wine] from the vat,114I.e., freshly squeezed grape juice. he may use it for the separation [of terumah] for 40 days with the presumption that it is still wine.115For it is unlikely to turn into vinegar before then.
[The following rules apply when a person] sets aside produce to separate terumah from until [the entire amount] becomes terumah.116I.e., he sets aside produce to serve the same purpose as the wine mentioned in Halachah 24. Although as an initial preference, one should separate terumah only from the same collection of produce,117See Chapter 3, Halachah 17. As explained there, after the fact, such a separation is acceptable. if one separates terumah [in such a manner], we operate under the presumption that the produce continues to exist. If he discovers that they perished, he should entertain doubts that all [the produce for which he thought he separated terumah is in fact tevel].118I.e., he should entertain the possibility that perhaps from the outset, the separation of the terumah was not acceptable. For perhaps, he did not make any separation until [the produce set aside] perished. Therefore he should separate terumah a second time for them.119As explained in Halachah 22.

=== 6 | chapter 6 ===
The great terumah and terumat ma'aser may be eaten by priests, both adults and minors, both males and females and their Canaanite servants,1Because Canaanite servants do not have a separate personal identity, but instead are considered as part of their master's possessions. A Hebrew servant, by contrast, is forbidden to partake of terumah as explained in Halachah 5. and their livestock,2The Sifra states that this applies only to animal fodder. Produce that is fit for human consumption may not be given to an animal. as [Leviticus 22:11] states: "When a priest will purchase a man, he is a financial acquisition...."When the servant of a priest flees3In which instance, his master is no longer obligated to provide him with his sustenance. or the wife of a priest rebels against him,4The term "rebels" has a very specific meaning when used in this context: to deny a husband marital intimacy. In such an instance, her husband has the right to divorce her and is not obligated to pay for her sustenance, as stated in Hilchot Ishut, ch. 14. Nevertheless, until he divorces her, she is entitled to partake of terumah. they may still partake of terumah.
Terumah required by Scriptural Law may only be eaten by a priest whose lineage [has been affirmed].5Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 20:2 defines this term as follows:

Anyone concerning whom two witnesses testify that he is a priest, the son of so-and-so the priest, and the descendant of so-and-so the priest, extending back until we reach a person whose lineage need not be checked, i.e., a priest who served at the altar.

The restriction of the consumption of terumah to such priests is alluded to in the Book of Ezra  2:62-63): "These sought their genealogical records, but they could not be found, so they were disqualified from the priesthood. [Nechemiah] told them that they should not eat of the most holy offerings [which includes terumah] until there would arise a priest [who would inquire of] the Urim and Tumim [concerning their lineage]." Priests whose status is accepted on the basis of a prevailing assumption6I.e., they are regarded as priests by people at large even though there is no definite proof of their lineage. may partake only of terumah required by Rabbinic decree.Terumah that is ritually pure, whether the great terumah or terumat ma'aser, whether required by Scriptural or Rabbinic Law is given only to a priest who is a Torah scholar7For only a Torah scholar can be expected to be versed in the knowledge and practice of the laws of ritual purity. The Sifri (to Numbers 18:28  cites a Biblical verse as support for this concept.This is also alluded to by a Biblical narrative. II Chronicles, ch. 30, relates how King Chezekiah affected a renewal of Torah observance among the Jewish people. Among his efforts was to renew the observance of terumah and tithes, as it is written (30:4): "He told the people... to give the portions of the priests and the Levites so that they could strengthen themselves in the Torah of God." Chulin 130b interprets this to mean that these gifts should be given only to a priest or Levite who "is strong in his observance of the Torah of God." In the revision of his Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 4:9), the Rambam writes that it is desirable and advisable to follow this restriction, but there is no prohibition against giving terumah to an unlearned priest. because it is forbidden to partake of terumah that is ritually impure.8We are concerned that the impure priest will cause the terumah to become ritually impure and then partake of it while it is in that state. All of the unlearned people are presumed to be ritually impure.9The commentaries explain that we do not think that a common person will willingly transgress and eat terumah that is impure. Instead, the suspicion is that he will be impure and therefore make the terumah impure. Nevertheless, he will not realize what has transpired and will eat the terumah that he himself made impure. For these reasons, one may give impure terumah to any priest one chooses.10For it has to be burnt and any priest can perform that act. The Ra'avad differs with this ruling, maintaining that even such terumah should not be given to a priest who is unlearned. The Rambam's position can be supported based on the explanation given above that we do not suspect that the unlearned priest will deliberately transgress.
When an Israelite woman marries a priest, even a minor three years and one day old,11If a girl is younger than that, her consecration is not binding, as stated in Hilchot Ishut 3:11. she may partake of terumah and the breast and thigh [given the priests from the peace sacrifices].12Which may be eaten by all the members of a priest's household (Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbonot 10:5).According to Scriptural Law, she may partake of these foods from the time that she was consecrated. Our Sages, however, forbade her from partaking of them until she enters the chupah.13According to Jewish law, marriage is a two-staged process involving kiddushin or erusin (consecration) and nissuin (living as man and wife). Today, it is customary to perform both stages at the same time. In the Talmudic era, by contrast, a significant amount of time - usually a year - was granted between the two. In this interim period, the woman was consecrated to her husband and relations between her and another man would be considered adulterous. Nevertheless, she lived in her parents' home and did not engage in intimacy with her husband. Nor was he obligated to support her. Our Sages feared that were a woman given terumah in this intermediate period, she might give it to her father or brother to eat. [This is a] decree, [instituted] lest she give her father and brother terumah to eat while she is a consecrated woman in her father's home.
A deaf-mute and a mentally or emotionally unstable woman who is married to a priest may not partake of terumah. [This restriction applies] even if her father concluded her marriage.14Both of these types of women are considered as incapable of marrying according to Scriptural Law. Since a deaf-mute's ability to communicate is so restricted, our Sages placed her in this category. Contemporary Rabbinic experts debate the status of a deaf-mute who was trained to communicate through other means.Were such women to conclude marriages on their own, the marriage would not be binding (Hilchot Ishut 4:9). Nevertheless, the father of such a woman has the potential to conclude her marriage before she reaches the age of majority. If he does so, the marriage is binding according to Scriptural Law (ibid. 3:11). Even so, our Sages forbade such women from partaking of terumah for the reason stated by the Rambam. [This is] decree, [instituted] lest a priest who is himself a deaf-mute marry a woman who is a deaf-mute and give her [terumah] to eat.15In contrast to a mentally sound priest, the marriage of a priest who is a deaf-mute is binding only according to Rabbinic decree. According to Scriptural Law, the marriage is of no consequence. Hence, such a priest's "wife" has no right to eat terumah For this reason, our Sages decreed that a deaf-mute who is the daughter of an Israelite16If, however, she is the daughter of a priest, she may partake of terumah by virtue of her father's privilege until she marries. should not partake of terumah at all.
A non-priest is forbidden to partake of terumah, as [Leviticus 22:10] states: "All non-priests17We have employed a literal translation, though somewhat clumsy in English, because of the exegesis of the verse later in the halachah. shall not partake of the consecrated food."18Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 133) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 280) include this as one of 613 mitzvot of the Torah. [This prohibition applies] even to a resident [worker] of the priest or his hired [worker], as [ibid.] states: "A resident [worker] of the priest or his hired [worker] shall not partake of the consecrated food."19Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 134) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 281) include this as one of 613 mitzvot of the Torah. [The term] "resident [worker]" refers to one hired forever. [The term] "hired [worker]" refers to one hired for years.20Even when a priest is obligated to provide for his worker's sustenance, since the worker possesses an independent financial capacity, he is not considered as the priest's "financial acquisition" (see Halachah 1) and may not partake of terumah. A Hebrew servant is comparable to a resident [worker] or a hired [worker].21Although a Hebrew servant is purchased by his master, he retains an independent financial capacity. Hence, even if he becomes nirtzah (see Hilchot Avadim, ch. 3), in which instance he must work for his master until the Jubilee year, he remains independent and may not partake of terumah.We have followed the simple meaning of the Rambam's words which appear to interpret the verse as referring to an ordinary worker. The Kessef Mishneh notes that in Yevamot 70a and other sources, our Sages interpret the verse as referring specifically to a Hebrew servant. Why then, he asks, does the Rambam single out a Hebrew servant? He explains that the Rambam is implying that there is no difference in this regard between a servant sold by the court and one who sells himself into slavery.A woman of priestly lineage who is married to a non-priest is considered as a non-priest, as [implied by the wording] "all non-priests" - i.e., neither he nor his wife.
A non-priest who willfully partook of terumah - regardless of whether he was ritually pure or impure and regardless of whether [the terumah] was ritually pure or impure22The Radbaz notes that when a priest who is ritually impure partakes of terumah that is ritually impure, he is not liable for death. He asks: Why then is a non-priest liable for partaking of such terumah? He explains that for a priest who is holy by nature, impure terumah is considered defiled and he is not liable for partaking of it. For a non-priest, however, impure terumah is also considered holy and he is liable for partaking of it. - is liable for death at the hand of heaven, as [ibid.:9] states: "They shall die because of it, for they have defiled it." He is liable for lashes,23I.e., the court must administer lashes if witnesses observed the transgression and administered a warning. And if they do administer lashes, the sinner's transgression is expiated and he does not receive punishment by the hand of heaven. but does not make financial restitution for what he consumed, because [a transgressor] is never subjected to both lashes and a financial penalty.24This is a general principle applying in many different contexts. See Hilchot Na'arah Betulah 1:11; Hilchot Geneivah 4:9; Hilchot Sanhedrin 16:12. The Radbaz notes that generally, whenever there is a financial penalty and the obligation for lashes, the person is given the financial penalty and freed of lashes. In this instance, the opposite is true. He is given lashes and freed of the financial penalty. The Radbaz explains that in this instance, the person was originally liable for death at the hand of heaven. Hence, it is inappropriate that the transgression be absolved through a mere financial payment. If he partook [of terumah] inadvertently, [he must make restitution and] add a fifth, as [ibid.:14] states: "When a person eats sanctified food inadvertently, he should add a fifth."25One fifth of the new total; one fourth of the original amount.
[Leviticus 22:12] states: "When the daughter of a priest will marry a non-priest, she should not partake of the sanctified terumah." There are two concepts included in this prohibition:26This charge is considered as one of 613 mitzvot of the Torah by Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 137) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 283) .a) that if a woman engages in sexual relations with a man prohibited to her and thus become a zonah27As explained in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:1, the halachic definition of the term zonah is: "A Jewish woman who engaged in relations with a man she was forbidden to marry, violating a prohibition that is universally applicable, or a woman who engaged in relations with a challal." or a chalalah,28The definition of the term chalalah is: "[A woman] born from [relations] forbidden to the priesthood. Similarly, any woman who is forbidden to the priesthood who engaged in relations with a priest becomes a challalah" (ibid. 19:1). as we explained in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, is forbidden to partake of the terumot forever,29The Radbaz emphasizes that although she is prohibited to partake of terumah, she is not liable for death at God's hands for willfully doing so. Nor is she required to pay an additional fifth if she does so inadvertently. as is the law with regard to any challal. For a challal is considered as a non-priest with regard to all matters;30None of the mitzvot and prohibitions associated with the priesthood apply to him. The Radbaz emphasizes that a challal is not entirely comparable to a non-priest, for a non-priest is liable for death at God's hand and a challal is not subject to such a punishment. andb) that if she marries an Israelite, she is forbidden to partake of the portions of the sacrifices given the priests, the breast and the thigh forever,31I.e., in contrast to terumah as stated in the following halachah. even if she is divorced or widowed.
She may, however, partake of terumah after [her husband] the Israelite divorces her or dies provided he did not leave any children that she bore, as [ibid.:13] states: "When the daughter of a priest will become a widow or a divorcee and she has no descendants,32From that marriage. she shall return to her father's home as in her youth. She may partake of the bread of her father."
According to the Oral Tradition,33See Yevamot 87a. [that verse was interpreted] "from the bread," but not all the bread. She returns to partake of terumah, but not the breast and the thigh.34Hence, if she willfully partakes of these foods even after being widowed or divorced, she is a transgressor and should be punished by lashes. See Hilchot Sanhedrin 19:4.
[This concept applies] not only to the daughter of a priest, but to the daughter of a Levite or an Israelite. If she engage in relations with a man forbidden to her, since she became a zonah, she is forbidden to partake of terumah forever, even if she has a descendant born to her from a priest.35As the Rambam explains in Halachah 12, as long as an Israelite woman who was married to a priest has a descendant from the priestly seed, she is permitted to continue partaking of terumah even though she is divorced or widowed. This halachah explains that there is an exception to that rule. If such a woman becomes a zonah, she can no longer partake of terumah.The Radbaz maintains that such a woman also is not liable for death at the hand of God if she partakes of terumah willfully, nor an additional fifth if she does so inadvertantly.
For this reason, a woman who was taken captive36Whom we suspect engaged in relations, either willingly or unwillingly, with her captors and thus became a zonah. See the latter portion of Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, ch. 18. may not partake of terumah even though she says that she was not defiled. Whenever the word of a captive woman who says that she was not defiled is accepted37See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 18:21 which explains that if a woman says "I was taken captive, but I was not defiled" before witnesses testify to her being taken captive, her word is accepted. or there is a witness38See ibid.:17 which states that in this instance, the testimony of one witness is acceptable. Moreover, the witness need not fit all the criteria that are usually required for witnesses in court. [who testifies to this effect] and she is permitted to her husband,39Even though he is a priest. she is permitted to partake of terumah. When a woman engaged in sexual relations with an animal, she is not disqualified from the priesthood40See ibid.:1. and may partake of terumah.
A daughter of an Israelite who has an offspring [she bore] from a priest may partake of terumah by virtue of her child. 41Provided she does not marry an Israelite as stated in Halachah 17. [This applies] whether the child is male or female or even a tumtum42A child whose genital area is covered by a mass of flesh and thus his gender cannot be determined. or an androgynus.43A person with both male and female sexual organs. Even the offspring of offspring until the end of time44I.e., her grandchildren or great-grandchildren who are descendants from a priest are alive even though her children themselves have died. [enable her to partake of terumah], as [indicated by the prooftext]: "She has no descendants."45I.e., the prooftext does not say, "She has no children" (Radbaz).
Just as the descendants from an Israelite [born] to the daughter of a priest disqualify her [from partaking of terumah], so too, the descendants from a priest [born] to the daughter of an Israelite entitle her [to partake of terumah]. [This applies] even if the descendants are of blemished lineage.What is implied? A daughter of an Israelite married a priest or the daughter of a priest married an Israelite and [that woman] gave birth to a daughter. A person who is an ervah46Marriage between the two would be either adulterous or incestuous. for the daughter entered into relations with her or [the daughter] married a mamzer47A person of blemished lineage coming from either an adulterous or incestuous relationship. [and the daughter gave birth to a baby which is a mamzer]. [Afterwards,] the daughter dies, but the mamzer remains alive.48Thus the offspring descendant that initially either enabled or disqualified a woman from partaking of terumah is no longer alive. Nevertheless, since there is a descendant of the relationship alive - even though the descendant is of blemished lineage - the woman's status remains the same as the Rambam concludes in the following halachah.
If [the mamzer's] grandmother was the daughter of an Israelite who [married] a priest, she may partake of terumah. If she was the daughter of a priest who [married] an Israelite, she may not partake of terumah. Thus we learn that [the daughter of an Israelite] may partake of terumah by virtue of her descendants even though the lineage of that descendant is blemished, even though [the descendant] is not even [on the level of an ordinary] Israelite.49Our translation follows the version found in authentic manuscripts of the Mishneh Torah. The version found in the standard published text translates as "even if he is not Jewish" which is obviously incorrect as indicated by Halachah 16. See also Radbaz. Needless to say that if a woman [who married a priest] has a daughter born to her by him - even if the daughter is married to an Israelite and even if she became a challalah - she may partake of terumah by virtue of the daughter of blemished lineage.50Obviously, as long as her husband, the priest, is alive, she may partake of terumah regardless. The entire issue of the status of her descendants arises only when her husband has died.
Similarly, the daughter of a priest may not eat by virtue of her descendant from an Israelite husband, even if that descendant is a priest.51If, however, she remarries a priest she may partake of terumah, as stated in Halachah 18.What is implied? A daughter of a priest married an Israelite and gave birth to a daughter that he conceived. That daughter married a priest and gave birth to a son that he conceived. [This son] is fitting to become a High Priest. He enables his mother52Who is the daughter of an Israelite. to partake of terumah and disqualifies his maternal grandmother [from doing so].53In this instance as well, obviously, as long as her husband, the Israelite, is alive, she is disqualified regardless. The entire issue of the status of her descendants arises only when her husband has died. [This applies] even if [the priest's] mother dies. [The grandmother] can say: "[One should] not be like my grandson, the High Priest, who disqualifies me from partaking of terumah."
The descendants of a servant do not disqualify [a woman from partaking of terumah], nor do they enable [a woman to do so].What is implied? The daughter of a priest married an Israelite or the daughter of an Israelite married a priest. A son was born to that woman. The son [then] went and became attached to a Canaanite maid-servant and conceived [a son] with her. [That son is] a servant.54See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 12:13. [The following rules apply if the woman's son] dies and the servant remains alive: If the servant's paternal grandmother was the daughter of an Israelite who had married to a priest, she may not partake of terumah.55For it is as if she has no offspring from her marriage to the priest. If she was the daughter of a priest who had married an Israelite, she may partake [of terumah], because this offspring is not considered as a descendant, because the concept of parental lineage does not apply with regard to servants.56As stated in Hilchot Yibbum ViChalitzah 1:4 and Hilchot Avadim 9:3, among the implications of this concept is that we pay no attention to the parental lineage of a servant's father. Instead, it is as if he was conceived by his mother alone. There are other implications of this statement, as indicated by Hilchot Ishut 15:6, et al.
[The above concepts are also relevant in the following instance.] The daughter of an Israelite married a priest and he died. She had borne a son to him. Afterwards, she married an Israelite. [Hence,] she may not partake of terumah. If her Israelite [husband] died, but she bore him a son, she may not partake of terumah because of that son. If that son dies, she may partake of terumah by virtue of her first son.57Who is a priest.
[Similar concepts apply when] the daughter of a priest marries an Israelite. [If] she bore him a son and then married a priest, she may partake of terumah.58By virtue of her marriage to the priest. If [her second husband] dies, but she had borne him a son, she may partake of terumah.59By virtue of her son. If her son conceived by the priest dies, she is forbidden to partake of terumah because of her son conceived by [her first husband,] the Israelite. If her son conceived by the Israelite dies, she returns to her father's home as in her youth. She may partake of terumah, but not of the breast and thigh [of the peace offerings].60As stated in Halachot 7-9.
[Similar laws apply when] a daughter of an Israelite marries an Israelite first and has a son that she bore to him. If she marries a priest [after her first husband dies], she may partake of terumah. If [her second husband, the priest,] dies, but she bore him a son, she may partake [of terumah] by virtue of the son [she bore him]. For he enables her to partake of terumah as his father did.61Similarly, if her son conceived by the priest fathers children, she may continue to eat by virtue of them, even if her son dies. If, however, the son conceived by the priest dies childless (or he and his descendants die), she may no longer partake of terumah.

=== 7 | chapter 7 ===
A priest who is ritually impure is forbidden to partake of terumah whether it is ritually pure or ritually impure,1Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 136) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 279) include this as one of 613 mitzvot of the Torah. as [Leviticus 22:4] states: "Any person from the seed of Aaron who is afflicted with tzaraat2Tzara'at is a physical affliction resembling, but not identical with leprosy, that comes as a result of gossip and imparts ritual impurity. or is a zav3This refers to a physical affliction resembling, but not identical with gonorrhea that imparts ritual impurity. may not partake of consecrated food." Which consecrated food may be eaten by all the descendants of Aaron, both male and female? We must say: terumah.4It does not refer to the breast and thigh of the peace offerings, for a woman of the priestly family who marries and is widowed or divorced may not partake of them (Yevamot 74b).[Thus] any impure person who eats terumah that is ritually pure is liable for death at the hand of heaven. Therefore he is given lashes,5If his transgression is observed by witnesses and they issued a warning. Whenever lashes are given on the earthly plane, the transgressor receives atonement and is no longer held liable for death by God. as [ibid.:9] states: "And you shall protect My charge and not bear sin because of it [and die because of it]."When an impure person partakes of terumah that is ritually impure, he does not receive lashes, although he transgresses a negative commandment,6From the fact that Sanhedrin 83a,b emphasizes that an impure priest is not liable for death for partaking of impure terumah, the Rambam concludes that a transgression is involved. for [impure terumah] is not holy.7Its impurity nullifies its holiness. See Chapter 6, Halachah 6 and notes, however.
Impure [priests who have immersed to purify themselves] may not partake of terumah until the sun sets and three stars appear afterwards8The Kessef Mishneh states that this is approximately 20 minutes after sunset. This applies in Eretz Yisrael. In different latitudes, the duration of this time period varies.This represents a stringency over other laws where ritual purity is required. In many such instances, as soon as one immerses himself, his purification is completed and no further wait is necessary. See Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 7:11. [on the day the impure person immerses himself], as [implied by ibid.:7]: "And the sun will set and he will become pure"9The simple meaning of the verse is that the person's purification process is not completed until the sun sets. The rules of Biblical exegesis, however, leave room for the meaning mentioned by the Rambam. - until the sky will become pure of the light - "afterwards he may partake of the consecrated foods."
A priest who is ritually pure who ate terumah that is ritually impure is not liable for lashes, because [the prohibition is the result of] a positive commandment. For the verse states: "Afterwards he may partake of the consecrated foods."10The Rabaz emphasizes that with regard to partaking of the sacrifices, in certain instances, an impure priest must also bring a sacrifice to mark his immersion from impurity. [Implied is that,] after he becomes purified, he may partake of food that is in a state of holiness. Food which is impure, by contrast, he should not eat, even though he becomes purified. A prohibition that stems from a positive commandment11I,e., as in the case at hand, there is no verse that says "Do not eat impure terumah," but from the positive commandment regarding pure terumah, we can conclude that partaking of the impure terumah is prohibited. has the status of a positive commandment.12Hence, its violation is not punishable by lashes.
When [a priest] was partaking of terumah and he feels his limbs shudder to ejaculate.13Which would render him ritually impure. He should hold his member14For he does not become ritually impure until the semen actually emerges and in this way, he could swallow the terumah first (Niddah 40a). and swallow the terumah.
We may immerse a deaf-mute or intellectually or emotionally unstable [priest] and feed him terumah after nightfall on that day.15These individuals are not responsible for their conduct. Nevertheless, their priesthood is intact. Hence, we immerse them to purify them and then enable them to partake of terumah. We guard them to make sure that they do not sleep after immersing themselves, because if they sleep, they are [considered] impure for perhaps they had a seminal emission16I.e., because of the doubt, we considered them impure. unless a copper container is made for them.17Which would allow a seminal emission to be detected. Were the container to be made of cloth, the semen could be absorbed (Radbaz).
Camel-riders are forbidden to partake of terumah until they immerse themselves and [wait] until nightfall, because we presume that they are ritually impure. [The rationale is that] the physical stimulation18The literal meaning of the Hebrew is "warmth." produced by riding on the flesh of a camel produces a drop of semen.19See the gloss of the Radbaz who states that the Rambam's wording implies that this ruling applies only when one rides bareback [see Shulchan Aruch (Even HaEzer 23:6)]. He also explains why it applies only to camel-riders and not those who ride on other animals.
When a woman engages in intimacy, she may immerse herself and partake of terumah in the evening,20I.e., intimate relations cause both the man and the woman to become impure. To emerge from that impurity, they must each immerse in the mikvah and wait until nightfall (see Leviticus 15:18 . provided she did not turn over during intimacy.21Intimate relations can cause a woman to become impure for two reasons:a) as stated above, the very act of intimacy brings about ritual impurity;b) she comes in contact with semen and touching semen makes one ritually impure (Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 5:9).As long as the semen is in the woman's vagina, it is not considered to have touched her, because it is touching her body internally, not externally. If, however, it flows outside her vagina and touches her externally, she does become impure. According to the Rambam, if the woman does not turn over in intimate relations, the semen will remain in her vagina and not flow outside. Hence, after immersing herself and waiting until nightfall, she may partake of terumah. If, however, she turned over in the midst of intimacy, the semen will flow out. Moreover, it is possible that it will not flow out immediately, but will do so over the course of the coming days. Now, semen is considered to remain viable until the third day after intimacy. Hence for three days, the woman must consider the possibility that the semen flowed out from her body and made her impure. Hence, she cannot immerse herself in the mikvah to regain ritual purity until three days have passed.The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam and maintains that even if the woman did not turn over during intimacy, as soon as she arises from bed, it is possible that semen will flow out from her vagina and touch her body. He quotes Niddah 41b in support of his explanation. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh suggest that the Rambam had a different text of that Talmudic passage and they validate his ruling. If she turned over during intimacy she is forbidden to partake of terumah for a duration of three days. For it is impossible that she will not discharge [semen] and become impure,22Because of it touching her body. as will be explained in the appropriate place.23Ibid.:11. There the Rambam states that the intent is not that semen remains viable for three full days, but that it can remain viable until the third day after relations.
Since the primary obligation of terumah [separated] in the Diaspora is Rabbinic in origin,24As stated in Chapter 1, Halachah 1, according to Scriptural Law, the requirement to separate terumah applies only in Eretz Yisrael. The early Sages ordained that it should be observed in certain neighboring countries. it is forbidden only to a priest who becomes ritually impure because of a discharge from his body: i.e., men who had a seminal emission, zavim,25This refers to a physical affliction resembling, but not identical with gonorrhea that imparts ritual impurity. zavot,26Women who become impure because they experienced menstrual bleeding at times other than her ordinary cycle. niddot,27Women who become impure because they experienced ordinary menstrual bleeding. and women who give birth.28Who becomes impure as explained in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, ch. 10. Since the obligation to separate terumah in these lands is only Rabbinic in origin, the Sages were lenient regarding the restrictions incumbent on those who partake of terumah. All of these individuals may partake [of terumah] after they immersed even if they did not [wait] until nightfall.29In contrast to terumah prescribed by Scriptural Law when such a wait is necessary, as stated in Halachah 2. The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this point and refers to Bechorot 27a in support of his position. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer different explanations of that passage that support the Rambam's interpretation. Those who, by contrast, became impure because of contact with a source of ritual impurity - whether contact with a human corpse, a form of impurity which is impossible to purge in the present age30For to purge the impurity resulting from contact with a human corpse, it is necessary to have the ashes from a Red Heifer sprinkled upon one's body and those ashes are not available in the present age. or contact with [the corpse of] a crawling animal - need not immerse themselves [to partake of] terumah separated in the Diaspora.
For this reason, a male priest who is a minor who has not yet had a seminal emission or a female of the priestly family who has never experienced menstrual bleeding may partake of [terumah from the Diaspora] at all times without undergoing an inspection, for the presumption that they did not have a discharge that would render them ritually impure applies to them.31Once a male or a female attains majority, by contrast, we assume that they have become impure and they must immerse themselves before partaking of terumah (Radbaz).A metzora32A metzora is somebody who has been afflicted with tzara'at. Tzara'at is a physical affliction resembling, but not identical with leprosy, that comes as a result of gossip and imparts ritual impurity. is considered as one who had a discharge that renders him impure,33For his impurity is also a result of a physical condition (ibid.). provided he is declared impure by a priest whose lineage is established.34For a person afflicted by tzara'at does not become ritually impure until a priest declares him so (Hilchot Tuma'at Tzara'at 9:2). With regard to the establishment of a priest's lineage, see the notes to Chapter 6, Halachah 2.The Radbaz adds that the reason the impurity of tzara'at is not observed in the present age is that we have no priests whose lineage is established to declare people ritually impure. The physical conditions for the impurity may exist in the present age.
A priest who is uncircumcised is forbidden to partake of terumah according to Scriptural Law.35The Radbaz writes that this prohibition applies even if he is uncircumcised with the Torah's permission, e.g., his brothers died because of circumcision, in which instance, caution is shown before circumcising him. [This concept is derived as follows: Leviticus 22:10] speaks of a resident worker and a hired worker with regard to [partaking of] terumah and [Exodus 12:45] speaks of a resident worker and a hired worker with regard to [partaking of] the Paschal sacrifice. Just as with regard to the Paschal sacrifice, the resident worker and the hired worker spoken about refer to those who are uncircumcised and who are forbidden [to partake of] it,36See Hilchot Korban Pesach 9:7. so too, with regard to terumah, we learn that a resident worker and a hired worker who are uncircumcised are forbidden [to partake of] it. 37Sefer HaMitzvot (Negative Commandment 135) and Sefer HaChinuch (Mitzvah 282) include this as one of 613 mitzvot of the Torah. There is, however, a slight difficulty with this classification. The Rambam maintains that any commandment that is derived through one of the Thirteen Principles of Biblical Exegesis does not have the status of a Scriptural command, nor is such a prohibition punishable by lashes (Sefer HaMitzvot, General Principle 2) and as the Rambam states here, there is no direct commandment prohibiting an uncircumcised person from partaking of terumah. Instead, it is derived by our Sages (Yevamot 70a) through an association of verses (gezeirah shaveh). Hence, seemingly, it should not be placed in that category. The Rambam notes this difficulty when discussing this mitzvah in Sefer HaMitzvot and states that since our Sages mentioned that this mitzvah was of Scriptural origin, he considered it as having that status. If such a person partakes [of terumah], he is liable for lashes according to Scriptural Law.A person who extends his foreskin38I.e., one was originally circumcised, but underwent an operation so that it would appear that he was not circumcised. In the Hellenist and Roman periods, there were Jews who underwent such operations so that they would resemble non-Jews. is permitted to partake of terumah even though he appears uncircumcised.39For according to Scriptural Law, his original circumcision was effective and he can never revert to being uncircumcised. According to Rabbinic Law, however, he must be circumcised again until he appears circumcised.40The Radbaz writes that the intent is not that he is forbidden to partake of terumah until he is circumcised again. Instead, the intent is that he is advised to undergo the operation and not to partake of terumah until he does so. The Sefer HaMitzvot and the Sefer HaChinuch (loc. cit.), however, say that such an individual is prohibited by the Rabbis from partaking of terumah.
One who is born circumcised may partake of terumah.41Although it is necessary to draw a drop of blood from such a person's organ (Hilchot Milah 1:11), it cannot be said that such a person is uncircumcised. Hence, he is permitted to partake of terumah (Radbaz). A tumtum42A child whose genital area is covered by a mass of flesh and thus his gender cannot be determined. may not partake of terumah for there is a doubt whether he is uncircumcised.43Since his gender is undetermined, we do not know whether or not he must be circumcised. An androgynus44A person with both male and female sexual organs. should be circumcised and then he may partake of terumah.45Although there are many unresolved questions about such a person's status vis-à-vis gender, there is no difficulty in him partaking of terumah for both males and females of the priestly family are permitted to partake of it.
Although an uncircumcised priest and all those who are impure are forbidden to partake of terumah, their wives and their servants may partake [of it].46They are prohibited from partaking of terumah due to outside factors. Their membership in the priestly family is, however, intact. Hence, their wives and servants may partake of terumah (Radbaz).
[The following laws apply to a priest] who has maimed testicles or a severed member. They and their servants may partake of terumah.47Although their wounds prevent such priests from serving at the Altar, they are still members of the priestly family. Hence, they and their servants may partake of terumah. Their wives may not partake of terumah.48As stated in Deuteronomy 23:2 and Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah, ch. 16, a person with such wounds is forbidden to marry a natural born Jewess. Hence, if a priest is intimate with his wife after suffering such wounds, she becomes a zonah and a chalalah and hence, is forbidden to partake of terumah. If [such a priest] was not intimate with his wife after suffering these wounds, [his wife] may partake of terumah.49Since they were not intimate, she has not become a chalalah and may partake of terumah. The Kessef Mishneh states that this refers to an instance where the couple were married and then he suffered this wound. If, however, a priest suffers such a wound and then consecrates a woman, she may not partake of terumah. See the notes to the following halachah. Similarly, if he married the descendent of converts, she may partake of terumah.50Ordinarily, a priest cannot marry a convert or the descendant of a convert. In this instance, however, because of his injury, the full measure of the holiness of the priesthood does not rest upon him and he may marry such a woman (Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 16:1). Once he marries such a woman, she is entitled to partake of terumah, because she is the wife of a priest.
When a priest with maimed testicles consecrates the daughter of a priest, she may not partake of terumah.51Since this woman is prepared to engage in intimate relations that are forbidden to her, our Sages prohibited her from partaking of terumah even though she had not actually engaged in such relations. Moreover, she is no longer permitted to partake of terumah by virtue of her being a member of the priestly family, because she was consecrated, as stated in Chapter 8, Halachah 1. [When a priest is] a eunuch who was brought to this state through natural means,52See Hilchot Ishut 2:14 for a more precise definition of the term used by the Rambam. As stated in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 16:9, such a person is permitted to marry a native-born Jewess. Hence, there is no difficulty with the wife of a priest with such a condition partaking of terumah. he, his wife, and his servants may partake of terumah. [When a priest is] a tumtum or an androgynus, their servants may partake of terumah,53For in this context, there is no difference between them and the servants of an ordinary priest. but not their wives.54For there is an unresolved doubt if their marriages are acceptable. Needless to say, if a tumtum undergoes an operation and it is determined that he is a male, his wife may partake of terumah even if he consecrated her before the operation.
When a [priest who was] a deaf-mute, a mentally or emotionally unstable person, or a minor purchased servants, they may not partake of terumah.55These individuals are considered as not being responsible for their actions and their acquisitions are not valid. Hence, the servants they purchase by themselves are not their property according to Scriptural Law and may not partake of terumah. If, however, the local court or their guardian purchases servants for them or they acquire them by inheritance, [the servants] may partake of terumah.56Because the acquisitions are binding and they have become the property of a priest.
When an androgynus [of the priestly family] engages in intimacy - whether through anal intercourse57The literal translation of the Rambam's words would be "as a male would be the object of intimacy." or vaginal intercourse - with a person who is disqualified from partaking of terumah, he is disqualified from partaking of terumah as a woman would be.58For such relations would cause a woman to be considered as a chalalah. Since there is an unresolved question regarding the gender of an androgynus, we are stringent and consider the possibility that he is a female. And a female is disqualified from terumah if she engages in intimacy that would render her a chalalah regardless of whether it is vaginal or anal intercourse (Radbaz). His servants also may not partake of terumah.59For their right to partake of terumah is dependent on that of their owner.Similarly, if he engages in intimacy with another adrogynus with whom relations would disqualify a woman from partaking of terumah, he is disqualified. Neither he nor his servants may partake of terumah. [The latter law] applies when he engages in intimacy through vaginal intercourse.60For such relations would render a woman a chalahah and, because of the unresolved question regarding the status of the androgynus, we apply that stringency to him as well. If, however, he is intimate through anal intercourse,61The literal translation of the Rambam's words would be "as a male would be the object of intimacy." [the above does not apply], because a male does not disqualify another male from priestly [privileges].62A male priest does not become a chalal because he entered into a forbidden sexual relationship.The Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh question the Rambam's ruling, noting that, seemingly, the person should be disqualified from partaking of terumah based on the same rationale as the first clause of the halachah: i.e., that the androgynus also has a feminine dimension and that feminine dimension will be disqualified through anal intercourse. Hence, they ask: Why does the Rambam only view this relationship as intimacy between males and hence, not able to disqualify the androgynus? Why not see it as a relation between a male and a female? Among the explanations given is that since both of the androgynies are engaging in relations as males, it is not appropriate to deem one a male and one a female.
When a servant belongs to partners and one of them is a priest that does not entitle others to partake of terumah,63The Jerusalem Talmud (the conclusion of tractate Terumot) states that for a servant to partake of terumah, he must belong to priests entirely. If an Israelite has even a one-hundredth share in the ownership of the servant, he may not partake of terumah. this servant is forbidden to partake [of terumah]. Whenever [the ownership of a servant] entitles him to partake of terumah, it also entitles him to partake of the breast and the thigh [of the peace sacrifices].64Which may be eaten by all the members of the priest's household.
When a daughter of an Israelite marries a priest and brings servants [to his domain] - regardless of whether they are classified as nichsei milog or nichsei tzon barzel65When a woman marries, her husband receives the right to benefit from her property. As explained in Hilchot Ishut, ch. 16, there are two arrangements under which a husband is allowed to benefit from his wife's property:nichsei milog - in this instance, in the event of divorce or the husband's death, the property reverts to the ownership of the woman according to its value at that time, regardless of the profit or loss she suffers;nichsei tzon barzel - in this instance, the property is evaluated at the time of marriage; in the event of divorce or the husband's death, the woman receives that amount, regardless of the worth of the property at that time.Servants can be classified in either of these categories. In both instances, they have the right to partake of terumah. With regard to servants who are nichsei tzon barzel, they are the husband's (the priest's) acquisitions, for it is as if he acquired them when he accepted financial responsibility for their worth. With regard to those who are nichsei milog, they are "the acquisition of his acquisition," i.e., property belonging to his wife whom he has acquired. See Halachah 20. - they may partake [of terumah]. Similarly, when the servants of priests purchase servants or the servants of a priest's wife purchase servants, they may partake of terumah, as [intimated by Leviticus 22:11]: "[When a priest] will purchase a soul, the acquisition of his money, [he shall partake of it]." Implied is even an acquisition of an acquisition.66I.e., servants acquired by servants who were acquired by the priest. The inference is derived based on the fact that the verse contains two derivatives of the word koneh - "acquire." An acquisition of [a priest] who is permitted to partake of terumah may entitle others to partake [of terumah]. An acquisition who does not partake of terumah may not entitle others to partake [of terumah].67When the wife of a priest is not entitled to partake of terumah (see Halachot 20-22), her servants may also not partake of terumah.
When the daughter of a priest marries an Israelite and brings servants [to his domain] - regardless of whether they are classified as nichsei milog or nichsei tzon barzel - they may not partake [of terumah].68The servants who are nichsei tzon barzel certainly may not partake of terumah for they are now the property of an Israelite. Even the servants who are nichsei milog may not partake of terumah, for at this time, their owner - the Israelite's wife - is disqualified from partaking of terumah.
[The following laws apply when] a widow marries a High Priest or a divorcee or a woman who underwent chalitzah - whether the daughter of a priest or an Israelite - marries an ordinary priest69These three types of relationships are forbidden, the first two by Scriptural Law, the latter by Rabbinic Law. Thus the woman will become a chalalah and hence, forbidden to partake of terumah. Since she is forbidden to partake of terumah, her servants are likewise forbidden. or [a priest] marries another one of the women with whom marriage is prohibited [by Scriptural Law].70I.e., a woman who is forbidden to him because of one of the prohibitions that apply to all Jews, even non-priests. Nevertheless, if he engages in relations with that woman, she becomes a zonah and thus prohibited against partaking of terumah. In this instance as well, since she is forbidden to partake of terumah, her servants are likewise forbidden. If she brings servants [to his domain] which are classified as nichsei milog or nichsei tzon barzel [to his domain], those classified as nichsei milog may not partake [of terumah],71For they are the woman's property, it is just that they are "on loan" to her husband, as it were. even though he is required to provide for their sustenance. Those classified as nichsei tzon barzel may partake of terumah, for they are the husband's property. If [a priest] married a shniyah,72A relatively distant female relative with whom our Sages prohibited marriage as a safeguard against the Scriptural prohibitions of incest. See Hilchot Ishut 1:6. she may partake [of terumah],73For according to Scriptural Law, she is the priest's wife and relations with him do not disqualify her, neither as a zonah or a chalalah. but her servants who are nichsei milog may not partake [of terumah].74Seemingly, since such a woman has the right to partake of terumah, her servants should also be so entitled. The Radbaz explains that since her marriage is not sanctioned by Rabbinic Law, her husband is under no obligation to sustain her. Hence, her servants do not receive the right to partake of terumah. Those servants that are nichsei tzon barzel are permitted to partake of terumah according to all authorities, for they are her husband's acquisitions as explained above.
When the daughter of a priest who is a widow is consecrated by a High Priest or one who is divorced is consecrated by an ordinary priest, they may not partake of terumah,75I.e., were it not for the reason stated by the Rambam, they would be permitted to partake of terumah by virtue of their membership in the Priestly family. because they are designated for intimate relations that are forbidden according to Scriptural Law. Similarly, if they enter the chupah76Entering the chupah means entering a private place with her husband. This is the act that constitutes the beginning of the second phase of the marriage relationship, nissuin. without being consecrated, they may not partake [of terumah]. For [entering into] the chupah disqualifies them.77Even though a woman enters the chupah without consecration, that act causes her to be considered as designated for intimate relations that are forbidden.If such a woman is widowed or divorced after consecration [but before marriage], she returns to suitability and may partake of terumah. If, however, she had married, she may not partake of terumah, because she already became a chalalah.78Through intimate relations with her husband.
When the husband of the daughter of a priest who is himself a priest dies and she falls before yevamim, one of which is a challal,79I.e., her husband, the priest, had several brothers, one of whom was born from a relationship forbidden to the priesthood, and thus had the status of a challal. she may not partake of terumah because of her connection to the challal.80Since she could be married by the challal, she is disqualified even though she is a member of the priestly family. [This applies] even if one of the acceptable [brothers] issued a mamar81A maamar is a Rabbinic institution in which a yevam declares his intention to marry his brother's childless widow by consecrating her through giving her money (Hilchot Yibbum 2:1). to her, for a maamar does not constitute a complete acquisition of a yevamah.82If another brother would perform yibbum with the widow, he would become her husband despite the maamar given by his brother. Thus the connection to the yevam who is a challal is still intact.
[Although a yavam who is] a priest gives a bill of divorce83I.e., instead of performing chalitzah which would absolve the connection between him and his yevamah, he gave her a bill of divorce. According to Scriptural Law, the bill of divorce is not effective at all. Nevertheless, according to Rabbinic Law, it disqualifies the woman from carrying out yibbum with any of the brothers (Hilchot Yibbum VeChalitzah 5:1). to his yevamah, [despite the fact that] she becomes forbidden to him, she still remains connected to him.84For according to Scriptural Law, their connection is still intact. Hence, she is entitled to partake of terumah. [She is not disqualified,] because she is designated for relations that are forbidden [only] by Rabbinic decree, since a bill of divorce disqualifies a yevamah only according to Rabbinic decree.Similarly, the daughter of a priest who underwent the rite of chalitzah85And thus became forbidden to a priest by Rabbinic decree. or is a shniyah86A relatively distant female relative with whom our Sages prohibited marriage as a safeguard against the Scriptural prohibitions of incest. See Hilchot Ishut 1:6. who became consecrated to a priest may partake of terumah.87Because she is a member of the priestly family. In contrast to the women mentioned in Halachah 21, these women are designated for relations that are forbidden only by Rabbinic decree. Hence, they are not disqualified.Were the yevamah to be the daughter of an Israelite, she would not be permitted to partake of terumah despite the fact that she is bound to a priest through the obligation of yibbum (Radbaz). [Also,] when an ordinary priest marries an ailonot,88A women whose female sexual characteristics are underdeveloped. she may partake of terumah.89Although the priest may divorce her because she cannot have children, until he does so, he may be intimate with her. Hence, she is entitled to partake of terumah.

=== 8 | chapter 8 ===
A fetus, a yavam, consecration, a deaf-mute, and a child of nine years old disqualify [a woman] from partaking of terumah, but do not entitle her to partake [of it].1This statement is explained in the halachot that follow.
What is meant [by the above statement] with regard to a fetus? A daughter of an Israelite who was impregnated by a priest2Without being married to the priest or after being widowed from him. is not entitled to partake of terumah by virtue of the fetus.3I.e., as soon as the baby is born, the mother is entitled to eat by virtue of her child. Until it is born, however, the restrictions apply. When the daughter of a priest, by contrast, was impregnated by an Israelite,4Without being married to the priest or after being widowed from him. she is prohibited against partaking of terumah because of the fetus. [This is derived from Leviticus 22:13:] "And she shall return to her father's home as in her maidenhood." This excludes a pregnant woman.5Rashi (Yevamot 67b) explains that a pregnant woman is excluded, because she does not resemble a maiden.
When an Israelite has relations with a daughter of a priest,6Without being married to the priest or after being widowed from him. we do not suspect that she became pregnant. Instead, she may immerse herself [in the mikveh]7To purify herself from the impurity she contracted because of the relations in which she engaged (see Leviticus 15:18 . Note, however, Chapter 7, Halachah 7, and notes, from which it is apparent that there are times when a woman will have to wait longer. and partake [of terumah] in the evening. If she was married to an Israelite and her husband died, she may immerse herself and partake of terumah in the evening [and continue doing so] for 40 days.8For even if she became pregnant, the pregnancy is not significant as the Rambam continues to explain. Hence, after 40 days passed, she should refrain from partaking of terumah until it is clear that she is not pregnant. If her fetus is recognized [afterwards], retroactively, her [actions] are objectionable9She is required to make restoration of the terumah and add a fifth of its value as atonement. from the fortieth day onward. For, throughout the forty days, the embryo is not considered as a fetus, merely as water.
When a daughter of an Israelite was married to a priest and he died, leaving her pregnant,10Without any other children. her servants11She herself may also not partake of terumah, as stated in Halachah 2. This halachah is speaking about her servants that are nichsei tzon barzel and thus belong to the heirs of her husband's estate. Until the fetus is born, it is not a significant entity and the servants that belong to it do not have the right to partake of terumah because of it. should not partake of terumah because of the fetus. For only a child that was born entitles others to partake [of terumah]. One which is not born does not entitle others to partake [of terumah]. Therefore if the fetus was a challal [and the woman had other acceptable children, the fetus] does not disqualify the servants from partaking of terumah.12The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this point and maintains that the right of the fetus to the servants is significant even before the fetus is born. Hence, he disqualifies them from partaking of terumah. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh offer interpretations of the relevant Talmudic portions that substantiate the Rambam's ruling. Instead, they may partake of it by virtue of his brothers who are acceptable priests until this challal is born, at which point, the servants become forbidden to partake [of terumah].13Until the estate is divided and each brother receives his share.
What is meant [by the initial statement] with regard to a yavam? When a daughter of an Israelite is under the obligation to perform yibbum with a priest,14Regardless of the age of the prospective yavam. she may not partake of terumah, for [ibid.:11] states: "When a priest will purchase a soul" and this [yavam] has not acquired [the woman] yet.15Although she was married to the brother of the yavam, the yavam does not acquire her until he performs yibbum. The Radbaz emphasizes that this ruling applies even if the yavam gave her a ma'amar, designating her as his wife.When the daughter of a priest is under the obligation to perform yibbum with an Israelite, she is forbidden [to partake of terumah]16Which, were she not obligated to her yavam, she could partake of by virtue of her membership in the priestly family. because of her yavam, as [implied by the verse:] "And she shall return to her father's home as in her maidenhood." This excludes a woman under obligation to perform yibbum.17Rashi (loc. cit. 67b) explains that such a woman is excluded, because she may not return to her father's home.
When a yavam who is a priest engages in relations with his yevamah by force or without intent or he merely uncovers her and does not complete the act of intercourse,18As stated in Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 1:10, the term "uncover" is of Biblical origin (Leviticus 20:18  and refers to the insertion of the corona alone in the woman's vaginal channel. "Completing relations" refers to the insertion of the entire male organ. he acquires [his yevamah], as stated in Hilchot Yibbum.19Hilchot Yibbum VeChalitzah 2:3. Nevertheless, he does not entitle her to partake of terumah until he completes the act of intercourse with her consent.When does the above apply? When [the yevamah] was widowed after consecration [alone].20And thus was not yet entitled to partake of terumah by virtue of her initial marriage. If, however, she had been married, since she had been partaking of terumah previously,21I.e., during her first marriage. she is entitled to partake of it by virtue of [the inferior] acts of intimacy mentioned above.
What is meant [by the initial statement] with regard to a consecration? When a daughter of a priest is consecrated by an Israelite, she is forbidden to partake [of terumah], for he has already acquired her. When the daughter of an Israelite has been consecrated by a priest, she may not partake [of terumah] until she enters the chupah, lest she give terumah to the members of her father's household, as we explained.22Chapter 6, Halachah 3, explains that the Sages forbade such a woman from partaking of terumah for this reason. According to Scriptural Law, she is entitled to partake of it.
When an Israelite tells the daughter of a priest: "Behold, you are consecrated to me after 30 days," she may partake [of terumah] for these 30 days,23By virtue of her ancestral right. for the consecration has not taken effect yet.24When a woman's husband words his statement in that manner, the consecration does not take effect until the 30 days pass (Hilchot Ishut 7:10). If, however, he told her: "You are consecrated to me from the present and after 30 days,"25In which instance, the wording he uses is confusing and there is a doubt whether the consecration takes effect immediately or only after 30 days (ibid.:12). she is forbidden to partake [of terumah] immediately.26Because of the doubt regarding her status. Similar laws apply with regard to other conditional agreements of this type.27I.e., if the man consecrated the woman conditionally, but stated that when the condition is fulfilled, the consecration would take effect from the present time (see ibid.: 6:16).
What is meant [by the initial statement] with regard to a deaf-mute? When a daughter of a priest is married to an Israelite who is a deaf-mute, she may not partake [of terumah], since he acquires her by virtue of the ordinance of our Sages who instituted marriage for him.28According to Scriptural Law, a deaf-mute does not have the capacity to consecrate a woman as his wife. Our Sages, however, desired that these individuals be given a chance to enjoy the basics of family life (see Hilchot Ishut 4:9, 11:4). When a daughter of an Israelite marries a priest who is a deaf-mute, she may not partake [of terumah], because he does not acquire [her] according to Scriptural Law,29And the acquisition ordained by our Sages does not have the power to supercede Scriptural Law. because he is not of [adequate] intellectual capacity.
[When a woman] was consecrated by a priest of ordinary mental capacity, but he did not marry her until he became a deaf-mute, she may not partake [of terumah].30For her consecration did not entitle her to partake of terumah and her marriage to a deaf-mute (through yibbum) does not give her this right either. [In the above situation, if after consecrating a woman, a priest] died and she fell before a yavam who is a deaf-mute, she may not partake [of terumah].31In this instance, the yibbum performed by the deaf-mute creates a marriage-bond that is effective according to Scriptural Law. Nevertheless, the relations with which he engages with her resemble the inadvertent relations mentioned in Halachah 6 and hence do not entitle the woman to partake of terumah. If, however, he married her when he was of ordinary mental capacity and then became a deaf-mute, she may [continue] to partake [of terumah].32For she is married according to Scriptural Law. If he died and she fell before a yavam who is a deaf-mute and he performs yibbum with her, she may [also continue to] partake [of terumah]. [The rationale for the leniency is] that she was partaking of terumah beforehand.33And the relations with the yavam restore her to her previous status.When the wife of [a priest who is] a deaf-mute bears him a child, she may partake [of terumah] by virtue of her child.
What is meant [by the initial statement] with regard to a child of nine years old?34The Rambam speaks about a boy "nine years and one day old." Nevertheless, the intent is that he has completed nine years of life and entered his tenth year. Even a portion of a day is considered as an entire day. Thus as soon as a child reaches his ninth birthday, he is nine years and one day old. Hence, for the purpose of brevity, we have translated as above. [When a daughter of a priest] engaged in relations with a child of nine years old who is forbidden to her, since sexual relations in which he engages are significant,35Although such a child is a minor and not entirely sexually potent, at this age, he is somewhat physically mature. Hence, relations in which he engage are significant to a certain extent. See Hilchot Ishut 11:3; Hilchot Yibbum 1:16; Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 1:13. she is disqualified from the priesthood and forbidden to partake of terumah, because she becomes a zonah or a chalalah, as we explained.36See Chapter 6, Halachah 7. [This applies] even if [the child] is sexually impotent.37I.e., and he inserted his organ in hers without an erection. The Radbaz explains that this is the fundamental new concept taught by this halachah. Otherwise, it would be obvious that since relations with this child are significant and they are forbidden to this woman, they disqualify her from partaking of terumah.When a daughter of an Israelite marries a priest who is nine years old, even though the relations in which he engages are significant, she is not entitled to partake of terumah because of [this] child, because he cannot acquire her [as his wife] until he reaches majority.38For a male cannot acquire a wife until he reaches majority. Such a marriage is not significant even according to Rabbinic Law (Hilchot Ishut 11:6-7).If there is a doubt whether [a child forbidden to a daughter of a priest] is nine years old39In which instance, she would be forbidden to partake of terumah. or not,40In which instance, she would be permitted. she is forbidden to partake [of terumah].41Because of the doubt. [This same ruling applies] if she married a boy thirteen years old and there was a question whether he manifested physical signs of maturity or not.42For a child does not reach maturity - and hence, a marriage that he enters is not significant - until he manifests bodily signs, two pubic hairs for a male, that he has reached maturity. Attaining the age of maturity is itself not sufficient (Hilchot Ishut 2:10-11).Seemingly, this clause is also speaking about an instance where the daughter of a priest is marrying a youth who disqualifies her and the question is whether he is of sufficient physical maturity for the marriage to be significant. In that instance, however, it would be proper to speak of consecration, not marriage. For this reason, Rav Yosef Korcus defines this clause as referring to a daughter of an Israelite who is marrying a priest and the question is whether the marriage entitles her to partake of terumah or not.
All of the relationships [mentioned above] that do not entitle a woman to partake of terumah prescribed by Scriptural Law also do not entitle her to partake of terumah prescribed by Rabbinic Law. [This is] a decree lest they have them partake of terumah prescribed by Scriptural Law.
The [following] individuals neither disqualify [the daughter of a priest from partaking of terumah]43If the individual involved is an Israelite fit to marry this woman. or enable [the daughter of an Israelite] to partake of it:44If the individual involved is a priest.a rapist, a seducer,45I.e., one who seduced a girl under majority. In that instance, even though the relations were with consent, since the girl is a minor, they are considered to have been carried out against her will. or a mentally or emotionally unstable person.46In the first two instances, since the relations were carried out outside the context of marriage, they are not significant with regard to terumah. In the latter instance, since the marriage of an intellectual or emotionally unstable person is of no significance whatsoever (Hilchot Ishut 11:6), the relations are considered as taking place outside the context of marriage. [This applies] provided she is not forbidden to them, in which instance, they disqualify her through relations, because she becomes a zonah or a chalalah, as we explained.47See Chapter 6, Halachah 7. In such an instance, the woman is disqualified even if the relations were carried out under duress.
When a woman married a priest who was intellectually or emotionally unstable or a priest raped her or seduced her and she bore him a child, she may partake of terumah because of her son.48Since he is a priest, he entitles his mother to partake of terumah. See Chapter 6, Halachah 12. There is a doubt concerning the matter, for since she was not consecrated to him, it is possible that she was impregnated by another person. Nevertheless, we operate under the presumption that the child was conceived by [the priest] who engaged in relations with her. [This applies] provided rumors did not circulate concerning her with another person. Instead, everyone gossips about her and this priest.Similar concepts apply when an Israelite who is intellectually or emotionally unstable engages in relations with the daughter of a priest or [an Israelite] raped or seduced her and she became pregnant. She may not partake of terumah because of the fetus. If the fetus is aborted, she may partake [of terumah].49I.e., she resumes her previous status.
When witnesses concerning a [sotah] warning and witnesses concerning [a sotah] meeting testify against a woman50A sotah is a woman suspected of adultery who is subjected to a test of her fidelity by drinking special water, the "bitter water" mentioned by the Rambam, prepared in the Temple. For a woman to be required to take this test, two witnesses must testify that she was warned by her husband not to enter into privacy with a particular man and two witnesses must testify that she in fact entered into privacy with the said person (Hilchot Sotah 1:1). married [to a priest], she is forbidden to partake of terumah until she drinks the bitter water, because there is a question whether she is a zonah. If her husband dies before she drinks the water or she is one of the women who are absolved from drinking51See Hilchot Sotah 2:2 which mentions fifteen women that are placed in this category. and do not receive the money due them by virtue of their ketubah, she is forbidden to partake of terumah forever.52For the sotah test is necessary to very whether or not she was faithful to her husband and that test is not administered unless the husband is alive (ibid. 2:7). Whenever the wife of a priest says: "I have been unfaithful," she is forbidden to partake of terumah.53This is not speaking about a sotah, but rather an ordinary woman married to a priest.Hilchot Ishut 24:23 states that, in this situation, we do not accept the woman's word and we require her to remain married to her husband, for we suspect that she was not unfaithful and made this statement only so that she would be divorced and free to marry someone else. Nevertheless, her word is accepted with regard to terumah and her husband must provide her with other food.
When a daughter of an Israelite who has not attained majority marries a priest without her father's consent, whether in his presence or in his absence, she may not partake of terumah even though her father consecrated her.54Until a girl attains majority, she cannot marry without her father's consent. Thus it is as if the marriage is conditional until he consents and if he does not consent, it is nullified (Hilchot Ishut 3:13, 22:5). Hence, we do no allow her to partake of terumah, for if the marriage is nullified, she would have no right to partake of terumah. [The rationale is that] her father might object and then she would retroactively be unfit [to partake of terumah]. [The reason] he remains silent even though he sees is because he is angry because she married without his consent.55And does not desire to speak his mind until he calms down.

=== 9 | chapter 9 ===
A woman may partake of terumah until her bill of divorce reaches her hand or the hand of her agent whom she appointed to receive it.1This latter point requires qualification as the Rambam proceeds to state.Whenever there is a doubt whether or not a woman was divorced, she may not partake of terumah.2For a Scriptural prohibition is involved and we follow the general principle: Whenever there is a question regarding a point of Scriptural Law, we rule stringently. Hence, even though her husband is liable to provide her with her sustenance in such a situation (Hilchot Ishut 5:13), he may not give her terumah. When a woman appoints an agent to receive her bill of divorce, she is forbidden to partake of terumah immediately.3This is a corollary to the point mentioned beforehand. Since a woman is forbidden to partake of terumah whenever there is a doubt that she was divorced, she is forbidden as soon as she appoints her agent, for at any time, he may receive her bill of divorce. Even though the matter is not entirely in the agent's hands, for the bill of divorce must be given on the husband's initiative, we follow the presumption that the agent will fulfill the mission with which he is charged (Radbaz). If she said: "Receive the bill of divorce for me in this-and-this place," she is not forbidden [to partake of terumah] until the agent reaches that place.4For the bill of divorce is not effective if given elsewhere (Hilchot Gerushin 9:34).If she sent an agent to bring her the bill of divorce, she may partake of terumah until the bill of divorce reaches her hand.5For in this instance, the agent is acting in place of the husband and the divorce is not completed until he gives the woman the bill of divorce (ibid. 6:5). When a person tells his wife: "This is your bill of divorce; [it is effective] one hour before my death"6Such an arrangement was often made when a couple were childless so that if the husband died the woman would be free of the obligation of yibbum. she is forbidden to partake of terumah immediately.7For we fear that he might die at any moment. Hence, from the previous hour onward, she would have partaken of terumah without having the right to do so.
[The inhabitants of] a city under siege, [the voyagers on] a ship in danger of sinking at sea, and a suspect to be judged [for a crime worthy of capital punishment] are presumed to be alive.8And if they are priests, their wives may continue partaking of terumah. Needless to say, this applies to one who goes on a caravan journey.9We are speaking about a caravan journey through the desert. Although there is a certain amount of danger to the travelers, we operate under the presumption that they are alive until we receive information otherwise.[In the following instances,] however: a city was captured by besieging forces, a ship was lost at sea, or a person was going out to be executed by a gentile court,10The officers of a gentile court are likely to accept bribes. Hence, the fact that one was sentenced to death is not necessarily proof that he died. a person dragged by a wild beast, one upon whom a landslide fell, or one carried away by a river, we regard the individuals with the stringencies appropriate to both the living and the dead.11In these situations, there is a high likelihood - but no definite proof that the person died. Hence, his wife must assume that he is dead and accept all the stringencies that state would apply. At the same time, she cannot act on the assumption that he is dead and remarry. The Rambam continues explaining the implications of this status vis-à-vis terumah. Therefore if among the women were the daughter of a priest married to an Israelite12She must presume her husband is alive and may not partake of terumah for that reason. or the daughter of an Israelite married to a priest,13She must presume her husband is dead and may not partake of terumah for that reason. they may not partake [of terumah].If, however, a person was sentenced to death in a [Jewish] court and was taken to the place where he will be stoned,14A person sentenced to be executed may be given a reprieve from execution if a redeeming factor is found for him (Hilchot Sanhedrin 13:1). Nevertheless, once he has already been brought to the place of execution, it is very unlikely that this will happen (Kessef Mishneh). we presume that he is dead and his wife may not partake [of terumah].15I.e., if she is the daughter of an Israelite married to a priest. If she is the daughter of a priest married to an Israelite, she may partake of terumah.
If a woman left her husband while he was in his death throes in another country, she may not partake of terumah, whether she is the daughter of a priest married to an Israelite or the daughter of an Israelite married to a priest. [The rationale is that] most people in their death throes die.16Hence, the daughter of the Israelite may not partake of terumah. On the other hand, not all die. Hence, since a daughter of the priest married to an Israelite was not partaking of terumah beforehand, this is not considered sufficient reason to allow her to do so (Radbaz).If one witness testifies that [a woman's husband] has died and one testifies that he has not died, she may not partake [of terumah].17Although a woman is not given permission to remarry in such an instance (Hilchot Gerushin 12:18), she is still not permitted to partake of terumah.
[When a man is married to two wives and] one of the wives tells the other that their husband died, since [the other wife] cannot marry by virtue of this testimony,18Hilchot Gerushin 12:16 states that, if no one contradicts the testimony, whenever a witness testifies that a woman's husband died, his or her word is accepted with the exception of five women: another wife of that man, a woman who is her husband's yevamah, the woman's mother-in-law, her mother-in-law's daughter, and her husband's daughter from another wife. In all these instances, we fear that there is enmity between these women and the man's wife and they will testify falsely so that she will marry another man and hence, be forced to accept a divorce from her husband. she may continue to partake of terumah19The Ra'avad does not accept the Rambam's ruling and maintains that even though the woman is not allowed to remarry, she should not be allowed to partake of terumah. For perhaps these women are telling the truth. The Radbaz supports the Rambam's ruling. on the presumption that her husband is alive until a person upon whose testimony is sufficient to enable her to marry testifies concerning her. [The same ruling applies] if such testimony is given by any of the five women whose testimony is not accepted if they say that her husband died.20Hilchot Gerushin 12:16 states that, if no one contradicts the testimony, whenever a witness testifies that a woman's husband died, his or her word is accepted with the exception of five women: another wife of that man, a woman who is her husband's yevamah, the woman's mother-in-law, her mother-in-law's daughter, and her husband's daughter from another wife. In all these instances, we fear that there is enmity between these women and the man's wife and they will testify falsely so that she will marry another man and hence, be forced to accept a divorce from her husband.
When [a priest] frees his servant, from the time he transfers21The Rambam's wording allows for the interpretation that this ruling applies whether he gives the bill of emancipation to the servant or to another person on behalf of the servant (see Hilchot Avadim 6:1). his bill of emancipation22The formal legal contract freeing him from slavery. to him, he disqualifies him from partaking of terumah. Whenever a servant is given his freedom, but his bill of emancipation is withheld as will be explained in Hilchot Avadim,23As stated in Hilchot Avadim 5:4, et al, there are certain situations where a servant is deserving of his freedom. Nevertheless, he does not receive the status of a freed servant until he receives his bill of emancipation. Even so, he is forbidden to partake of terumah from the time he becomes worthy of freedom. he is, nonetheless, forbidden to partake of terumah.
There is a doubt [whether the transfer of the ownership of a servant is effective in the following situation]. A person composed a legal document transferring his property - which included servants - to another person. He [did not give the document to that person directly, but instead] gave it to another person on his behalf.24In such a situation, we say that since generally, it is considered desirable to receive a gift, the intended recipient acquires the property unless he lodges an objection at the time he hears about the gift. See Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 4:2. The recipient [of the present] remained silent and afterwards, protested. There is a doubt whether his protests reflected his initial disposition25I.e., that he never desired to receive the present and thus it never left the domain of its initial owner (ibid.:3). and thus [the servants] have never left the initial domain or whether his protest after his initial silence is [interpreted as] a renunciation of his initial position.26And thus, he is considered to have acquired the property - and the servants - and then to have renounced ownership of it and them. Therefore, [the servants] may not partake of terumah. [This applies] whether the second master27The recipient of the present. was an Israelite and the first master, a priest or the first master was an Israelite and the second, a priest.28For in either situation, there is a possibility that their present owner is an Israelite.
When an Israelite rents livestock from a priest, he may feed it terumah.29Because the rental does not interrupt the priests's ownership. The Israelite must, however, transfer ownership of the terumah to the priest before feeding it to the animal. When a priest rents livestock from an Israelite, although he is obligated to provide it with food, he may not feed it terumah, because it is not his financial acquisition.30There are, however, contexts where rental is considered equivalent to purchase. See Hilchot Sechirut 7:1.
When an Israelite receives a cow from a priest for the sake of fattening it and has it evaluated so that its increase in value will be split,31This was a popular arrangement in the Talmudic era. The owner of livestock would give it to a shepherd to fatten. The shepherd would have it evaluated and accept responsibility for its value although he did not actually pay the priest anything. Afterwards, when it has been fattened, the value which the shepherd accepted responsibility for is returned to the owner and the two share the profits equally. See Hilchot Shluchin VeShutafim 8:1-4 and Hilchot Malveh ViLoveh 8:12 for more details concerning this arrangement. he may not feed it terumah even though the priest has a share in its increase in value. If, by contrast, a priest receives a cow from an Israelite for the sake of fattening it and has it evaluated, he may feed it terumah. [The rationale is that] although the Israelite has a share in its increase in value, its body belongs to the priest, because he has [accepted responsibility] for its value.
When a cow belonging to an Israelite gives birth to its firstborn, the owner may feed it terumah, for the firstborn belongs to the priests.32And thus the law mentioned in the first clause of Halachah 7 applies. A person may store vetch33A type of legume used as animal fodder. that is terumah in his dovecote. He need not worry that his doves will come and eat it.34Even a priest may not feed his doves terumah, for terumah may only be given to domesticated animals. Nevertheless, everyone, even Israelites, need not take precautions against an animal eating vetch that is terumah on its own initiative. The Radbaz explains that the rationale is that the obligation to separate terumah from vetch is merely Rabbinic in origin. Implied is that if the obligation was Scriptural in origin, one could not take such leniency. It must be noted, however, that not all authorities consider the obligation to separate terumah from vetch as Rabbinic.
It appears to me35This introduction precedes a law which the Rambam derived through his own process of deduction without an explicit source in the previous Rabbinic literature. that if a priest sold his cow to an Israelite and took payment, he can no longer feed it terumah even though the purchaser has not drawn it into his domain as of yet. [The rationale is that] according to Scriptural Law, the transfer of money completes a transaction, as will be explained in Hilchot Mekach UMemcar.36Hilchot Mechirah 3:1. There it is explained that the Rabbis required the purchaser to draw the article into his possession for the transaction to be completed. [Conversely,] if an Israelite sold a cow to a priest, he should not feed it terumah until he draws it into his domain37And thus completes the transaction. even though he already made payment.

=== 10 | chapter 10 ===
When a non-priests partakes of terumah unknowingly, he must make restitution for the principal and add a fifth.1As stated in Halachah 26, the intent is one fifth of the new total. Thus if a person eats the value of four measures of grain, he must pay five. Moreover, he may not use grain that is terumah to make restitution, he must use ordinary grain (which is more expensive). This fifth becomes considered as terumah itself and must be eaten in a state of ritual purity. See also Halachah 15. Even if he knows that it is terumah and that he is warned against partaking of it, but he does not know whether or not he is liable for death,2At the hand of heaven. he is considered to have acted unknowingly and he must make restitution for the principal and add a fifth.
A person who eats an article [that is terumah] that is ordinarily eaten, drinks something that is ordinarily drunk, or smears himself with something ordinarily used for that purpose [is liable],3Since these are the ways in which one may benefit from terumah (see Chapter 11, Halachah 1), these are the ways for which one is liable for partaking of it. as [derived from Leviticus 22:15]: "And they shall not defile the sacraments of the children of Israel." This includes one who smears himself.4The implication of the verse is that just as eating involves tangible physical satisfaction, so too, smearing oneself produces tangible physical satisfaction.Whether one partakes of terumah which is ritually pure or ritually impure unknowingly, one must make restitution for the principal and add a fifth.5It appears that in contrast to the intentional violation of the prohibition mentioned in Halachah 5, in this instance, the transgressor should pay the full value of the terumah even if it is ritually impure. The rationale is that here a person is receiving atonement for his transgression. Hence, he is required to make full payment. He is not liable for a fifth until he eats an olive-sized portion, as [indicated by ibid.:14]: "When one will eat a sacrament unknowingly"; eating implies consuming no less than an olive-sized portion. Just as one is liable for eating an olive-sized portion, so too, [one is liable for] drinking an olive-sized portion.6The Radbaz explains at length why although with regard to most prohibitions, the minimum measure for which one is liable for drinking is a revi'it of a log, a larger measure than an olive-sized portion, in this instance an exception is made. The basis of his explanation is that this prohibition focuses on "eating" terumah, and as stated above, intaking an olive-sized portion constitutes eating.
[The following laws apply if a person] ate terumah and then ate again, drank and then drank again. If there is sufficient time to eat a half a loaf of bread7I.e., an equivalent of three egg-sized portions. If a person stretches out his consumption of an olive-sized beyond this time span, it s not considered as "eating," for he will not have ingested a significant amount at once. The Rabbis mention different opinions with regard to this time span, referred to as k'dai achilat pras, some as brief as 2 minutes and some as long as 9 minutes. Based on Shiurei Torah, the suggested practice is to consider k'dai achilat pras as 4 minutes with regard to eating matzah on Pesach, but 9 minutes with regard to eating on Yom Kippur. See also Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 14:9 and notes. from the time he began to eat until he concluded or sufficient time to drink a revi'it from the time he began to drink until he concluded,8The time to drink a revi'it is much less than k'dai achilat pras. The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's ruling, maintaining that the latter measure of time should be applied in this instance as well. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh cite sources to support the Rambam's view and note that he mentions this measure of time for drinking both with regard to the prohibition against drinking on Yom Kippur (Hilchot Shevitat Esor 2:4) and the prohibition against drinking gentile wine (Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 14:9). They do note, however, that in Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 8:11, however, the Rambam mentions the time span of k'dai achilat pras even with regard to drinking.They differentiate between the rulings as follows: In all the instances involving prohibitions against eating, the Rambam mentions the time to drink a revi'it because a person will not feel satisfaction if his drinking the minimum measure is stretched out over a longer span of time. In Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah, by contrast, the concept involves considering a person ritually impure because of his having ingested a quantity of liquid. As long as he does not wait longer than k'dai achilat pras, the liquid is still collected in his digestive system and has not begun to circulate throughout his body. [all he consumes] is combined to comprise an olive-sized portion.
Terumah, terumat ma'aser, whether the latter is from d'mai9Produce that we are unsure whether or not the tithes have been separated. The Rama (Yoreh De'ah 331:59) explains that the term is a composite of two Aramaic words da mai which mean: "What is this?", i.e., the person is unaware of the status of the produce with which he is dealing. or from produce from which the tithes were definitely [not separated], challah,10The portion of dough separated and given to the priests. and the first fruits can all be combined together to comprise an olive-sized portion11I.e., if one eats a little bit of any combination of these forbidden substances and the entire amount is an olive-sized portion, one is liable. for which one is liable for death12If the transgression was intentional. or [restitution, plus] a fifth,13If the transgression was performed unknowingly. for they are all called terumah [at different times in the Torah].14Challah is referred to as terumah in Numbers 15:20 and the first fruits are referred to as terumah in Deuteronomy 12:17.According to law, one should not be liable for a fifth for [the unknowing consumption of] terumat ma'aser that is d'mai, just as one is not liable for the second tithe [from d'mai], as will be explained.15Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 5:4. Since we are speaking about d'mai, produce from which separations are being made because of a doubt, there is no obligation according to Scriptural Law to add a fifth. With regard to ma'aser sheni, our Sages felt that if the obligation of an additional fifth was imposed, people would ignore the obligation to separate ma'aser sheni from d'mai entirely. With regard to terumat ma'aser from d'mai, they felt the converse is true. Were the obligation of an additional fifth not imposed, people would not treat the obligation to separate d'mai seriously. Nevertheless, our Sages said: If one is not liable for a fifth, people will treat it with disdain.
When a person partook terumah intentionally [after] receiving a warning, he is liable for lashes and is not required to make financial restitution.16A person never receives both corporal punishment and a financial penalty. Hence, he is liable only for lashes. See the notes to Chapter 6, Halachah 6, which explain why here he is punished by lashes and not required to make restitution. If he did not receive warning, [he is required to make financial restitution].17When he makes restitution, the produce he gives the priest is considered as ordinary produce and not as terumah (Terumot 7:1). If [the terumah] was ritually pure, he is required to make restitution for the principal, but is not required to add a fifth.18An addition of a fifth was required only in the case of inadvertent transgression. In his Commentary to the Mishneh (Terumot 7:1), the Rambam explains that the additional fifth was instituted for atonement and that was possible only when the transgression was violated unintentionally. When it was violated intentionally, the sin is too great for atonement to be granted in an ordinary manner. If [the terumah] was ritually impure, he is required to pay only as if it were wood, because it is fit only to use as fuel.19For terumah can only be eaten only when it is ritually pure. Accordingly, if one ate berries or pomegranates or the like that were terumah that became impure, he is not obligated to make restitution, because these are not fit to be used as fuel.20Since they have no value, there is no need for restitution.
When a person eats terumah that is chametz on Pesach, whether willfully or unknowingly, whether it is ritually impure or pure, he is exempt from financial liability.21The Ra'avad objects to the Rambam's decision, noting that it is the subject of a difference of opinion between the Sages of the Mishneh (see Pesachim 32a) and the opinion stated by the Rambam does not appear to be accepted in a definitive manner. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh provide interpretations of that passage that justify the Rambam's ruling. Even if he separated terumah from matzah, but it became chametz [before he ate it], he is exempt. 22Pesachim, loc. cit., speaks about an instance where a person steals terumah that is matzah from a priest and ate it. Even if it became chametz in the thief's domain in which instance, the thief caused the priest a loss, the thief is not liable financially. He is not even required to pay as if it were wood, because it is not fit for use as fuel. [Instead,] since it is forbidden to benefit from it,23See Hilchot Chametz UMatzah 1:2,4, et al. it is of no value whatsoever.
If, however, one unknowingly ate terumah on Yom Kippur,24When a person is forbidden to eat. In this instance, the prohibition rests on the person (the gavra in yeshivah terminology) and not the cheftza, the article in question. Hence he is liable. ate terumah that was perforated,25I.e., dough that is terumah is discovered with holes in it. Our Sages fear that the holes were made by a poisonous snake who deposited his venom in the dough. Hence, they forbade partaking of it (Hilchot Rotzeach UShemirat Nefesh 12:1). drank wine that was terumah that was left open,26This too was forbidden for a similar reason. We fear that a poisonous snake drank from it and deposited his venom there (ibid.:6-7). In these two instances, although the substances are forbidden, they are forbidden only in consideration for the person's wellbeing. There is no ritual prohibition resting on the foods. Hence one is liable. smeared himself with wine and oil [that were terumah] at the same time, or drank oil and vinegar [that were terumah] at the same time,27Halachah 11 states that one drinks oil or smears oneself with wine, he is liable only for the principal, for as the commentaries state there, that is not the customary manner of benefiting from these substances. In this halachah, the Rambam clarifies that if one combines the substances as he states here, this is considered as the normal pattern and one is liable. chewed raw kernels of wheat,28The Ra'avad notes that there is a difference of opinion concerning this matter in the Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot 6:1). The opinion cited by the Rambam is advanced by Rabbi Yehudah HaNasi while the majority of the Sages differ. Hence, he maintains that the Sages' view should be followed for, as stated in the following halachah with regard to barley, eating uncooked kernels of wheat is harmful. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh justify the Rambam's view. As stated in Hilchot Berachot 3:2, one is required to make a blessing when eating such kernels. This indicates one is deriving benefit and if one derives benefit from terumah, he is required to make restitution. or swallowed vinegar,29It is uncommon to partake of these foods in this manner. Nevertheless, it is not so infrequent a practice to reduce one's liability. he is liable to make restitution for the principal and add a fifth.
When a person is satisfied and is disgusted by his food, but continues eating terumah despite the fact that he is satisfied, he is not required to add a fifth [when making restitution, for the prooftext cited above] states: "When one will eat...." [Implied is that he is when he eats in an ordinary manner] and not when he harms himself.30Note the parallel with regard to the prohibition against eating on Yom Kippur (Hilchot Shivitat Esor 2:7). There too the Rambam rules that consuming food in such a state is not considered as "eating." Similarly, when one chews raw kernels of barley, he is not liable, because he harms himself.
When a non-priest swallowed prunes of terumah [whole31If, however, he chewed them before swallowing them, the second person is not liable at all. For once they have been chewed, they are entirely worthless (Radbaz). unknowingly] and then regurgitated them, and another person came and also ate them unknowingly, the first person is required to make restitution for the principal and add a fifth32For swallowing the fruit whole is also considered eating. and the second person is obligated to pay the first one as if the prunes were wood.33After the person swallowed the prunes, the sanctity of terumah within them is considered to have been desecrated. For that reason, the first person who swallowed them is required to make restitution. They become his property and the second one is liable as one who damages the property of the first.
When one feeds terumah to workers34Whom he agreed to supply with meals in addition to their wages. or to guests, they are required to make restitution for the principal and add a fifth, for they acted unknowingly.35In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 6:3), the Rambam elaborates on why the guests and not the host are responsible, citing the principle (Kiddushin 42b) that a person cannot act as an agent to perform a transgression for a colleague. Instead, the transgression is solely the responsibility of the person who performed it, in this instance, the people who partook of the food. He must pay them for their meal,36I.e., the full price of the meal were it to have been prepared from ordinary produce. for ordinary produce is more valuable than the terumah,37For this reason, it is preferable for the workers to have the employer pay them rather than having him pay the principal for the terumah (Radbaz). since a person's soul is repelled from forbidden food.38Note a similar ruling in Hilchot Mechirah 16:14. This principle is stated by the Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot, loc. cit.) in explanation of the reason the employer is required to reimburse his workers. Seemingly, he was required to provide them with a meal. He did and they ate to their satisfaction, why then is he liable to them? Our Sages explain, based on the above principle, that since the food was forbidden, their souls did not derive true satisfaction from it and hence, he is required to give them a meal.
When [a non-priest] feeds terumah to his children who were below majority39The children are not liable, for they are not obligated in the observance of the mitzvot. or to his servants whether they are above or below majority,40The servants are not liable, for they have no independent financial capacity. he must pay the principal, but not the additional fifth.41See Halachah 15 which states that whenever a person is required to pay only the principal, the grain that he pays is not considered as terumah. [This ruling also applies to] one who partakes of terumah from the Diaspora,42For it is forbidden only according to Rabbinic Law and the Sages did not require this additional payment. one who eats or drinks less than an olive-sized portion,43One is not liable in this instance, because the prooftext requiring payment of the additional fifth mentions "eating," and eating or drinking less than an olive-sized portion is not considered as "eating" [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 7:3)]. a nazarite who unknowingly drank wine that was terumah,44Wine is forbidden to a nazirite whether it is terumah or not and our Sages explain that eating a forbidden substance is not considered "eating." In this context, a distinction can be made between eating on Yom Kippur which is an issur gavra, i.e., the food is not forbidden, the person is forbidden to partake of it, and wine for a nazirite, which is an issur cheftza, the wine itself becomes forbidden for him (Pri Megadim, Eshel Avraham 202:11). This explanation resolves an objection lodged by the Ra'avad who cites a Tosefta that rules differently than the Rambam. one drinks oil [without it being mixed with other liquids] and one who smears himself with wine.45In the latter two instances, these are not ordinary ways of benefiting from these products.
When the daughter of a priest who was married to an Israelite or disqualified [from partaking of terumah for other reasons] partook of terumah, she must make restitution for the principal, but she is not required to add a fifth.46Since she was entitled to partake of terumah previously, a distinction is made between her and other non-priest. See the Sifra to Leviticus 22:12.When a woman47The daughter of an Israelite married to a priest who was therefore entitled to partake of terumah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 8:1)]. was partaking of terumah and she was told: "Your husband died," or "...divorced you," she is required to pay only the principal.48As in the previous clause. If the terumah was chametz on the day preceding Pesach, she is exempt from making restitution. [The rationale is that then] the time is pressing and she hurried to eat without investigating.49The Kessef Mishneh explains that since it is a pressing time, it is considered as if the transgression was violated due to forces beyond her control (ones).[These same laws apply] when a servant was partaking [of terumah] and he was told: "Your master died and left an heir who does not entitle you to eat,"50E.g., his son was a challal or he had no sons and his daughter was married to an Israelite (ibid.). "...sold you to an Israelite," "...gave you to him as a present," or "...freed you," and when a priest was partaking [of terumah] and he discovered that he is the son of a divorcee or a woman who underwent chalitzah.51With regard to the servant, the same logic that applies with regard to the women mentioned previously applies to him. Since he was allowed to partake of terumah previously, he is not held responsible for the additional fifth. With regard to the priest who was disqualified, we find that he still has a certain vestige of connection to the priesthood, as evidenced by the fact that were he to bring an offering in the Temple, it would be acceptable after the fact (Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash 6:10). Therefore it is sufficient for him to make restitution for the principal [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)]. In all of these instances, if these individuals had terumah in their mouths when they discovered that they were forbidden to partake of it, they should spit it out.52Even though by spitting it out, he is spoiling the terumah, that is preferable to swallowing it. For until he swallows it, he is not considered to have partaken of it (Radbaz).
[Similarly, when a priest] was partaking [of terumah] and he was told: "You became impure," "The terumah became impure,"53In these instances, when he began eating, he was permitted to do so, it is only afterwards, that he or the terumah became impure. "You were impure," or "the terumah was impure,"54Thus from the outset, he should not have partaken of the terumah. he should spit it out. [The same ruling applies] if he discovered that [the terumah] was tevel, the first tithe from which terumat ma'aser had not been separated,55In which instance, it is forbidden to partake of it until the appropriate separations are made. or ma'aser sheni56The second tithe which cannot be eaten outside of Jerusalem unless it is redeemed. or consecrated property that was not redeemed, or [when partaking of the terumah,] he tasted a bug.57And the disgusting taste of the bug prevented him from swallowing the terumah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.)].
When there are two containers, one of terumah and one of ordinary produce, and terumah fell into one of them, but it is not known which one, we operate under the supposition that it fell into the one which [contained] terumah.58In this instance, although there is reason to suspect that the terumah fell into the other container, we consider it as ordinary produce. The rationale is that we were operating under the chazzakah, prevailing assumption, that the container was filled with ordinary produce. Hence, unless there is a strong likelihood otherwise, we continue to operate under that perspective.This reflects a principle that has ramifications beyond the laws of terumah. Although generally, we maintain that when there is a doubt regarding a Scriptural prohibition, we rule stringently, in this instance, since there is a plausible explanation for the lenient ruling, it is accepted. See also Chapter 13, Halachah 13-14, and the Tur and the Shulchan Aruch, Yoreh De'ah, sec. 111.There is, however, a point that has to be clarified. In Chapter 13, it is explained that this principle applies with regard to matters of Rabbinic Law, but not matters of Scriptural Law, and yet, here we are dealing even with questions involving terumah of Scriptural status. Nevertheless, there is no difficulty, because here we are not speaking about whether it is permissible to partake of the mixture or not. That question was discussed in Chapter 13, and the ruling was rendered that it is forbidden. Here the question concerns financial restitution: Is the non-priest required to pay for the produce that he ate? With regard to this point, the Rambam explains that we can use the above reasoning.If it is not known which one is terumah and a non-priest partakes of one of them, he is not liable for payment.59For the additional fifth. The principal, i.e., the remaining container, must certainly be given to the priest. For if the one which was eaten was terumah, the second one should be given to him as payment for the first. And if the one that was eaten was not terumah, than the remaining one is and it must be given to the priest. [The rationale is that when a person seeks] to expropriate money from a colleague, the burden of proof is on him.60Thus if the priest seeks to expropriate the additional fifth, he must prove that the container consumed was terumah.This is a fundamental principle in Jewish Law. Whenever there is a doubt with regard to the ownership of money or movable property, the person in physical possession of the property in question is allowed to maintain possession until the claimant proves his claim. See Hilchot Mechirah 20:5, et al. He must treat the other one as if it were terumah. If another person partakes of the other one, however, he is also exempt.61From the additional fifth. For in this instance as well, we are not certain that he partook of terumah. If, however, one person eats them both, he must make restitution for the smaller one.62For he definitely partook of terumah. Nevertheless, since we do not know which one was terumah, he can only be held liable for the smaller one, because of the principle stated above. If he did so intentionally, he is required to make restitution for the principal. If he did so unknowingly, he is required to make restitution for the principal, plus a fifth.
When a person eats the additional fifth unknowingly, he must [make restitution for it and] add another fifth.63For the fifth originally added becomes considered as terumah and compensation must be made for it. For the fifth is considered as the principal with regard to all matters.64I.e., it must be eaten in a state of ritual purity. Similarly, he continues to add a fifth for every fifth forever.65When Leviticus 5:24 speaks of adding a fifth, it uses a form that could be interpreted as plural, "its fifths." The implication is that he may have to add many fifths [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 6:1)].Whenever a person makes restitution for the principal and the additional fifth, [the grain] he gives is terumah with regard to all matters66I.e., if it becomes mixed with ordinary grain, the laws of dimua (the mixture of terumah) apply (ibid.). [with one exception]. If they were sown, the grain that grows is ordinary produce.67In contrast, grain growing from terumah is considered as terumah (Chapter 11, Halachah 21). If the priest wishes to forgo [the payment], he cannot.68For we are not speaking about a mere financial payment owed the priest, but a means of attaining atonement. Whenever, [by contrast,] a person makes restitution only for the principal,69See Halachah 5 and Halachot 11-12. [the grain] he gives is ordinary grain70I.e., none of the restrictions of terumah apply to it. and if the priest desires to forgo payment, he may.
[The following laws apply if] a daughter of an Israelite partakes of terumah and then marries a priest. If [she partook] of terumah that had not been acquired by a priest,71I.e., it had been separated, but had not been given to a priest. she may make restitution of the principal and the additional fifth to herself.72She must separate this grain to receive atonement. Nevertheless, since as a priest's wife, she is entitled to partake of terumah, she may take the terumah she separates as her own. If she partook of terumah that a priest had acquired, she is required to make restitution of the principal to its owner,73That priest. but she may keep the additional fifth as her own. For whenever a person makes restitution and pays an additional fifth, he may give the additional fifth to whichever priest he desires.
If she was not able to make restitution before she was divorced,74Or she was widowed and left childless (Radbaz). she can no longer make restitution to herself and she is like a person who never married a priest at all.
Whenever a person partakes of terumah whether unknowingly or intentionally, he may make restitution only from ordinary produce from which the terumot and the tithes have been separated. Restitution may be made from leket, shichichah, pe'ah,75See Hilchot Matanot Aniyim for a definition of these terms. They are acceptable for this purpose, because once they are acquired by a poor person, they become his private property. ownerless grain,76Terumah need not be separated from such grain or from the presents for the poor. and grain from the first tithe after terumat ma'aser was separated i.e., even if the great terumah from that crop had not been separated, for the person separated the tithes before the terumah.77The Kessef Mishneh explains that we are referring to an instance where the person separated the first tithe while the crop is still stalks of grain and gave it to the Levite before it has been winnowed. As explained in Chapter 3, Halachah 13, in such an instance, it is not necessary to separate the great terumah. If, however, it is ordinary grain from which the separations were not made in the proper order, it cannot be used to make restitution for terumah.One may make restitution from the second tithes and consecrated property that were redeemed, even though they were not redeemed in an appropriate manner.78In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 6:5), the Rambam explains that this refers to the second tithe that was redeemed using an unminted coin or consecrated property that was redeemed with land. The commentaries have questioned this interpretation, noting that usually redemption with such articles is not effective at all (see Hilchot Ma'aser Sheni 4:9; Hilchot Arachin 7:1). They cite the Rambam's Commentary to Berachot 7:1 which interprets this term as referring to a situation where the principal was paid, but the additional fifth that is required was not. And one may make restitution using new grain79New grain refers to grain harvested after the omer offering. Old grain refers to grain from the previous harvest. for old grain. One may not, however, make restitution from one type [of grain] for another type [of grain]. [This is derived from Leviticus 22:14:] "And he shall give the priest the sanctified [food]." [Implied is that it must be the same] as the sanctified food he ate.
When a person eats zucchini from the sixth year,80In the seventh year and thus there is no way he can acquire the zucchini of the sixth year. he should wait until [he acquires] the zucchini of the eighth year to make restitution from them. For he cannot pay his debt from the crops of the seventh year, as will be explained in that place.81See Hilchot Shemitah VeYovel 6:10 which states that the crops of the Sabbatical year may not be used to pay debts, for this is comparable to using them for commercial purposes which is forbidden.
When a person ate terumah that was ritually impure, he makes restitution from ordinary produce, whether pure or impure.82The produce he gives as restitution will be considered as impure terumah. Hence, there is no difficulty in him giving impure produce. If he partook of terumah that was ritually pure, he should make restitution with ordinary grain that is pure.83For if the grain is impure, it will not be an adequate replacement. If he made restitution from ordinary grain that was impure whether intentionally or unknowingly, the restitution he made is accepted, but he must make restitution again from ritually pure grain.
When a person partook of terumah belonging to a chaver,84A person who is careful to observe the laws of ritual purity. See Chapter 6, Halachah 2; Hilchot Ma'aser, ch. 10. he should make restitution to him. If he partook of terumah belonging to a common person,85Who is not necessarily careful concerning the laws of ritual purity. he should make restitution to a chaver,86So that the laws of ritual purity are adhered to. and take its worth from him and give it to the common person whose terumah he ate.87So that he is reimbursed for his loss. For we do not give articles that require ritually purity to a common person.
When [an Israelite] stole terumah from his maternal grandfather who was a priest and consumed it [unknowingly], and afterwards, his maternal grandfather died, he may not make restitution to himself,88Even though he is an heir, since we are speaking about stolen property, he may not maintain possession of it, but instead must remove it from his domain and give it to someone else. Note the parallel in Hilchot Gezeilah 8:2-3. but rather to another heir89Since the terumah belonged to his maternal grandfather, it is not appropriate that the restitution be given to someone who does not share a family connection with him. Hence he may give it to any member of the family who is a priest, e.g., one of his uncles (Radbaz). from [the priestly] tribe. Similarly, if he inherited terumah from his maternal grandfather and partook of it, a creditor collected terumah [as payment] for a debt and he partook of it or a woman [received it as part of the money due her by virtue of] her ketubah and she partook of it, they must make restitution for the principal and the additional fifth90This is speaking about an instance where the person did not know that the produce he ate was terumah and thus transgressed unknowingly. to a priest who is a chaver and that chaver gives them the monetary equivalent of the terumah at the time they partook of it.91To explain this ruling: Since these individuals are not entitled to partake of terumah, they must atone for partaking of it by making restitution and adding a fifth. Nevertheless, the terumah legitimately belonged to them. Hence, after the priest receives the grain given for atonement, he should reimburse the person for the worth of the terumah.
When a person steals terumah but does not consume it, he should pay twice its worth92As is required when making restitution for theft (Exodus 22:3 . to the owners.93Although terumah is consecrated, it belongs to its owners. For even an Israelite has the right to give it to the priest he desires. He may make this payment according to the worth of terumah.94Which is less expensive than ordinary grain. When making restitution to atone for partaking of terumah, it is necessary to pay with ordinary grain. In this instance, however, he need not atone for partaking of terumah. All that is necessary is to pay twice the amount of the article he stole. If he stole it and ate it, he must pay twice the principal and a fifth of the principal: i.e., the principal and an additional fifth from ordinary grain,95To atone for partaking of terumah. and the principal according to the worth of terumah.96To atone for the theft.
When a person steals terumah that is consecrated to the Temple treasury97I.e., a priest was given terumah and consecrated it to the Temple treasury [the Ramban's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 6:4)]. We are forced to say this because terumah separated by an Israelite must be given to a priest and may not be given to the Temple treasury. and eats it, he is not required to pay a double amount, for a double amount is not paid to the Temple treasury, as explained in the appropriate place.98Hilchot Geneivah 2:1. When speaking about the thief's obligation to pay double, Exodus 22:8 states: "He shall pay his colleague double," i.e., his colleague, another human, and not the Temple treasury (Bava Metzia 57b). He must, however, make restitution for the principal and add two fifths, one fifth [to atone] for partaking of terumah and one fifth [to atone] for benefiting from consecrated property.99This is the standard penalty to atone for this transgression (Hilchot Meilah 1:3,5).To whom does he make restitution? If [the terumah] was the size of an olive100For the liability for terumah depends on the produce being the size of an olive. and it was not worth a p'rutah,101For the liability of misusing consecrated property depends on it being worth a p'rutah, he should make restitution to the priests. If it is worth a p'rutah - whether or not it is the size of an olive - he should pay the Temple treasury.
Why does the prohibition against benefiting from consecrated property fall [on this grain when it is already forbidden because of] the prohibition against terumah?102The Rambam's question is based on the principle that, generally, once an object is forbidden because of one prohibition, it does not become forbidden again, because of a second one (see Keritot 14a). Because the terumah was forbidden to a non-priest and permitted to a priest. Once he consecrated it, it became forbidden to a priest. Therefore a prohibition was added to it even for an Israelite in the manner explained in the laws of forbidden relationships and forbidden foods.103See Hilchot Issurei Bi'ah 17:9; Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 14:19. In these sources, it is explained that one of the exceptions to this principle is an issur mosif, a negative commandment that increases the scope of the prohibition, including entities that were not originally forbidden. See the Ramban's Commentary to the Mishnah (loc. cit.).
When a person obtains terumah by robbery,104The difference between geneivah (theft) and gezeilah (robbery) can be explained as follows: Theft implies taking a colleague's property discreetly. Robbery, by contrast, involves taking something by force against the will of its owner (Hilchos Geneivah 1:3). he must make restitution for the principal and add one fifth.105And only one fifth, in contrast to the law regarding a thief in Halachah 23, where he is required to atone for the theft as well. [The rationale is that] the fifth that he is liable for [to atone for partaking of] terumah fulfills his obligation for robbery,106The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, asking why the person is not liable for an additional fifth to atone for taking a false oath concerning the robbery, as required by Hilchot Gezeilah 7:1-2. The commentaries explain that according to the Rambam, it is sufficient to give one fifth, for that atones for both transgressions. Although in Halachah 24, the Rambam requires two different fifths to be given, that is because one is required to atone for partaking of consecrated property. That is a different type of transgression and that requirement is not paralleled with regard to the transgression against taking a false oath. as [implied by Leviticus 22:14:] "And you shall give the priest the sacred [food]." He is liable only for the fifth [associated with atonement for] the sacred [food]. If he obtains terumah through robbery and feeds it to another person, that person must make restitution for the principal and add a fifth.107For he must atone for partaking of terumah unknowingly, as in Halachah 10.Whenever we have said that a person must make restitution for the principal and add a fifth, [the intent is that] if he ate grain worth four [zuz], he must pay five108I.e., the fifth is one fifth of the new total. See parallels in Hilchot Arachin 4:5; Hilchot Meialah 1:5, Hilchot Gezeilah 7:5, et al. from the type of grain from which he partook. Whenever we mentioned [payment of] the principal and two fifths, [the intent is that] if he ate grain worth four [zuz], he must pay six. Whenever we mentioned [payment of] two principals and one fifth, [the intent is that] if he ate grain worth four [zuz], he must pay nine.Whenever he makes restitution, he must pay for the worth of the grain at the time he partook of it whether its value depreciated at the time he made restitution or appreciated.109The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, asking why is the person not required to pay the worth at the time of the robbery if the grain depreciated in price. The Radbaz explains that this is, in fact, the Rambam's intent and this halachah is speaking about an instance when he ate the terumah directly after stealing it. The Kessef Mishneh states that this halachah is not necessarily speaking about a thief, but about any person who partakes of terumah unknowingly. The time when he partakes of the terumah is equivalent to the time of theft.

=== 11 | chapter 11 ===
Terumah may be used for eating, drinking, and smearing upon oneself, for smearing upon oneself is equivalent to drinking, as [indicated by Psalms 109:18]: "It has entered his innards like water and like oil into his bones." And drinking is like eating.1The intent is that a person may benefit from terumah in all the ways one ordinarily benefits from produce.[One should] eat a substance fit to be eaten, drink a substance fit to be drunk, and smear a substance fit to be smeared. One should not smear wine and vinegar.2For it is not common to smear these substances. One may, however, smear oneself with pure oil3One may not, however, burn pure terumah oil. Since it is fit to be used for a person's direct satisfaction, it should not be used merely as kindling fuel (Radbaz). and may kindle impure oil. It is referred to as oil [fit for] burning universally.
It is permitted to compress dates that are terumah and collect them as a cake of dried dates.4For this is considered as benefiting from dates as food. It is, however, forbidden to make them into beer.5In Babylon, it was customary to make beer out of dates. Nevertheless, it is forbidden to do this from dates which are terumah, because one should not make terumah which is food into a liquid (the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah, Terumot 11:3). [For the same reason,] we do not make dates into honey, nor apples, wine, nor fall produce into vinegar.6Although fall grapes are not of the same quality as ordinary summer grapes and thus might be used for vinegar, since this is a deviation of the ordinary way in which the grapes are used, it is not appropriate to use terumah produce in this manner. Similarly, with regard to other produce, we do not change them from their natural state if they are terumah; the only exceptions are olives and grapes.7For using them to produce oil and wine respectively is considered an ordinary - if not the preferable way - of using them. Indeed, when mentioning these products, Numbers 18:12 refers to them as "oil" and "wine," not as olives and grapes [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 11:3)].If one transgressed and made food into a beverage, one should drink it.8For it is still considered as terumah and it should not be wasted. When a non-priest partakes of date-honey, apple-wine, or the like that is terumah inadvertently, he is not liable to make restitution.9For they are not considered as the fruit itself, merely as its by-products.The Ra'avad maintains that if these products were already given to a priest, the non-priest must make restitution for their value. For taking them is equivalent to stealing. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishnehmaintain that the Rambam would also accept this ruling, for in his Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.:2), he states that the person who partakes of these products is liable for the principal, but not for an additional fifth. If he partook [of such products] intentionally, he should be given stripes for rebellious conduct.10The punishment given for violating a Rabbinic prohibition. He is not considered as liable for lashes, because he is not liable for the transgression of a Scriptural prohibition for the same reason mentioned in the previous note.
We may not place dried dates and dried figs [that are terumah] into brine.11Because this ruins them. Putting these fruits into brine would allow the juice they contained to be extracted. One may, however, place wine in brine.12This is done to improve the flavor of the brine. We do not place fragrant herbs in oil, because doing so removes it from the category of food and makes it oil for smearing. One may mix wine, honey, pepper, and the like, in order to partake of them.13It was common to make such a mixture in the Talmudic era.
We do not boil wine that is terumah, because this reduces its quantity.14This applies even though boiling it improves its taste and fragrance [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (ibid.)]. We do not pickle onions that are terumah in vinegar that is terumah, because this spoils the vinegar.We do not mix grain with legumes.15For this ruins the grain and grain is more important than legumes (Radbaz). All substances that become distinct from each other when they are sorted through a sieve may be mixed together. When the land of Judah was laid waste,16In the Roman conquest. [the people] began mixing one type of grain with another17There was a sparsity of grain and the people did not care to differentiate one species from the other. and one type of legumes with another. They did not, however, [mix] grain with legumes.
In the same way as ordinary flour is sifted, so too, a priest [sifts flour] that is terumah. He sifts [what is fit] to eat and discards the bran.18Even though it is terumah and he will thus be discarding bran that is terumah. This is allowed since he is doing the same as he would with ordinary produce. If he desires to make fine flour, he should sift it many times until he produces a kab or two kabbim from a se'ah.19A se'ah contains six kabbim. Nevertheless, because the person is sifting the flour carefully, he may be left with only one or two kabbim from the entire se'ah. He should not discard the remainder, because it is fit to be eaten.20Hence it is forbidden to destroy it. Instead, he should place it in a private place.21Where it will not be taken by another person.
Oil that is terumah should not be used to seal an oven or a range,22For this will be using it for a purpose other than a person's direct physical benefit. nor should it be smeared on a shoe or sandal.23Applying oil to leather objects strengthens them (Kessef Mishneh). Nor should one smear it on his foot while [the foot] is in a shoe or sandal.24Because the oil will be applied to the shoe and the sandal directly. He may, however, smear [oil that is terumah] on his foot and put on a shoe or smear his entire body and then roll on a new leather mat. Even though they will be smeared, he need not show concern.25Once the oil has been applied to his flesh, its sacred quality is divested. Hence, the fact that afterwards, the oil becomes applied to the leather is not significant. He should not, however, place oil on a marble tablet to roll upon because he causes it to be ruined.26One certainly is not allowed to place oil that is terumah on a leather mat, because that will cause it to be absorbed in the mat and thus not applied to the person's skin. One might, however, think that it is permitted to use a marble tablet for this purpose, because none of the oil will be absorbed. Nevertheless, a certain amount of oil will remain on the tablet and thus be ruined. This is forbidden (Kessef Mishneh).
Whenever anyone partakes of terumah - even fruit27Washing one's hands before partaking of ordinary fruit is, by contrast, considered a sign of haughtiness (Hilchot Berachot 6:3). With regard to bread, however, our Sages ordained that one must wash even before partaking of ordinary bread. - he must wash his hands [before doing so. This applies] even if his hands are pure, as will be explained in the appropriate place.28See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 8:8. See also the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Challah 1:9). It may not be eaten on a table at which a non-priest [is dining; this is] a decree lest he partake of it. Terumah from the Diaspora29Which is separated only by virtue of Rabbinic decree. may be eaten on a table at which a non-priest [is dining] and, like ordinary food, does not require that one wash his hands before partaking of it.We do not smear oil that is terumah with soiled30The intent is not necessarily impure hands, but any hands that one has not watched carefully to make sure that they are pure. For if one touches oil with such hands, it is impure by Rabbinic decree (Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTuma'ah 8:8-10). hands.31For this would make the terumah impure and that is forbidden. Instead, one must wash his hands before applying oil to his body (Kessef Mishneh). If, however, [such oil] fell on his flesh, he can rub it with soiled hands.32For once it comes in contact with his flesh, its sacred quality departs and the fact that one's hands are impure is not significant (ibid., based on Keritot 7a). One may apply oil that is terumah to an infant during the seven days after he was born [even though he is uncircumcised].33And it is forbidden for an uncircumcised person to make use of terumah, as stated in Chapter 7, Halachah 10. For a newborn is not considered as uncircumcised for the first seven days [of his life].34In his gloss to the Mishneh Torah, B'nei Yaakov notes that although this question is left unresolved by the Babylonian Talmud (Yevamot 71a), the Rambam's ruling is based on the Jerusalem Talmud where the question is resolved.
A priest may smear oil that is terumah on himself and then bring his daughter's son who is an Israelite and roll him on his back.35Even though his Israelite grandson will come in contact with the oil and benefit from it, that is of no concern for once it touches the flesh of the priest, its holiness departs and even a non-priest may benefit from it. If he smears oil [that is terumah] on his body and enters a bathhouse, a non-priest may massage him36The Kessef Mishneh offers this interpretation in order to maintain the standard version of the Mishneh Torah. He, however, suggests that the version is in error and that the proper version is that he can attend to him. in the bathhouse even though [the oil] will be applied to him.
When the daughter of a priest applied chilbah37A pungent herb. which is terumah to her hair, an Israelite woman is not permitted to apply [the remaining chilbah] to [her hair]. She may, however, rub her hair together with the hair [of the daughter of the priest].38Although the chilbahwill also be applied to the hair of the Israelite woman, since it was first applied to the hair of the priest's daughter, its holiness has departed and it can then be applied to the Israelite woman's hair.Why were priests given permission to apply chilbah which is terumah to their hair?39For this is not considered direct physical benefit, like eating. Because it is not fit for human consumption [as food].40I.e., it is not normally eaten, because its taste is too sharp. If, however, it was entirely unfit for human consumption, there would be no obligation to separate terumah from it (Kessef Mishneh, see Chapter 2, Halachah 8, and Chapter 12, Halachah 7).
The stems of figs, dried figs, wild figs, carobs, the insides of melons,41The seeds and the juice in the melon [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Ediot 3:3)]. the peels of melons, esrogim, and cucumbers even if they do not contain any food, and the extremities of the vegetables that are discarded by homeowners [when preparing vegetables],42The tops and stems of vegetables that are cut off when preparing a vegetable for cooking (ibid.). are forbidden to non-priests.43Even though they are not fit to be eaten, since they are in contact with the food, they are considered like food (Radbaz). The extremities of the vegetables that are cut off by gardeners, by contrast, are permitted to non-priests.44For they cut off only those leaves that are not at all fit to be eaten, a homeowner, by contrast, will discard even those that are slightly undesirable (Kessef Mishneh). The Rambam is apparently relying on a version of the Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot 11:4) which is different than the standard printed version of the text.The casings of beans and sesame seeds are forbidden if they contain food. If they do not contain food, they are permitted.
The seeds of esrogim are permitted to be eaten.45For they are bitter and are not fit to be eaten (Radbaz). The seeds of olives, dates, and carobs, [by contrast,] even though they were not collected by a priest, are forbidden to a non-priest.46For usually, there is a certain amount of food attached to them.The commentaries note that the Rambam's ruling here represents a reversal of his position in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 11:5) where he rules more leniently with regard to carob seeds. With regard to other seeds, [the rule is]: If they were collected and have moisture, so that they can be sucked, they are forbidden to a non-priest. If they were discarded, they are permitted.47The rationale is that since it is only fit to be eaten under pressing circumstances, there is no obligation to separate terumah according to Scriptural Law. Instead, the obligation is Rabbinic in origin. It is a decree, instituted so that it not be exchanged with other produce. Since it has been discarded, it will not be exchanged. Hence, the decree was never applied in such situations.
Bran from wheat: Fresh bran is forbidden, for it is fit to be eaten by humans. Aged bran is permitted.48For it is no longer considered as food. Until when is the bran considered fresh? For the entire time that people are accustomed to beat the grain at the granaries.
Lower quality and slight rotten kernels of grain that are terumah are forbidden.49For they are still fit to be eaten. If they already produce dust,50If they are aged to the degree that they produce dust, they are no longer considered food and there is no prohibition against partaking of them. they are permitted. When one pours water over dregs [of grapes] that are terumah, the first and second batches are forbidden to non-priests, but the third is permitted.51For the influence of the grapes is not significant at that time. The Radbaz states that this leniency applies even if the mixture has the flavor of wine. If one does not pour water over them, but instead, strains off the wine from the seeds, even the third straining is forbidden to non-priests.
When one has cleared the kernels of wheat that are terumah from a grainheap, we do not require the owner to sit and collect the [leftover] kernels one by one and [only after collecting them] bring ordinary grain there. Instead, he may sweep the area in the ordinary manner, and then bring ordinary grain there.52The fact that there will be some grain that is terumah is not significant. Similarly, when a jug of oil that is terumah spills, we don't require [the owner] to sponge it up until [the earth] is dry.53Our translation is taken from the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 11:6). Instead, he may conduct himself as he does with ordinary [oil].54Even though some oil that is terumah will be left to spoil on the ground.
When a person pours out oil that is terumah from a jug, he should continue to pour until the stream [of oil] ceases and the oil begins to drip, little by little. Once three drops have dropped one after the other, it is sufficient. It is permitted to place ordinary oil in that jug.55Even though there will be some remnants of the oil that was terumah there, we do not require him to clean the jug thoroughly (ibid.:8). If, however, he did not place ordinary oil and leaned the jug on its side until the remnants [of the oil] collected together, those remnants are terumah.56The fact that he has diverted his attention from the oil is not significant; we do not suspect that other oil was added to the jug (ibid.).
A priest may fill a lamp with oil fit to be burnt57I.e., oil that is terumah that is ritually impure and hence, fit to be used as fuel for a lamp. and give it to an Israelite to ascend to a loft and enter a room to perform tasks on behalf of a priest,58The oil should be burnt for the sake of the priest and not for the sake of an Israelite. Nevertheless, since the priest derives benefit from the Israelite's acts, this is permitted. but not for the sake of an Israelite. If they were partners, it is permitted.
When an Israelite was a guest at a priest's [home]59When referring to this law, the Rama (Yoreh De'ah 331:19) mentions the converse situation as well. A priest visited an Israelite and the Israelite kindled a lamp for him using impure oil that is terumah. The Israelite may allow the lamp to continue burning after the priest departs.  and the priest kindled oil fit to be burnt for him and then departed, he is not required to extinguish [the lamp] until it burns out on its own.60Since the priest originally benefited from it, there is no prohibition in allowing it to continue to burn for the sake of the Israelite. An Israelite may dip a wick in the lamp of a priest61I.e., even though it contains oil from terumah that is impure. and kindle it so that he may proceed [using] it.62The Mishneh LiMelech explains that according to the Rambam, the prohibition against an Israelite benefiting from impure oil that is terumah is Rabbinic in origin. Our Sages did not impose their decree in a situation where a Jew would be forced to walk in the dark. Because of the danger involved, the Israelite is entitled to do this even without the permission of the priest (Kessef Mishneh).
When livestock belonging to a priest was standing next to livestock belonging to an Israelite or when garments belonging to a priest were being woven next to garments belonging to an Israelite, oil that is fit for burning may be kindled because of them without the permission of the priest.63Since the priest is deriving benefit from the oil, it may be kindled without asking him. And since he is deriving benefit from it, the Israelite may also derive benefit.The Radbaz emphasizes that this applies only when the priest does not object. If, however, he specifically lodges an objection, it is forbidden.Similarly, we can light oil that is fit to be burnt in synagogues, houses of study, and dark alleyways without the permission of a priest.64In all these instances, it is a mitzvah that benefits people at large to kindle the light and our Sages did not institute their decrees when doing so would impede the performance of such a mitzvah. And a person who does not have ordinary oil to kindle a Chanukah lamp may kindle oil that is fit to be burnt without permission of a priest.65The rationale is that he is performing a mitzvah. Since mitzvot were not given for our personal satisfaction (Rosh HaShanah 28a), he is not considered to be deriving personal benefit from kindling the Chanukah lamp. Nevertheless, if he has other oil, it is preferable for him to use that rather than impure terumah oil. We may kindle oil that is fit to be burnt above [the bed of] a sick person with the permission of a priest.66A priest must explicitly give permission for the oil to be kindled there [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 11:10)]. In contrast to the previous instances, the priest's permission is necessary in this situation, because only one individual - not people at large - are benefiting from the light (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh).
When a daughter of an Israelite who is married to a priest frequently visits her father, he may light [such oil] with her permission.67Since she is married to a priest, she is permitted to benefit from the kindling of this oil. And thus, all the laws mentioned above with regard to a priest, also apply with regard to her. It is permitted for a priest to kindle oil fit to be burnt in a house of mourning or at a wedding celebration68For this is also considered as a mitzvah that benefits people at large. even though a multitude of people are present. We do not suspect that the people will partake of it. At a wedding celebration, [this will not take place] because they will not touch it because of their garments are clean,69The garments worn by people at a wedding celebration are very clean and they will not want to soil them with oil that was used for a lamp [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 11:10)]. and in a house of mourning, the people will not feel free to do so because of their mourning.70They will be too preoccupied with their mourning to consider anything else (ibid.).
When a person sows terumah unknowingly, he should turn it over.71And thus destroy what he sowed (ibid. 9:1). This will be beneficial because he will be able to sow a new crop of ordinary produce instead. If he did so intentionally, he must maintain [the crop].72This will cause him to suffer a loss, for as the Rambam states in the following halachah, the produce of such a field may not be eaten by non-priests. Thus he will not be able to sell it at the price of ordinary produce. And yet he will have to till his land just as it was ordinary produce. Once it reaches a third of its growth, whether he sowed it intentionally or unknowingly, he must maintain [the crop].73For at this point, the crop is already considered significant (see Hilchot Ma'aser 2:3-5). Thus destroying it would be similar to destroying terumah which is forbidden. If it was flax, even if it reached a third of its growth and even if he sowed it intentionally, he must turn it over.74And destroy it, so that he will not make use of it. This is a penalty so that he should not sow it with the intention of benefiting from its fibers.75We fear that he will interpret the prohibition as applying only to using the flax seeds as food and not to using the plant's fibers for other purposes.
Produce that grows from terumah is considered as ordinary produce with regard to all matters76Hence all the agricultural obligations that are incumbent on ordinary produce are incumbent upon it, as stated in Halachah 27. Although Terumot 9:4 states that produce which grows from terumah is terumah, the intent is that it is forbidden to non-priests. This was one of the decrees enacted by our Sages on the day the students of the School of Shammai outnumbered those of the School of Hillel [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 9:4), based on Shabbat 1:3]. except that it is forbidden to non-priests.77I.e., it does possess the sacred quality that characterizes terumah. Our Sages decreed that it be forbidden to non-priests like terumah [as a safeguard], lest a priest maintain possession of impure terumah with the intent of sowing it and producing [a crop of] ordinary produce and this lead to undesirable consequences. Therefore, it is permitted to eat the products [of such plantings] with impure hands78When one hands are in a state of impurity, because of touching food that is ritually impure, as a result of a Rabbinic decree. It is not necessary to wash one's hands before partaking of such produce. and a person who has immersed himself that day79To be purified from ritual impurity, a person must immerse himself and then wait until nightfall that day. The immersion itself is not sufficient to bring one to a state of ritual purity. may partake of them like ordinary produce.
Produce grown from produce grown [from terumah] are like ordinary produce with regard to all matters.80They may even be eaten by non-priests. [This applies] even to types of produce whose seeds do not decompose81Plants like onions or garlic (Terumot 9:4) that grow from an existing bulb. Although that bulb is produce grown from terumah, since it is forbidden only according to Rabbinic Law, when it is planted again and new produce grows from it, the Rabbinic prohibition can be nullified. provided the new growth exceeds the root82I.e., a simple majority is sufficient. We do not require 60 times its substance. in the second generation of produce. [In such a situation,] the new growth elevates the root even if the seed does not decompose and the entire [plant] is permitted to be eaten by non-priests.83The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam's ruling, stating that if the seed does not decompose, even the second generation produce that grows is forbidden. He supports his ruling based on Terumot 9:4 which makes such statements with regard to tevel, produce from which the terumot and tithes have not been separated. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh, however, support the Rambam's position.The same applies with regard to [produce that grows from] terumah from the Diaspora,84Since such terumah is forbidden only by Rabbinic decree and it is not a common matter, our Sages did not enforce their decree with regard to it. terumah mixed with ordinary produce,85Even though the produce which is terumah is mixed with less than 100 times its volume and thus it is not nullified (see ch. 13), if the mixture is planted, the produce that grows is permitted to all. extra terumah,86This is referring to a situation similar to those described in Chapter 3, Halachah 6, when originally, the person gave less than the required amount of terumah and hence was required to separate terumah again. The second separation is considered as terumah only because of Rabbinic decree and produce which grows from it is permitted. or seeds from garden vegetables that are not eaten themselves, e.g., turnips and radishes. Although the turnips and radishes themselves are terumah, [the produce] growing from their [seeds] is like ordinary produce with regard to all matters.87Since the seeds themselves are not edible, they are not considered as terumah (although the vegetables themselves are). And since they are not considered as terumah, the produce that grows from them is also not considered as terumah.Similarly, when a person sows flaxseed that is terumah, the plants growing from it are permitted to non-priests.88Since flaxseed is usually not eaten, the requirement to separate terumah is only Rabbinic in origin. Hence, when the terumah from flaxseed is sown, it is permitted (Radbaz). The Ra'avad, however, differs concerning this and the previous instance and maintains that produce that grows from this type of terumah is not permitted.
When a person sows terumah that is impure, even though the produce that grows is ritually pure, it is forbidden to partake of it.89Even by priests. Instead, it must be burnt, as was required of the seeds from which it grew [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 9:7)]. [The rationale is that] since the terumah that was sown was forbidden to be eaten, it was already cast off. [Hence, it remains forbidden].
If he cut off the leaves that grew and then another set of leaves grew and he cut them off, the produce that emerge afterwards is permitted to be eaten.90By a priest. It is permitted because planting it purified it from impurity. It is not permitted to an Israelite, however, because it is still the first generation of offspring from terumah and not the second (Ra'avad, as explained by Radbaz and Kessef Mishneh).
When plants of ordinary produce became impure and afterwards, they were sown and designated as terumah, they are permitted [to be eaten. The rationale is that] sowing them caused them to be considered pure and they did not become impure while they were terumah so that they would be forbidden.
When a stalk [of grain] was in the midst of a grain heap and one straightened the edges of the grain heap,91This obligates that terumah and tithes be separated from the produce as stated in Hilchot Ma'aser 3:13. this stalk is considered tevel, because it was in the grain heap when it was straightened. If [that stalk] was planted,92Before terumah was separated from that grain heap. and then it was singled out and designated as terumah, there is an unresolved question if it is terumah. Since it was planted, it is possible to say that it was released from the categorization as tevel93The Rambam's words require some qualification. Certainly, the fact that the stalk is replanted does not cause the categorization as tevel to be released, as evident from Hilchot Ma'aser 6:6. The question here is whether the designation as terumah remains or not. and is considered as produce for which all the required work was not completed.If, however, it was designated as terumah before it was planted, it is terumah.94The fact that it was replanted does not change its own status. Therefore if one ripped off [a portion] of it and ate it willfully, he is liable for death [at the hand of heaven]. If he did so unknowingly, he must [make restitution and add] a fifth. If he bent over and ate from the ground with his mouth, his intent95To eat in this manner. is of no consequence because of the approach of people at large [and] it is not the ordinary practice for people to eat in this manner. Therefore he is not liable for death, nor for the [additional] fifth if he acted unknowingly.
The obligations of leket, shichichah, pe'ah, terumah the tithes and the tithe given to the poor apply with regard to a field of produce that grew from terumah. Poor Israelites and poor priests come and take these presents. The poor priests eat those that they acquire. The poor Israelites sell theirs to the priests for the price of terumah.96Which is less than the price of ordinary produce. This is necessary, because as stated in Halachah 21, it is forbidden for an Israelite to partake of such produce. Similarly, a Levite must sell his tithes to a priest.97It is, however, forbidden to sell the second tithe. Instead, this produce must be given to the priests (Radbaz).
A person who crushes such produce is praiseworthy. When a person threshes it with an animal, what should he do?98I.e., if the animal partakes of the produce, the owner will be benefiting from produce grown from terumah. And if he muzzles the animal to prevent it from doing so, he will be violating the prohibition (Deuteronomy 25:4 : "Do not muzzle an ox while it is threshing." He should tie a bucket around the animals neck and place the type of grain it is threshing in it. Thus he will neither be muzzling the animal, nor feeding it terumah.

=== 12 | chapter 12 ===
It is forbidden to cause the terumah of Eretz Yisrael to contract ritual impurity,1I.e., to cause it to contract ritual impurity directly. as [is the rule with regard to] other sacred articles.2See Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim 18:2. The Sefer Mitzvot Gadol considers this as one of the 613 mitzvot. The Rambam does not, however. One should not bring it to a state of ritual impurity,3To bring about a situation where it is likely that the terumah will contract impurity. nor should one spoil it. Instead, he should partake of pure [terumah] and kindle impure terumah.It is permitted to cause terumah from the Diaspora to become impure, even with impurity mandated by Scriptural Law. Although it is only ritually impure4One might still think that causing it to become impure would be forbidden, because although it is impure by Rabbinic decree, it is not impure according to Scriptural Law, and it is forbidden to spread ritual impurity. because of the impurity stemming from the Diaspora which is a Rabbinic decree,5As the Rambam states in Hilchot Tumat Meit 11:1-2, our Sages decreed that everyone living in the Diaspora is considered as if he became impure because of contact with a human corpse. Now impurity of Rabbinic origin is less severe than impurity of Scriptural origin. Nevertheless, since the obligation to separate this terumah is only Rabbinic in origin, our Sages did not forbid making it incur Scriptural impurity. [this leniency is granted] because the obligation to separate [such terumah] is also of Rabbinic origin. For this reason, a woman may separate challah6Which is bound by the same rules as terumah. while in the niddah state in the Diaspora, for she is cautioned only against eating it, not against touching it, as we explained.
If a doubt arose whether terumah became impure, it should not be eaten,7Lest it have become impure and it is forbidden to partake of impure terumah. nor should it be burnt.8Lest it not be impure and the person would be destroying terumah unnecessarily. Instead, one should place it aside until it becomes definitely impure, [at which time,] it should be burnt. There are situations in which doubt has arisen that mandate that terumah should be burnt as will be explained with regard to [the laws of] ritual purity and impurity.9See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 13:13.
When a question arises whether a jug of wine has become ritually impure, one should not do anything with it. One should not move it from its place, nor reveal it. Instead, he should leave it in its place until it definitely becomes impure and must be burnt.10The Rambam is ruling according to the opinion of Rabban Gamliel in Terumot 8:8. Other opinions in the mishnah maintain that the terumah should be protected that it does not become impure and still others maintain that it should be left in a place where it is likely to become impure so that we will not have to wait for the mandate to destroy it. We are not concerned that perhaps it will be eaten.
[The following rules apply when] a jug [of wine that is terumah which is pure] is broken in an upper vat and the lower vat [contains ordinary wine that is] impure.11And thus we are concerned that the pure terumah will flow into the vat of impure wine. In such a situation, an ordinary person will not be able to partake of it, because of the terumah that has become mixed with it. And a priest will not be able to partake of it, because the wine that is terumah has become impure. Thus it will not be useful at all. If it is possible for a person to save a revi'it of wine in a state of purity,12When both his hands and the articles he uses are ritually pure [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 8:10)]. he should do so.13Even though by doing so, he will cause the wine which is terumah to mix with the impure wine and thus the entire mixture will become unfit for use. It is, nevertheless, desirable for him to do this, because in this way, he will be saving at least a revi'it of wine that is pure terumah. If not, he should save [the wine] with his hands without washing them even though he imparts ritual impurity [to the terumah],14Even though he will make the wine ritually impure in this manner, it will become ritually impure anyway. (Moreover, the ritual impurity that he will impart to it will be only Rabbinic in origin; see also the notes to the following halachah.) And in this way, he will prevent the terumah from mixing with the ordinary produce and disqualifying it. as will be explained [in the laws pertaining to] ritual purity.15See Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 8:8,10; 9:5.
When does the above apply? To a jug of wine, [and then] provided that the contents of the lower vat are less than 100 times the amount [that falls in], in which instance, the terumah wine will mix with the ordinary wine and everything will be disqualified.16For, as stated above, an ordinary person will not be able to partake of it because of the terumah and even a priest will not be able to partake of it because the terumah will have become impure. If, however, the lower vat contained 100 times the amount of the jug and thus [the wine that descends] will be nullified because [the mixture] is 101 times the original17See Chapter 13, Halachah 1. or the jug contains oil, he should allow it to descend and become impure instead of making it impure with his own hands. [The rationale is that] the entire quantity is fit to use as fuel and there will be no great loss.18I.e., even though the oil that is terumah becomes impure and mixed with the contents of the lower vat, the person will not suffer the loss of the entire mixture, because it can be used as fuel.Similarly, if a jug of oil is spilling,19To the earth and thus will be spoiled entirely. if it is possible for one to save a revi'it of oil in a state of purity, he should do so. If not, he should save it while ritually impure.20From a comparison to the wording used in Halachah 4, the Or Sameach rules that with regard to wine, one is permitted to save the wine only if merely his hands are ritually impure. If his entire person is ritually impure, he is forbidden to do so. In this instance, by contrast, the person may save the oil even if his person is ritually impure.The difference between the two instances can be explained as follows. With regard to wine, what the person is doing is saving the ordinary wine, not the terumah, because there is no use for impure wine. Hence, he is permitted to do so only if he does not impart ritual impurity of Scriptural origin to the terumah. With regard to the oil, he is saving the oil that is terumah - for impure oil can be used as fuel. Hence, he is allowed to do so even if he will be making it ritually impure. Since the jug is broken, he is not adjured against saving it in a state of ritual impurity, because he is agitated.21Over the possible loss of his money.
[The following laws apply when] one was traveling from place to place, carrying loaves that are terumah, and a gentile tells him: "Give me one of them. If not, I will touch all of them and make them ritually impure."22For according to Rabbinic decree, a gentile is considered as ritually impure and can convey that impurity to other objects. See Hilchot Tumat Meit 1:13-14. He should place one of them on a rock,23So that the gentile can take it. If one of the loaves is ritually impure, he should leave that loaf for the gentile. but he should not place it in his hand so that he will not be a direct cause of the terumah becoming ritually impure.
[The following laws apply with regard to] chilbah and vetch that are terumah. Since they are not fit for human consumption,24Under ordinary circumstances. Nevertheless, they are eaten by humans from time to time. Otherwise, there would be no obligation to separate terumah from them. See Chapter 2, Halachah 8, and Chapter 11, Halachah 9. it is permitted to carry out all the actions [connected with their preparation] in a state of ritual impurity. One must be careful only when placing them in the water to soak. For if one placed them in the water to soak while ritually impure, one will have made them ritually impure directly.25And that is forbidden. Even though the person will be causing the produce to contract ritual impurity later, in his Commentary to the Mishnah (Ma'aser Sheni 2:3), the Rambam explains that this stage of preparation is singled out because it is when the produce comes in contact with the water that it becomes fit to contract ritual impurity. Once one has soaked them, however, one need not be concerned with ritual impurity at the time one crushes the vetch26To remove their coatings. or when one feeds them to an animal. For this reason, one may give chilbah and vetch that are terumah to a priest who is a common person.27As stated in Chapter 6, Halachah 2, it is forbidden to give terumah that is ritually pure to a priest who is a common person, for we fear that he will be ritually impure and yet will not be aware of his state. In this instance, however, there is no difficulty for we are not concerned with this terumah becoming ritually impure.The Kessef Mishneh notes that this ruling is a minority opinion in the Mishnah (Challah 4:9) and the majority of the Sages rule that it is forbidden to give such terumah to an unlearned priest. Why then, he asks, does the Rambam accept the minority view. (Significantly, in his own Commentary to the Mishnah, the Rambam states that the majority opinion is accepted.)
We do not entrust terumah to a priest who is an unlearned person, because he is easygoing about it and may partake of it.28I.e., he knows that he is a priest and that terumah should be eaten by priests. He does not consider himself impure and does not understand why he should not be allowed to partake of the terumah. Even if it is sealed with a wrapper, we fear that he will break open the wrapper and partake of the terumah (Radbaz). We may, however, entrust [terumah] to an unlearned Israelite if it is stored in an earthenware container sealed with a wrapper,29Since it is sealed closed, the Israelite will realize that there are questions of ritual purity involved and will not dare to touch it. provided it is not produce that is already made fit to contract ritual impurity. [This is] a decree lest it be moved by his wife while she is in the nidah state.30A woman in such a state can cause an article to become impure by moving it even though she does not touch it. See Hilchot Mitamei Mishkav UMoshav 8:2-3. Nevertheless, both the Ra'avad and the Kessef Mishneh question the Rambam's ruling, for seemingly, since the produce has not become fit to contract ritual impurity, why would the woman's moving it cause the produce to contract impurity?
We do not separate terumah from olives in a state of ritual purity for an unlearned person.31Quite often the owner of the produce would be an unlearned person whom we assume is not precise in his observance of the laws of ritual purity. Nevertheless, he would often employ workers or hire a vat owner who was precise in his observance so that his produce would comply with the laws of ritual purity. The first clause is speaking about a situation where the owner of the produce had already put olives in the press and squeezed the oil from them before asking the person precise in his observance to separate terumah. Since the olives became subject to contract ritual impurity because of the oil, we assume that they became ritually impure through contact with an impure person. Hence, if the person who was precise in his observance would separate terumah, there is a probability that it is impure, but people will think that it is pure, because of the reputation of the person who is precise in his observance. Hence, he is forbidden to separate terumah from it. We may, however, prepare ordinary olives for him in a state of ritual purity.32I.e., a person who is precise in his observance may perform the entire process, crushing the olives for their oil and separating terumah . [This leniency was granted] so that the operator of the vat could earn his livelihood.33I.e., since the owner of the produce is not precise in his observance of ritual purity, it would be preferable not to separate terumah for him under any circumstances. Nevertheless, leniency was granted so that the owner of the vat could earn his livelihood.How should this process be carried out?34I.e., after preparing the oil and separating the terumah, what precautions should he take that the owner of the produce does not cause the terumah to contract ritual impurity? He should separate an amount of produce sufficient for terumah and place it in a utensil that cannot contract ritual impurity, e.g., a stone utensil. When the unlearned person comes to take the ordinary produce and the terumah, we tell him: "Be careful not to touch the terumah.35I.e., he is permitted to touch the utensil, but not the terumah itself. Otherwise, the produce will become tevel again."36Although this is not true, he is given this warning so that he will be careful not to touch the terumah. We are confident that he will heed the warning, because even the unlearned people were careful in the observance of the prohibition against partaking of tevel (see Hilchot Ma'aser 9:1).
When an Israelite performs the tasks associated with the preparation of his produce while ritually impure, we should not harvest grapes with him. Needless to say, we should not tread the grapes with him,37In the first instance, the grapes being picked are considered fit to contract ritual impurity only by Rabbinic decree (Hilchot Tumat Ochalin 11:1). In the second instance, the wine is already starting to flow and the impurity is of Scriptural origin. Hence, the Rambam uses the expression: "Needless to say." because the terumah will be made ritually impure.38I.e., the wine will be ritually impure, and thus the terumah separated from it will be ritually impure and of no value. Hence, performing these tasks is forbidden, because one is aiding a Jew in the performance of a transgression. For it is forbidden to cause produce from which terumah has not been separated to become impure [Avodah Zarah 55a; the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Avodah Zarah 4:9)]. One may, however, carry barrels to39For these barrels are empty. and from the vat for him.40For the wine has already been rendered impure.
When olives and grapes have become ritually impure, we may squeeze them and separate terumah [from the oil or wine].41I.e., and the wine or oil is considered as ritually pure. The Kessef Mishneh explains that we are speaking about a situation in which the olives or grapes had become impure with a person who himself had come in contact with a source of ritual impurity. Thus the grapes and olives are considered as ritually impure to the second degree. Making the grapes and the olives impure does not make the wine and the oil impure, because something that is impure to the second degree does not convey impurity to ordinary produce (see Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 11:2). Hence once this wine and oil has been squeezed out, terumah that is ritually pure can be separated from it. The Radbaz emphasizes that in this instance as well, we are speaking about using less than an egg-sized portion of produce at a time as will be explained. If [grapes or the olives] became impure after they themselves were designated as terumah, they should be squeezed [using] less than an egg-sized portion at a time.42Hilchot Tumat Ochalin 9:2 explains that as long as the impure produce is less than an egg-sized portion, the fact that it comes in contact with the liquids is not significant. In such an instance, the liquid that flows from them is permitted to be drunk by the priests. Indeed, it would be fit to be used for libations on the altar. [The rationale is that] the liquid is considered as set aside within the fruit.43Thus touching the fruit is not considered as touching the liquids (ibid.). The reason that [our Sages] spoke of less than an egg-sized portion44And not an egg-sized portion itself. is that this is a decree lest one use more than an egg-sized portion and the liquid become impure because of [contact with] the egg-sized portion.45For with regard to terumah, impurity of the second degree can impart impurity of the third degree (Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah 11:3).If the produce was impure to the third degree, one may tread upon it in the vat and the liquid produced from it can be used for pure terumah.46Even though it came into contact with the olives or grapes that were impure. [The rationale is that] ritual impurity of the third degree does not bring about ritual impurity of the fourth degree with regard to terumah, as will be explained with regard to the concept of ritual purity.47Hilchot Sha'ar Avot HaTumah, loc. cit.:2
When a loaf of bread that is terumah becomes impure, it should be discarded among the firewood48I.e., if it is placed in the woodpile, people will not regard it as food and they will not partake of it. The point of this entire halachah is to emphasize appropriate safeguards so that people will not partake of impure terumah. Needless to say, it is desirable to burn the impure terumah immediately. The point of this halachah is to provide guidelines should one desire to save it to use as fuel. until one uses it for fuel. Similarly, if oil [that is terumah] becomes impure, it should be placed in a repugnant container until it is used as fuel so that it will not create a stumbling block for others, [lest] they partake of it.When wheat [kernels] become impure, one should parboil them49So that they will no longer be fit to be used to make flour. and place them in a repugnant container until they are no longer fit to be eaten and then use them as fuel for an oven or range. Liquids that are not fit to be used as fuel, e.g., wine, should be buried.50The Kessef Mishneh notes that wine that is terumah that became impure could also be used for its fragrance. Nevertheless, our Sages did not desire that such wine be set aside for this purpose, lest one partake of it unknowingly.
When wine that is terumah is left uncovered, since it is forbidden to drink it,51Lest a poisonous snake have drank from the wine and deposited its venom there [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 8:4); see also Hilchot Rotzeach UShemirat Nefesh 11:7-8)]. it should be poured out. Similarly, figs, grapes, marrow, squash, watermelon, and cucumbers that are terumah that were discovered to be perforated are forbidden to be eaten because of the mortal danger involved.52Here also we fear that the produce was perforated by a poisonous snake who deposited its venom there (ibid. 12:2). What should be done with them? They should be discarded in the sea or buried.
When a dough was kneaded with water that was left uncovered,53And is thus forbidden for the reason mentioned in the notes to the previous halachah (ibid. 11:15). it should be burnt even though it is terumah.54Even though one will be wasting terumah, we show concern for the danger that could be involved.
It is forbidden for a priest to take terumah or any other of the presents given to him until they were separated by the owners [of the produce], as [implied by the verses, Numbers 18:12]: "The first [of the produce] which they will give to God I have given to you" and [ibid.:19]: "...that the children of Israel will offer up to God are given to you." [Implied is that] the children of Israel must offer it up and then [the priests] can acquire it.[The priests] should not take [these presents] after they have been set aside except with the knowledge of the owners. For the owners have the right to give them to any priest that they desire, as [ibid. 5:10] states: "A person's sacraments will belong to him."55I.e., though he may not make use of them, the right to give them away is his. [Nevertheless,] if [a priest]56The Radbaz states that this applies even to an unlearned priest. Although terumah should not be given to such a priest lest he cause it to become impure, if he takes it, we do not expropriate it from him. takes them without the owner's knowledge, he acquires them. For all that belongs to the owner is the right to apportion them and that right is not financially significant.
When terumah was given to a priest and he found other entities in it, it is forbidden for him [to take them]. This is comparable to theft, for perhaps other people placed them [in the terumah] to take them [afterwards].57I.e., we suspect that a person understood that the terumah was set aside, not to be used, and deposited other articles there for safekeeping.
An Israelite is not required to trouble himself with terumah and bring it from the granary until a city or from a desert until a settled area. Instead, the priests should go out to the granaries and the Israelites should give them their portions there. If they did not go out [to collect the terumah, the owner] should separate it and leave it in the granary. Our Sages ordained that if there are beasts or animals who would eat it there and it is not protected from them, [the owner] should take the trouble of dealing with it and bringing it to the city. He may collect a wage for bringing it [to the city] from the priest. [This is done,] because if he separated it and left it for the animals and beasts, God's name would be desecrated.58For terumah is referred to as "sanctified," allowing it to be destroyed in this manner desecrates God's name (Radbaz).
It is forbidden for the priests and the Levites59To whom the tithes are given. to assist [farmers] in the granaries in order to receive the agricultural presents given them.60This applies to the presents required by Scriptural Law. They may, however, render assistance in order to receive those mandated by Rabbinic Law (Hilchot Bikkurim 5:13). Whoever renders such assistance desecrates the holiness of God's name. Concerning such people is applied [the malediction, Malachi 2:8]: "You have defiled the covenant of Levi." It is forbidden for an Israelite to allow [a priest] to help him. Instead, he should grant them their portion with honor.
When a person gives terumah to a priest on the condition that he returns it,61And then the terumah would belong to the Israelite who - although he could not partake of it - could sell it to a priest. he has fulfilled his obligation to give.62For such a present is a valid transfer of property. See Hilchot Lulav 8:10; Hilchot Zechiyah UMatanah 3:9. It is, however, forbidden to do so, for [the priest] is considered like one who helps in the granaries.63I.e., he is performing a favor for the owner in return for his terumah. Similarly, it is forbidden for [the priests] to seize the terumot and the tithes. It is even forbidden for them to make a verbal request for them. Instead, they should take them with honor, for they are eating and drinking from the table of God.64Since the presents are God's, as it were, they should be treated with honor. These presents are given to Him and He apportioned them to them, as [Numbers 18:8] states: "Behold I have given to you the safeguard of My terumah."65I.e., the verse implies that terumah belongs to God and that He grants it to the priests.
A person should not give terumah to the watchman of his vat, nor a firstborn animal to the watchman of his flock, nor the presents [given when an animal is slaughtered]66See Hilchot Bikkurim, ch. 9. to the shepherd of his animals. If he gave them [to these individuals], he desecrated [their honor] unless he gave them their wages for watching first.67If he gives them the presents first, it would appear that he is bargaining with them to reduce their wages. This would be similar to a priest assisting in the granary which is forbidden.One Israelite68The Radbaz emphasizes that such statements may be made only by an Israelite. A priest is forbidden to do so, for this is similar to helping in the granaries. may tell another Israelite: "Here is a sela.69A silver coin of the Talmudic period. Give terumah...", "...a firstborn...", or other presents [given to the priests] "...to so-and-so, the priest, who is my daughter's son, or "...my sister's son," or the like.70Since the owner has the right to do what he wants with the presents, he is permitted to receive gifts for them as well.
When does the above apply? When the owner desired to give [the presents] to one of two priests or [tithes] to one of two Levites gratis and his colleague told him: "Here is this and give to that one." If, however, an owner told a priest or a Levite: "Here is this portion. [Give me something in exchange] for my privilege to give it to whom I want," this is forbidden.71For such an arrangement looks like the person is selling the terumah. Similarly, it is forbidden to sell terumah as merchandise even though he purchases it from a priest and sells it to a priest.72For it was granted to the priests for consumption and not for commercial purposes.
There are ten individuals to whom terumah is not given in the granaries even though they may partake of it or grant others the right to partake of it:73I.e., their wives and servants may partake of it.a deaf-mute, an intellectually or emotionally unstable person, or a child who does not know how to spread out his hands to recite the priestly blessing,74Our translation is taken from the Kessef Mishneh. Although Hilchot Tefilah 15:4 states that a priest should not bless the people until he is old enough to grow a beard, that can be interpreted as meaning that he should not bless the people alone. With other priests, however, he may bless them. these [are not given terumah], because they lack sufficient knowledge;a tumtum75A person with a massive of flesh covering his sexual organs that prevents his gender from being known. and an androgynus,76A person with both masculine and feminine sexual organs. because they are unique types of people;a servant, lest passersby in the field [see him taking terumah] and give testimony that he is a priest;an uncircumcised person and a ritually impure person,77They are forbidden to partake of terumah, but they could be taking for their wives, children, or servants. because they are abhorrent;a woman [married to a priest], lest she be divorced78And thus become forbidden to partake of terumah. and [to prevent her from] entering into seclusion [with someone in the granary];79For these are not places frequented by multitudes of people. Yevamot 99b mentions these two rationales as separate views. The Rambam, however, does not see them as mutually exclusive and combines them both. anda person who marries a woman who is not appropriate for him;80Rashi (Yevamot, loc. cit.) interprets this as meaning a woman whom the priest is forbidden to marry. he was penalized in that [terumah] would not be allocated to him in the granaries until he divorces her.In all the above instances, [terumah] may be sent to their homes and allocated to them as is the law regarding other sacramental foods dependent on the boundaries [of Eretz Yisrael] with the exception of a person who marries a woman who is not appropriate for him, an uncircumcised person81The Kessef Mishneh notes that Yevamot, loc. cit., does not place an uncircumcised person in this category if his failure to circumcise himself comes as a result of forces beyond his control, e.g., his brothers died because of circumcision. He suggests that perhaps the Rambam had a different version of that passage. and a ritually impure person, to whom [terumah] is not sent at all.

=== 13 | chapter 13 ===
Terumah becomes nullified in a mixture 101 times the size of the original quantity.1In Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:16, the Rambam explains:

Why did [the Sages] choose the figure of 100 for terumot? For terumat ma'aser is one hundredth of the entire crop, and yet it causes the entire crop to be "sanctified," as [Numbers 18:29] states: "its sacred part." Our Sages said: "An entity which must be separated from it sanctifies it, if it returns to it.

Nevertheless, from Halachah 13-14, it appears that according to Scriptural Law, terumah is nullified when mixed with a majority of ordinary produce and the verse is cited merely as a support.What is implied? When a se'ah of terumah falls into 100 se'ah of ordinary produce and all the produce becomes mixed together,2Obviously, if the produce which is terumah is distinct, it is sufficient for him to remove it. he should separate one se'ah and give it to the priest. The remainder is permitted [to be eaten by] non-priests.3In Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:15, the Rambam explains: "Why is it necessary to separate [a measure of] terumah and not a measure of orlah or mixed species from a vineyard? Because terumah is the property of the priests." I.e., from a ritual perspective, it is not necessary to remove the se'ah, for the existence of the terumah has been nullified. Nevertheless, from a financial perspective, it is necessary to give the priest his due. This is the explanation of the concluding clause.[Accordingly,] whenever the terumah is a substance which the priests do not care about, e.g., terumah from wild figs, carobs, Edomite barley and the like, it is not necessary to separate [a hundredth for the priest]. Instead, since it fell into a 100 times its amount, it is nullified because of its minimal size and the entire mixture is permitted to non-priests.
If a se'ah of terumah fell into less than 100 [se'ah of ordinary produce], the entire mixture becomes miduma.4And it is forbidden for a non-priest to partake of it.In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Demai 1:3), the Rambam explains that Exodus 22:23 uses the term dima as a synonym for terumah. Hence our Sages referred to a mixture of terumah and ordinary produce in this manner. It should be sold to a priest at the price of terumah5Which is far less than the price of ordinary produce. Since the terumah is not nullified, we have to consider the possibility that every kernel is terumah. with the exception of that se'ah.6Which is given to him without cost.When does the above apply? When produce becomes mixed with its own kind. If, however, produce becomes mixed with produce of another type, [the ruling is dependent on whether] the flavor [of the terumah] is recognizable or not. If the entire mixture has the flavor of terumah, it is all considered as miduma and should be sold to the priests with the exception of the value of the terumah. If the flavor of the entire mixture is that of the ordinary produce, the entire mixture is permitted to non-priests.7Since the flavor of the terumahis not recognizable, it is considered as nullified. This principle applies with regard to all the Torah's prohibitions [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 2:7)].
When a se'ah of terumah falls into 100 se'ah and one se'ah was removed from the mixture8As required by Halachah 1., if that se'ah fell into other produce, the question whether the mixture is considered as miduma is determined according to the proportion [of terumah in the first mixture].9Even though the se'ah was taken out to be given to the priest, it is not considered as terumah. Instead, we calculate the proportion of terumah in the first mixture, on that basis, determine how much of the se'ah that fell is considered to be terumah and then see if that amount is one hundredth of the new mixture or not. For example, if one se'ah fell in one hundred se'ah, we consider the se'ah that was removed as slightly less than 1/100th terumah. Thus if it fell into a se'ah or more of ordinary produce, the second mixture is permitted [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 5:5)].Similarly, if a se'ah of terumah fell into less than one hundred se'ah [of ordinary produce] and the entire mixture became miduma and then some of this mixture fell into other [produce], the question whether the mixture is considered as miduma is determined according to the proportion [of terumah in the first mixture].What is implied? Ten se'ah of terumah fell into 90 se'ah of ordinary produce and the entire mixture became miduma. If ten se'ah from this mixture fell into less than 100 se'ah of ordinary produce, the mixture is considered miduma, because in the ten se'ah of the [original] mixture, there was at least one se'ah of terumah.10And thus a se'ah of terumah is being mixed with less than 100 se'ah of ordinary produce. If less than ten se'ah [of terumah] fell into [the original mixture], the [second] mixture is not considered as miduma [when one se'ah of the first mixture fell into 100 se'ah].
When does the above apply? With regard to substances that do not become blended together, e.g., wheat kernels with wheat kernels or flour with flour.11In this instance, every entity remains discrete. It's only that an observer cannot distinguish between the terumah and the ordinary produce (see Radbaz). When, however, substances blend together, e.g., oil that is terumah mixes with ordinary oil or wine that is terumah mixes with ordinary wine, we follow the majority. If the majority is terumah, should the mixture fall into other produce, the ruling is the same as if [the first mixture] was [entirely] terumah.12I.e., instead of calculating the percentage of terumah alone in the new mixture, we consider the first mixture as if it were terumah. Only if the second mixture is 100 times as large as the first is it permitted. If the majority of the [first] mixture is ordinary produce, should that mixture fall into other produce, [the entire first mixture] is considered as ordinary produce and there is never a difficulty concerning a mixture of terumah.13We do not calculate the percentage of terumah in the second mixture. Even if the terumah is more than one hundredth of the second mixture, that mixture is permitted. Nevertheless, in all instances, the entire [first] mixture is forbidden to non-priests.
When a se'ah of terumah falls into 100 se'ah, [a se'ah of the mixture] was removed, another [se'ah of terumah] fell in, [another se'ah] was removed, and another fell in, the ordinary produce is permitted14Since the mixture was permitted, it is considered as if the se'ah of terumah that fell into it does not exist. We do not consider it as existing within the mixture, so that were it to be combined with other terumah, the entire mixture would be considered miduma. until there is a majority of terumah [in the mixture]. Thus if more than 100 se'ah of terumah fell into 100 se'ah of ordinary produce, se'ah after se'ah [in above manner], the entire mixture is considered as miduma.15The Ra'avad differs with the Rambam concerning this figure, maintaining that the mixture is considered as miduma if 51 se'ah of terumah fall into the ordinary produce in the above manner. His rationale is that since a se'ah is removed from the mixture, it is possible that he is removing a se'ah of ordinary produce. Hence, after 51 se'ah fell and 50 se'ah were removed, it is possible that there is a majority of terumah in the mixture. The Radbaz justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that it is logical to assume that each se'ah that is removed has an proportionate amount of terumah and ordinary produce.
[The following rules apply when] a se'ah of terumah fell into 100 [se'ah of ordinary produce] and before one se'ah was removed, another se'ah of terumah fell [into the mixture]. If [the owner] was aware of the first se'ah before the second se'ah fell, [the mixture] does not become miduma. Instead, he should remove two se'ah and the remainder is permitted. [The rationale is that] since it should have been taken out,16And thus the entire mixture would be considered as permitted. we consider it as if it was taken out. If, however, he did not become aware of the first se'ah until after the second fell in, the mixture is considered miduma. It is as if both se'ah fell in at the same time.17The Ra'avad comments on the Rambam's ruling, noting that he is following what appears to be the minority opinion in Terumot 5:8. The Kessef Mishneh questions the intent of the Ra'avad's comments and asserts that according to the Tosefta, the majority opinion also accepts the distinction the Rambam makes here. This interpretation is borne out by the Rambam's Commentary to that mishnah.
The waste products of terumah are not combined with it [a mixture of it and ordinary produce] to cause the ordinary produce to be forbidden. The waste products of ordinary produce, by contrast, are combined with it to cause terumah to be nullified in a mixture.What is implied? A se'ah of high quality wheat that is terumah fell into 100 se'ah of wheat of low quality that is ordinary produce. The owner ground the entire quantity. Even though there is much bran in the ordinary produce and a small amount in the terumah and thus the flour from the terumah is more than one hundredth of the flour from the ordinary produce,18For high quality grain produces more flour and less bran than lower quality grain. Thus more of the lower quality grain is bran and more of the higher quality grain is flour. it is nullified. For we measure the flour with the bran and [together,] it is 101 times [the original amount of terumah]. If, however, a se'ah of low quality wheat that is terumah falls into [slightly] less 100 se'ah of high quality wheat that is ordinary produce and [the owner] ground the entire quantity, [the weight of] the flour that is terumah will be one hundredth of [the weight of] the flour that is ordinary produce. Hence it is nullified because the mixture is 101 times the original amount [of terumah], for the weight of the ordinary produce increased and that of the terumah decreased.19The Ra'avad notes that the Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot 5:9) goes even further and says that the bran in the terumah, since it is considered waste and not food, can be considered as part of the ordinary produce and if there is 100 times the weight of the flour from the terumah when this bran is added to the ordinary produce, the terumah is nullified. The Radbaz and the Kessef Mishneh suggest that the Rambam does not mention this point, because he feels that the Babylonian Talmud - according to which halachah is decided - does not accept it. Nevertheless, it appears that the Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 99:1) follows the Ra'avad's view, although the Rama states that as a stringency, the Rambam's perspective should be followed.
When a log20A measure of liquid weight of the Talmudic period. of clear wine that is terumah fell into 100 lugin of cloudy wine21I.e., the dregs had been removed from the wine that is terumah, but had not been removed from the wine which was ordinary produce. that is ordinary produce, we do not remove the dregs from the wine [and only then calculate whether the ordinary wine is 100 times the terumah]. Instead, we nullify the log of terumah.22Counting the dregs of the ordinary produce as part of the mixture. Similarly, if a log of cloudy wine [that is terumah] fell into a 100 log of clear wine, we do not remove the dregs in [the wine that is terumah].23The Rambam is apparently saying that in this instance, the dregs of the terumah wine are counted and unless the ordinary wine is 100 times the amount of that wine including its dregs, it is considered as miduma. See Chapter 11, Halachah 13, which states that the dregs are considered as terumah.The Ra'avad differs and maintains that in this instance, like the one described in the previous halachah, the dregs of the terumah are not counted, because they are wastes. The Radbaz justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that wine dregs are different than the wastes mentioned in the previous halachah, because they have the flavor of wine and can produce wine.
When a log of water fell into 99 lugim of wine and then a log of wine that is terumah fell into the mixture, the entire mixture is considered as miduma, because water does not nullify [the existence of] wine.24The Ra'avad explains the rationale for this ruling as follows: The water is not considered as the same type as wine. Hence, it cannot nullify it unless the flavor of the wine is no longer noticeable. The wine, by contrast, is considered its type and it requires 100 times the weight of the terumah. The Kessef Mishneh explains that this can be understood as the Rambam's intent.
[The following rules apply when] a se'ah of terumah fell into less than 100 se'ah of ordinary produce and then other ordinary produce fell into the mixture so that there was more than 100 times [the weight of the terumah]. If [the second batch of produce was added] unknowingly, [the terumah] is nullified because there is 101 [times the original weight]. If he mixed it intentionally, the entire mixture is considered as miduma, because we do not nullify the existence of substances prohibited by Scriptural Law as an initial preference.25The Radbaz notes that in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:25, the Rambam writes:

It is forbidden to nullify a substance forbidden by Scriptural Law as an initial and preferred measure. If, however, one nullified it, the mixture is permitted. Nevertheless, our Sages penalized such a person and forbade the entire mixture. It appears to me that since this is a penalty, we forbid this mixture only to the person who transgressed and nullified the prohibited substance. For others, however, the entire mixture is permitted.

In the present instance, however, it appears that the produce is considered as miduma, not only for the person who mixed together, but for everyone. The Radbaz differentiates between the two situations, explaining that in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot, the Rambam is speaking about a forbidden substance. Hence, if it was considered forbidden, it would have no value entirely. In our halachah, even if the mixture is considered miduma, it can be sold to priests and thus, it will not be wasted entirely.
It is, however, permitted to nullify terumah from the Diaspora [by mixing it] with a majority of permitted substances26I.e., since the prohibition is of Rabbinic origin, one may nullify it as an initial preference, as stated in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:26. and eat it during the time when one is ritually impure.27The Radbaz explains that the mixture may be eaten by a priest even when he is ritually impure or by a non-priest. Not only that, if a person possesses wine that is terumah from the Diaspora, he should take one log of this wine and mix it with two lugim of ordinary [wine]. Thus there are three lugim.28And the wine that is terumah is nullified, because it is mixed with a majority of ordinary produce. Afterwards, he can add another log of the terumah wine into the three lugim and then take one log from the four and drink it.29The Ra'avad differs, maintaining that once there is no longer a majority of ordinary produce, the mixture is forbidden. The Kessef Mishneh justifies the Rambam's ruling, explaining that once the terumah is nullified, it does not become a factor again if other terumah is added. He may then add another log [of terumah wine] and take out a log and drink it. Similarly, he may continue adding a log of terumah and removing a log until all the wine that is terumah is completed. Thus he can nullify several lugim [of terumah] in two lugim of ordinary produce.
When one sows terumah next to ordinary produce and cannot identify which produce is terumah and which is ordinary produce, the entire batch is permitted even if there were 100 rows of terumah and [only] one row of ordinary produce.30The rationale is that the produce that grows from terumah is not terumah and is forbidden to non-priests only as a stringency (Chapter 11, Halachot 21-22). Hence, if there is any confusion about which produce is terumah, it is all permitted.When does the above apply? With regard to produce whose seed decomposes in the earth, e.g., wheat, barley, and the like.31For then there is no trace of the original plant. If, however, the seeds do not decompose, e.g., garlic and onions,32In which instance, the new plant grows from a bulb of the original one and that original plant never decomposes entirely. even if 100 rows are ordinary produce and one row is terumah, the entire mixture is miduma. 33For the terumah is distinct and has not become mixed with the ordinary produce [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 9:5)]. If the entire crop is harvested,34Without paying attention to the prohibition. terumah can be nullified in a mixture of 100 times its weight, but, as an initial and preferred option, one should not harvest the crop.35For as stated above, as an initial preference, a prohibited substance should not be nullified. It must, however, be emphasized, the Rambam's intent is not to let the produce remain in the ground forever. Instead, it should be harvested as produce which is miduma and sold to priests at the price of terumah.
When there are two containers of produce, one containing terumah and one containing ordinary produce and it is not known [which contains the ordinary produce and which contains the terumah], if [the contents of] one of these containers falls into ordinary produce, [the mixture] is not considered as miduma.36Since we are unsure of the identity of the produce that fell into the mixture, we do not rule it forbidden because of the doubt. Instead, we say that the ordinary produce fell into it.This halachah involves produce that is forbidden as terumah according to Rabbinic decree, e.g., terumah from the Diaspora or a mixture of terumahand a majority of ordinary produce. These principles are also applied in other contexts, see Chapter 10, Halachah 14, and Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 111:1). [This same law applies if produce that is] terumah fell into one of two containers [of ordinary produce], but one does not know which one and afterwards, one of those containers fell into ordinary produce.Similarly, if one sowed [the grain from] one of the two containers, the produce that grows is considered as ordinary produce with regard to all matters.37Even if the original was terumah [The produce in] the remaining container is considered as terumah.38Because of the doubt applying to its status. If [the contents of] the second container fell into other produce, [the mixture] is not considered as miduma.39The same principle applies here. Since we are unsure if the identity of the produce which fell into the mixture, we do not rule that it is forbidden because of the doubt. Similarly, if another person sowed [the contents of] the second container, the produce that grows is considered as ordinary produce.40Since each person asks concerning the status of the produce that he sowed individually, both are permitted, because in each instance, there is a doubt.If [the contents of] both containers fall into one mixture of other produce, the mixture is considered miduma according to the amount of produce in the smaller container.41I.e., if the larger container contained one se'ah and the smaller container contained half a se'ah, we require the mixture to contain 50 ½ se'ah to be permitted, not 101 se'ah. If one person sowed both of them,42And thus the same person is asking about both plantings of produce. Hence, there is more room for stringency. if the produce is a species where the seed decomposes, the produce that grows is considered as ordinary produce.43Since no trace of the original produce remains, we rule leniently.If the seed does not decompose, the produce that grows is miduma.44Since the produce concerning which a doubt arose originally continues to exist, stringency is called for.When does the above apply? When one sowed [the contents of] the second container before the first batch of produce was harvested.45For then it is considered as if he sowed them both together. If, however, he harvested the first batch of produce before sowing the second, the produce that grows is considered as ordinary produce even when the seed does not decompose. [The rationale is that] produce that has been reaped and produce that is growing are not considered as indicators of each other's status.
When there are two containers [of produce], one containing ordinary produce and the other, containing terumah and two se'ah, one of ordinary produce and one of terumah, and both se'ah fall into these containers, [one into each], the produce is permitted. We assume that the ordinary produce fell into [the container of] ordinary produce and that the terumah fell into [the container of] terumah. [This applies] even though the weight of the ordinary produce is not greater than that of the terumah.46But rather they are of the same weight. Were there to be a majority of ordinary produce, according to Scriptural Law, the existence of the terumah would already be nullified and thus there would be greater room for leniency. Nevertheless, as the Rambam continues to explain, even when there is not a majority, since the entire question is one of Rabbinic Law, we allow leniency. If, however, there is a majority of terumah, even when it is forbidden only according to Rabbinic Law, the mixture is forbidden.When does the above apply? With regard to terumah in the present era, for the requirement is of Rabbinic origin.47See Chapter 1, Halachah 26. If the terumah is mandated by Scriptural Law, [the above ruling does not apply unless] the weight of the ordinary produce is greater than that of the terumah.48In such an instance, the existence of the terumah would already be nullified and thus there would be greater room for leniency, since then the question is one of Rabbinic Law. The above leniency applies only with regard to such questions and not to questions involving Scriptural Law.
When a se'ah of terumah falls into a grainheap49From which terumah and the tithes have not been separated. and [the owner] states: "The terumah of this grainheap is in its midst," the borders of the terumah are defined where the se'ah fell and the entire mixture becomes miduma because of the terumah which fell in and the terumah of the grainheap.50Though in and of itself, the amount of terumah which fell in the grainheap would not disqualify it, when it is combined with the terumah that was designated it does.The Ra'avad appears to have had a different version of the Jerusalem Talmud, Terumot 3:3, the Rambam's source. Hence he differs with the Rambam's ruling..If he said: "The terumah of the grainheap is in its northern portion,"51This law applies even if no terumah has fallen into the grainheap. we divide the grainheap in half, and then the northern half in half. Thus the northern most quarter of the grainheap is miduma.52Because there is less than one hundred times the weight of the terumah in that corner.
If there were two grainheaps before a person and he said: 'The terumah for both grainheaps is in one of them," they are both considered miduma.53The one which contains the terumah is certainly miduma. Since we do not know which one that is, they are both considered as miduma.If there were two se'ah of grain and one grainheap before a person and he said: "One of these se'ah is considered terumah for this grainheap," one of them is terumah and he does not know which.54Hence he must observe the restrictions of terumah with regard to both of them. If there were two grainheaps and one se'ah before him and he said: "This is terumah for one of the grainheaps," [the se'ah] is terumah and [terumah has been separated from] one of the grainheaps, but he does not know which one is no longer tevel.55Hence terumah must be separated in a conditional manner. One must bring other produce and say: "If terumah has not been separated for this grainheap, than this is terumah for it. But if it is the other grainheap from which terumah has not been separated, it is terumah for that."

=== 14 | chapter 14 ===
[The following laws apply when] there were fifty dark figs and fifty1The same laws also apply if there are 30 light figs and 70 dark ones, or any other combination of numbers (Radbaz). light figs and one fig that is terumah fell among them. If it was light, the dark figs are permitted2Because the fig that was terumah was not dark. and the light figs are considered miduma.3Because there are not enough to nullify its presence. We do not count the dark figs together with the light figs, because there is no possibility to mix the two with each other. If it was dark, the dark figs are miduma and the light figs are permitted. If it is not known whether it was light or dark, it can be nullified when the mixture is 101 times [the weight of] the original fig.4Although the fig that was mixed in has a specific color, both types of figs can be counted together to nullify it, for it is possible to press all the figs into a single cake of figs (Rav Ovadiah of Bartenura, Terumot 4:7). Alternatively, since we do not know which type of fig fell in, the fact that it was of a specific color is not significant to us (Yayin Malchut). If he knew what type of fig it was but forgot, they are all considered miduma.5The rationale is that since at the outset he knew the color of the fig and there are neither enough dark figs or light figs to nullify it, the fig is considered as forbidden. And once it is forbidden, his forgetting its color does not cause it to become permitted again (Radbaz).
Similar laws apply when there are cakes of pressed figs or blocks of pressed figs and a cake or block of [figs that are] terumah falls among them. If it is not known whether the one which fell in was a block or a cake, the cakes and the blocks are combined and the terumah can be nullified if their [combined weight] is 101 times that of the terumah. [Similarly,] when there are large cakes of figs and small ones and a cake of figs [that is terumah] falls among them, but it is not known whether the cake which fell in was large or small, [the existing cakes] can nullify the one which fell in whether by weight or by number.What is implied? A cake [of figs] fell into a mixture of 100 other cakes, both large and small. We assume that a small cake6If, however, we know that a large cake fell in, but we are uncertain about its size, we cannot merely count 101 cakes both large and small to nullify it (Rabbi Akiva Eiger). fell in and one may remove one of the small cakes.7I.e., since there were 101 cakes, 101 times the number of cakes that fell in, the cake that was terumah could be nullified. We assume that it was small and hence, to fulfill the obligation to remove a cake, we remove a small one. If a cake fell into 40 cakes, 20 of them weighing four litra each and 20 of them, weighing one litra each, since the combined weight is 101 litra, we assume a small one fell in and remove one of the small ones.8The remainder are permitted, because it is possible that there was 101 times the weight of the terumah in the mixture. It is sufficient to remove a small one. The rationale is that since the terumah has been nullified, the removal of the cake is required only as a financial matter: to give the priest his due. Hence, to receive a larger cake, the priest must prove that a larger cake did indeed fall in.
Flour and finely sifted flour cannot be combined together to nullify terumah.9I.e., there is one container of flour and one container of finely sifted flour. Terumah fell into one of the containers, but we do not know which one. We do not say that the two containers of flour should be considered like the two groups of figs and considered as a single entity. Instead, we judge them individually. The rationale is that once the terumah becomes mixed with the flour or the finely sifted flour, it is part of one mixture and not the other. Hence it is not appropriate to combine them (Radbaz).
When a se'ah of wheat which is terumah falls on the mouth of the storage vat of wheat, we do not measure it against the 101 times [its weight or ordinary grain found] in the storage vat. For we do not make such an assessment unless the terumah has been mixed with the ordinary produce10And in this instance, that is not true, for it is positioned at the top of the storage container. or we do not know where the terumah fell.11And in this instance, we do.What should be done? We consider the terumah as if it is wheat placed above barley and separate the terumah itself which fell unto the storage vat with some of the ordinary produce upon which they fell as one would be collecting wheat from barley.
[The following laws apply when] there are two containers or two storage vats and terumah fell into one of them. It became mixed with [the contents of the container or storage vat] and it is not known which one it fell into. If the two storage vats were in the same building, they are considered as if they were combined and the terumah is nullified if the entire quantity is 101 times its weight. It is as if they were both contained in a single storage vat. Moreover, the containers are considered as combined together even if they are in two separate buildings, for it is possible to gather the two in one building.12In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 12:4), the Rambam writes that containers are frequently moved and in the process of their being moved, the two containers could be combined. Hence, we view them as if they were combined at present. This ruling is also quoted in other contexts; see Shulchan Aruch (Yoreh De'ah 111:7). If, however, the two containers were in two cities, they are not combined.
How should he remove the se'ah which fell in?13I.e., as stated in Chapter 13, Halachah 1, one se'ah must be removed from the mixture and given to the priest. How should that be done in the present instance? For the terumah fell into only one of the containers and we do not know which one. If he desires to remove it from one of them, he may. If he desires to remove half from one and half from the other, he may.[The following laws apply when] there are jugs filled with dried figs that are ordinary produce and [the owner] pressed a litra of figs that are terumah into the opening of one of them, but he does not remember which one. If there are 101 jugs, the terumah is considered nullified. He should take one jug and sell it to a priest except for the worth of the litra [of terumah]14Although only the figs on the top of the opening are terumah, we require himself to sell the entire jug, because of the impression that might be created (Shita Mekubetzet, Beitzah 4a). and the remainder [of the jugs] are permitted. If there are less than 100 jugs, [the figs at] the openings [of the jugs] are considered miduma and those at the bottom are permitted.15Since we are talking about compressed figs, they will not mix with the contents of the jugs, but instead will be found on the top of a jug. Hence, when considering nullifying the figs, only the tops of the jugs are considered, but not the bottoms. Therefore we require 101 jugs, not 101 times the weight of the initial amount of terumah.The Radbaz explains that this situation differs from that described in Halachah 1. In that situation, although the light figs and the dark figs could be distinguished from each other, they were all mixed together. Hence, it is possible to speak about one type being combined with the other to nullify the terumah. In the situation described by our Halachah, the tops and the bottoms will always remain discrete.
Similar laws apply if one pressed [a litra of] figs into the opening of a kaveret16The term kaveret literally means "bee-hive." Here we are talking about a storage compartment that is built like a bee-hive.or into the top of a cake.17I.e., we require 101 of the containers and count only the figs at the openings of the containers. If he pressed them onto the top of a cake, but does not know whether he pressed them onto the northern portion [of the cake] or its southern portion, nor does he know which cake he pressed them onto, we look at all the figs as if they were separate entities and [the figs that are terumah] should be nullified based on weight. If all the cakes weigh 10018I.e., without the terumah, 101 litra with the terumah. litra, the terumah is nullified19I.e., we consider the entire mixture as a single entity unlike the previous instances where the bottoms of the containers were considered as separate from the tops. In the previous instances, he knew that he pressed the terumah onto the tops of the container. Therefore only the tops are considered. In the present instance, he does not know the portion of the cakes unto which he pressed the figs. That lack of knowledge works to his advantage, enabling us to count in the entire mixture. provided each of the cakes weighs more than two litra so that in each cake, the terumah is nullified because there is a majority of ordinary produce.20In addition to considering the status of the entire mixture, we must consider the status of each cake individually. Each cake must have enough figs to nullify the presence of the terumah according to Scriptural Law. The rationale is that when there is a doubt concerning the presence of terumah, it is nullified when there is a majority of ordinary produce.
When terumah is definitely [present in a mixture], it is forbidden if the mixture is 100 [or less times its weight]. If there is merely a doubt concerning the presence of terumah, it is forbidden if there are only fifty. It is permitted only if one adds a majority [of the new mixture].21I.e., as the Rambam explains in the following halachah, one must add enough figs so that there is 101 times the amount of terumah that fell in (Kessef Mishneh). If there are more than fifty, one need not add such a majority.What is implied? One fig that is terumah fell into 99 figs and they are all present. They are all forbidden to non-priests, as explained.22As stated in Chapter 13, Halachah 1, it is necessary to have 101 times the amount of terumah.
If, [after a fig that is terumah fell into 50 other figs, and then] one of the mixture becomes lost, it is possible that one of the ordinary figs was the one that was lost, but it is possible that it was the fig that fell in. Hence, the mixture is forbidden until one adds ordinary produce to it from another source,23It is, however, permitted to add such produce. We do not apply the principle that, as an initial preference, one should not nullify the presence of a forbidden substance, because here we are not certain that there is a forbidden substance present, for one fig has been lost. adding 51 figs to the entire quantity. If one fig fell into 51 figs and one of the mixture was lost, the remainder is permitted to non-priests.24Since one fig has been lost, 51 figs are sufficient. We do not require 101. Note th contrast to Chapter 15, Halachah 2.
[The following rules apply when] a se'ah of terumah fell into less than 100 se'ah of the first tithe from which terumat ma'aser was not separated or into [produce from] the second tithe or consecrated property that was not redeemed and the entire mixture became miduma. If [the terumah] fell into the first tithe, the terumat ma'aser should be designated,25So that the mitzvah of separating it has been fulfilled. and the entire mixture sold to the priests with the exception of the worth of the terumah that fell into it and the worth of the terumat ma'aser.26For such produce must be given to the priests as a present. The majority of the mixture, however, belongs to its owner. Even though it is being given to the priest, because the owner may not make use of it, the priest must reimburse the owner for its value. Nevertheless, as mentioned previously, the value of produce that is terumah is less than that of ordinary produce.The Radbaz mentions another possible solution to this difficulty: If the Levite has a large amount of produce from which terumat ma'aser has not been separated, he may make this entire mixture terumat ma'aser for that produce and in this way, not suffer any financial loss. If it fell into [produce from] the second tithe or consecrated property that was not redeemed, they should be redeemed27At which point they are considered as ordinary produce and the laws mentioned in Chapter 13, Halachah 2, apply. and then sold to a priest with the exception of the worth of the terumah.
When a se'ah of impure terumah falls into less than 100 se'ah of ordinary produce or into produce that is from the first tithe, or from the second tithe, or from consecrated property - whether [the latter three] are ritually pure or ritually impure - [the mixture] is miduma.28Because there are less than 100 se'ah to nullify the se'ah of terumah. Hence, the entire mixture is like impure terumah which is forbidden to everyone. Thus it is all forbidden and must be left until it rots.29One would think that it should be used as fuel and thus the person will derive some benefit from it. The Radbaz explains that this is not allowed for the following reason. Since there is not enough other produce to nullify the terumah, the entire mixture is considered as terumah. Nevertheless, since it is not impure, it should not be burnt, because it is forbidden to burn pure terumah. This stringency is, however, only observed when there is no danger that the terumah will be eaten, as the Rambam proceeds to explain.When does the above apply? With regard to an entity that is not eaten raw.30E.g., wheat or barley. When, by contrast, it is normal practice to partake of a type of produce uncooked,31E.g., oil. one should not set them aside lest someone encounter them and partake of it.32See Chapter 12, Halachah 12, which states that impure terumah should be placed in repugnant container so that no one will accidentally partake of it. Instead, the entire mixture should be used as fuel, like impure terumah is used as fuel.
When a se'ah of pure terumah falls into less than 100 se'ah of ordinary produce that is impure, the entire mixture should be sold to a priest with the exception of the worth of the terumah. The priest should eat this mixture which is miduma as roasted kernels33In which instance, the impure grain does not cause the pure terumah to become impure, for produce does not become fit to contract impurity until comes in contact with one of seven liquids (Hilchot Tumat Ochalin 1:1-2). Since the kernels of the terumah are roasted without contact with water, they are never fit to contract impurity. or he should make them into a dough using fruit juice which does not render produce fit to contract impurity,34Fruit juice is not one of these seven liquids. Hence dough made with fruit juice is not susceptible to ritual impurity (Ibid. 3; 13:13). so that [contact with] the impure ordinary produce will not render the terumah as impure.35It is not only that the priest will be suffering a loss because the terumah becomes impure. It is forbidden to cause terumah to become impure as stated above.Alternatively, he should make this mixture that is miduma into a dough that is less than the size of an egg. [This is beneficial], because impure food does not cause other food to become impure until [the impure food] is the size of an egg.36See Ibid. 4:1, 12. Making the mixture into small loaves is the Rambam's interpretation of the term nikudim in the Mishnah (Terumot 5:1). Or he may divide the mixture that is miduma and place a portion of it that is less than the size of an egg in each dough so that the terumah in it will not become impure.
When a se'ah of impure terumah falls into 100 se'ah of ordinary produce that is pure or a se'ah of pure terumah falls into 100 se'ah of ordinary produce that is impure, it should be removed and the terumah is nullified, because the new mixture is 101 times [the size of the terumah that fell in. That se'ah] should be eaten as roasted kernels, or it should be made into dough with fruit juice, or into dough that is less than the size of an egg.37I.e., he should use the grain in a manner that will prevent it from contracting ritual impurity, as described in the previous halachah. [The rationale is that] the se'ah which fell in is not [necessarily] the se'ah that was removed.38I.e., and hence it is permitted to be eaten.
When a se'ah of impure terumah falls into 100 se'ah of pure terumah, it is nullified because of the insignificant amount and the entire mixture should be eaten in a state of ritual purity.39There is no need for any safeguards. If it fell into less than 100, he should leave the entire mixture until it rots.40As explained in Halachah 11.
There were two containers [of grain, each containing less than 100 se'ah]. A se'ah of terumah fell into one of them and it was known into which one it fell.41And the contents of that container was considered as miduma. Afterwards, a second se'ah of terumah fell into one of them, but it was not known into which it fell. [The rationale is that] we assume that the second se'ah fell into the same place as the first se'ah, for we associate the problematic issue with the [previous] problem.If, however, the first se'ah fell into one of the containers, but it was not known into which it fell and afterwards, a second se'ah fell into one and it was known into which one it fell, we do not say that the first one fell into the same place as the second. Instead, both are considered to be problematic.42I.e., they are both miduma. The rationale is that the problematic status of the two containers was established before the second one fell in and the fact that we know into which one it fell cannot resolve the existing problem.Rav Yosef Korcus maintains that this is the interpretation of the Rambam's ruling. Nevertheless, he and the Radbaz both maintain that this law applies even if the first container contains 100 se'ah and the first se'ah is nullified. Since one se'ah has to be removed from it, it can also be considered as problematic.
If there were two containers [of grain], one ritually pure and one ritually impure,43The Kessef Mishneh explains that this law applies whether the grain in the containers was terumah or ordinary produce. and a se'ah of terumah fell into one and it was not known into which, we assume that it fell into the impure one.44I.e., we follow the same principle mentioned in the first clause of the previous halachah, because the impure grain is also considered as "problematic."
When there are two containers, one containing pure terumah45The Kessef Mishneh suggests that the text should read "impure terumah." and one containing impure ordinary produce,46The Kessef Mishneh suggests that the text should read "pure ordinary produce." His rationale for these emendations is that if the ordinary produce is impure, it is not proper to say that it should be "eaten in a state of ritual purity." With these emendations, he resolves the objections of the Ra'avad. As will be explained, the Radbaz offers an interpretation that preserves the standard version of the text. should a se'ah of pure terumah fall into one of them,47But we do not know which. we assume that it fell into the one containing terumah.48This represents the converse of the principle mentioned in Halachah 15, just as there, we associate the problematic issue with the existing problem, here we associate the produce that is of a positive nature (terumah) with the existing terumah (Radbaz). The ordinary produce should, however, be eaten in a state of ritual purity like terumah.49I.e., according to one of the three suggestions given in Halachah 12. The intent is that we are not certain that the terumah did indeed fall into the container containing terumah. Were it to have fallen into the other container, it would be forbidden to prepare a dough from it in the ordinary manner, because that would cause the terumah to contract ritual impurity which is forbidden.
[18-19]50Our text is taken from the Shabsei Frankel printing of the Mishneh Torah which is based on authentic manuscripts and early printing. The standard printed text is both redundant and problematic. When a se'ah of impure terumah falls into one of the above mentioned containers, we say that it fell into the terumah.51For we assume that the terumah fell into terumah. The ordinary produce should, however, be eaten as roasted kernels or made into dough with fruit juice.52To prevent it from contracting ritual impurity as mentioned above.
—
When there are two containers, one containing impure terumah and the other ordinary produce that is pure, and a se'ah of pure terumah falls into one of them,53Here also the Kessef Mishneh suggests inverting the words pure and impure in the text. Otherwise, this ruling would be a contradiction to Halachah 17. we assume that it fell into the terumah,54And thus the entire mixture is considered as impure terumah. but the ordinary produce should be eaten as roasted kernels.55So that the terumah will not be subject to contracting ritual impurity (Kessef Mishneh).
If a se'ah of impure terumah fell into one of these containers, both of them are forbidden.56I.e., the leniencies of assuming that the problematic se'ah fell into the produce that was already problematic or that terumah fell into terumah are not granted, because, as the Rambam continues to explain, here a Scriptural prohibition is involved. [The rationale is that when] there is a doubt [whether produce is] impure terumah, it is forbidden to be eaten, while when there is a doubt whether it is miduma, it is permitted. For the prohibition against partaking of impure terumah is Scriptural in origin,57See Chapter 7, Halachah 3. The impure terumah does not become nullified because it was mixed with a larger quantity of other produce. while the prohibition against partaking of a mixture that is miduma is Rabbinic in origin58For according to Scriptural Law, as long as there is a majority of non-terumah produce, the terumah is nullified. based on the principles explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot.59See Chapter 15:1-3, 13, 15.

=== 15 | chapter 15 ===
A sealed barrel [of wine that is terumah] makes a mixture miduma whatever the ratio [between it and the other barrels].What is implied? When a sealed barrel [of wine] that is terumah becomes mixed with several thousand sealed barrels [of ordinary wine], the entire mixture becomes miduma.1This follows the principle devar shebiminyan lo betal: "The presence of an object that is sold by number is never considered insignificant." Since these objects are sold by number, each one is considered important and it is not appropriate to say that one is insignificant (Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:1-3). If the barrels are opened, [the presence of the terumah] is nullified when 101 times its contents are present.2For once the barrels are opened, they are no longer considered as important. It is, however, forbidden to open the barrels, for this would be considered as purposefully nullifying a forbidden substance and that is prohibited (Radbaz).
When a sealed barrel [that contains terumah] becomes mixed with 100 barrels and then one falls into the Mediterranean Sea, they are all permitted. We assume that it is the one that is terumah that fell in. This is not the case when a fig falls into 100 figs. In the latter instance, it is necessary to set aside one [fig].3And give it to a priest. The Jerusalem Talmud (Terumot 4:7) records a difference of opinion concerning this matter between Reish Lakish and Rabbi Yochanan. Reish Lakish's opinion is the one cited by the Rambam. Rabbi Yochanan, however, differs and maintains that the same law applies even with regard to figs. The Rambam rules according to Reish Lakish's opinion, for the Babylonian Talmud (Zevachim 74b) mentions his view only and not that of Rabbi Yochanan. See also Hilchot Avodat Kochavim 7:10 where the Rambam issues a similar ruling.The Ra'avad does not accept this ruling. He maintains that the Babylonian Talmud mentions Reish Lakish's opinion only in connection with the discussion of another minority view. Hence, it is not necessary to mention Rabbi Yochanan's view. [The rationale for the distinction is] that a barrel that falls into the sea is noticeable. A fig and the like which fall are not noticeable.
When a sealed barrel [that contains terumah] becomes mixed with 100 barrels and one of them is opened,4Inadvertently. It is forbidden to open such a barrel intentionally. he should remove one hundredth of it,5More precisely, 1/101. I.e., the percent of the mixture that is terumah. This is given to a priest. and then he may drink the barrel.6It is true that this ruling is somewhat problematic. For if the barrel is in fact terumah, the entire barrel, not only the hundredth portion, must be given to the priest. And if it is not terumah, it is permitted to drink it in its entirety. Nothing need be given to the priest.The Ma'aseh Rokeach explains the reason for the stringency. Were this safeguard not taken, one might permit the barrels even when they were all opened. The other barrels are, however, forbidden until they are opened. Whenever any one of them is opened, he should remove the percentage that causes the mixture to be miduma and drink the remaining hundred portions.If a barrel [containing terumah] became mixed with 150 barrels and 100 of them were opened, one should remove the percentage that causes the mixture to be miduma, i.e., one barrel and drink [the remaining barrels]. The remaining 50 are still forbidden; we do not presume that the barrel that was terumah was among the majority [that were opened].7Although when considering those barrels, it is necessary to give a barrel to a priest because of the suspicion that one is terumah, we are still stringent regarding those remaining. Even if there are several thousand barrels, they are all considered miduma. Whenever any one is opened, he should remove one hundredth of it and then he may drink the remainder [of that barrel]. The other barrels, however, are miduma,
We have already explained in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot8Chapter 16, Halachah 1. that a leavening agent or a spice9Based on Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:26, the Radbaz states that this same law applies if terumah is used to cause cheese to harden. causes a mixture to be forbidden regardless of how small the amount is mixed in.10I.e., the standard ration of 1/101 is not effective to nullify the terumah. In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Orlah 2:4; Terumot 10:2), the Rambam explains that since the effects of the terumah are evident in the food - it rises or it is spiced because of it - we cannot say that the terumah is nullified. Therefore if a person pureed an apple that was terumah and put it in a dough and it caused [the dough] to leaven, the entire dough becomes miduma and is forbidden to non-priests.
When an egg, even its yolk,11We are speaking about a situation where the egg is cooked whole. Thus despite the fact that the yolk is on the inside and covered by the whites, a spice intended for it can cause it to be forbidden, because it absorbs (Radbaz, Kessef Mishneh). was flavored with spices that are terumah, it is forbidden, because it absorbs.
When yeast that is terumah fell into a dough and it was removed and afterwards, the mixture became leavened, [the dough] is permitted.12Since the yeast was removed, we do not say that it caused the dough to rise. Instead, we assume that the dough rose on its own accord (Radbaz).
We have already explained13Chapter 13, Halachah 2; Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:1,6. that if terumah becomes mixed with a substance of a different type, [the mixture is forbidden if the terumah] imparts its flavor [to the mixture]. Therefore, [the following laws apply when] a diced onion is cooked together with other food. If the onion is terumah and the other food is ordinary produce and it is flavored by the onion, the other food is forbidden to non-priests. If the onion is ordinary produce and the cooked food is terumah and the flavor of the cooked food was imparted to the onion, the onion is forbidden [to non-priests].14How do we know whether the flavor of the terumah was imparted to the mixture. We give it to a priest to taste (ibid. 15:29).
[The following laws apply if] lentils were cooked and then a dry onion was placed among them: If the onion was whole, it is permitted.15In his Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 10:1), the Rambam explains that this applies whether the onion is terumah and the lentils ordinary produce or the reverse. In both instances, since the lentils are already cooked and the onion is whole, there is little likelihood that one will absorb the flavor from the other. If it was diced, [the ruling depends on whether] its flavor was imparted.16Here also the same principle applies whether it is the onion or the lentils which are terumah. Since the onion is diced, it will both impart and absorb flavor easier. If he cooked the onion with the lentils, whether it is whole or diced, we estimate whether it imparted its flavor.17Since the onion is cooked, even if it is whole, it can both impart and absorb flavor easily. With regard to the remainder of the cooked food,18I.e., in addition to the lentils. regardless of whether the onion was placed upon it after it was cooked or cooked with it, or whether it was whole or diced, we estimate whether it imparted its flavor.19As the Rambam proceeds to explain, lentils are considered as being unique. Once they are cooked, they do not absorb flavor from other foods easily. Other foods are more absorbent. Even after they have been cooked, they may absorb the flavor of the onion.Why do we not estimate [whether flavor was imparted] when a whole onion was placed among cooked lentils? Because it does not absorb from them, for it is whole, nor does it impart [flavor] to them, because they have already been cooked. If the onions were soft,20The Kessef Mishneh suggests that the text should read rabbim, "many," instead of rachim, "soft;" i.e., one onion that is whole will not impart that much flavor, but several onions will. it is considered as if they were diced. Similarly, if its tip or its outer shell21Once the tip or the outer shell is removed, its flavor will be imparted easily even though it is still whole. was removed or it was moist, it is considered as if it was diced. Wild onions, whether moist or dry, whether whole or diced, we see if they have imparted their flavor.
When one pickles vegetables that are ordinary produce with those of terumah, they are permitted to non-priests22In certain contexts (see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:34), pickling is considered as cooking. Nevertheless, in this instance, the Rambam rules leniently. with the exception of onions, scallions, and garlic.23Because their sharp and pungent taste nature causes their flavor to be imparted to any vegetables pickled with them [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 10:10)]. [With regard to these species,] if one pickled vegetables that are ordinary produce with onions that are terumah or onions that are ordinary produce with onions that are terumah, they are forbidden to non-priests. If one pickled vegetables that are terumah with an onion that is ordinary produce, the onion is permitted to non-priests.24For the onion will not absorb the flavor of the other produce.
[The following rules apply when] olives that are ordinary produce were pickled together with olives that are terumah. If they were both crushed, or the ordinary olives were crushed, but those which were terumah were whole,25When olives are crushed, they will absorb easier [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 10:7)]. or they were pickled in brine that was terumah, they are forbidden to non-priests.26For the brine imparts its flavor to the objects pickled in within it. If, however, they were both whole or the olives that were terumah were crushed and those that were ordinary produce were whole, they are permitted, because those that are crushed absorb from those which are whole.
Water in which terumah was pickled or cooked is forbidden to non-priests.27For it has absorbed the flavor of the terumah.
The laws governing terumah apply to anise as long as it has not yet flavored a dish [of food].28Anise is used as flavoring. Once it has flavored other foods, it is discarded. Hence, until it has flavored other foods, it is significant and the laws of terumah apply. Afterwards, it is considered as a wasteproduct (Radbaz). Once it has flavored a dish, the laws of terumah no longer apply.
[The following laws apply when a person] removes a warm loaf of bread [from the oven] and places it over a barrel of wine that is terumah. If the loaf is from wheat, it is permitted.29Even though the bread may absorb the fragrance of the wine, it does not absorb its substance and the fragrance alone is of no consequence. This is a general principle that applies with regard to all prohibited foods; see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:33. If it is from barley, it is forbidden, because it draws forth [the wine itself].30It is considered as the actual substance of the wine has been imparted to the bread.
When an oven has been heated with cumin that is terumah, the bread is permitted. For it does not have the flavor of the cumin, only its fragrance and fragrance does not create a prohibition.31In Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:22, the Rambam writes that when an oven is heated with shells of produce that is orlah or mixed species in a vineyard, whatever is cooked in the oven is forbidden. The commentaries note, however, that there is a fundamental distinction between the two instances. It is forbidden to benefit from - not only to eat - the prohibited substances mentioned in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot. It is, by contrast, permitted to benefit from terumah.
When barley that is terumah falls into a cistern of water, the water is permitted even if [the barley] spoils the flavor of the water, for food that imparts an undesirable flavor does not bring about a prohibition.32This concept also applies with regard to all the Torah's prohibitions; see Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 15:28.
[The following law applies when] chilba33A pungent herb. that is terumah and its plant fall into a cistern of wine. If the chilba seed itself34I.e., without the influence of the plant whose flavor is similar to that of the seeds. The rationale is that the plant is not considered as terumah [the Rambam's Commentary to the Mishnah (Terumot 10:5)]. See also Chapter 2, Halachah 4. is of sufficient quantity to impart its flavor to the wine, the wine is forbidden to non-priests.
When there are two cups of wine: one of terumah and one of ordinary wine35And the ordinary wine is less than 100 times the amount of terumah wine. and they were each mixed with water and then combined, we consider it as if the ordinary wine was not present and as if the wine that was terumahwas mixed with the water alone, for water is not of its type. If that water is sufficient to nullify the taste of the terumah wine in the mixture, the entire mixture is permitted to non-priests. If not, it is forbidden, for as we have explained,36See Chapter 13, Halachah 9, which explains that the water is not combined with the ordinary wine to create a mixture 100 times the amount of the terumah. water does not nullify wine.
When wine that is terumah falls on produce, one may wash the fruits and they are permitted.37The Radbaz notes that in Hilchot Ma'achalot Assurot 16:32, the Rambam writes a similar law with regard to wine associated with idol worship that fell on produce. There, however, he rules stringently, stating that the fruits are forbidden if the wine is poured upon them while they are broken open. The Radbaz explains that the Rambam did not mention the point here, because he relied on what he had stated earlier. Indeed, if the fruit was broken open and the wine improved its flavor, it should be sold to a priest at the price of terumah. Similarly, when oil that is terumah falls on produce, one may wash the fruits and they are permitted.38Even though oil is more likely to cling to fruit than wine, it is sufficient to wash the fruit. Generally, oil does not improve the taste of fruit (Radbaz).When oil [that is terumah] falls on [ordinary] wine, one should make it coagulate39For in this way, the oil can be removed without it mixing with the wine. Similarly, oil impairs the flavor of wine (ibid.). and the wine is then permitted to non-priests. If [oil that is terumah] mixes with brine, it should be made to coagulate, then the upper layer of the brine should be removed40This stringency is necessary, because oil improves the flavor of brine (ibid.). so that all the brine that has the taste of oil will be removed.
A pot in which terumah was cooked should not be used to cook ordinary produce. If it was cooked in it, it causes it to be forbidden if its flavor is recognizable. If he washes out the pot with wine or with water, it is permitted to cook in it.41The Ra'avad questions the Rambam's ruling, asking why this instance is different from the laws involving non-kosher food absorbed in a utensil. In that instance, it is not sufficient to wash out the utensil, one must perform hagalah, boiling water in the utensil to purge the absorbed matter. The Radbaz explains that the Rambam maintains that this concept applies with regard to sanctified foods and other prohibitions, but not with regard to terumah. The rationale is that if the priests consider the terumah insignificant - as would be the case with regard to terumah absorbed in a pot - it is no longer of consequence. He draws support for this explanation from the mishnah in Terumot 11:8 (quoted in Chapter 11, Halachah 15) which states that after one pours out the contents of a jug of wine of terumah, one can pour ordinary wine into the container even if there is a small amount of residue from the previous wine. This explanation is also given in one of the responsa ascribed to the Rambam in a response to a question concerning this subject by the sages of Lunil. The Kessef Mishneh also cites these ideas and states that the reason the Rambam requires that the pot be washed out is because the contents are being cooked. If they were not to be cooked, even washing would not be necessary. If he cooked [terumah] in part of the pot, it is not necessary to wash out the entire pot, only the place where it was cooked.42This leniency applies only with regard to terumah and not to prohibited food absorbed in a utensil. The rationale is the same as in the previous note: Since the priests consider this terumah insignificant, we do not show concern about it (Radbaz).
The great terumah, terumat ma'aser, challah,43The portion of dough that must be separated and given to a priest. and the first fruits are all referred to as terumah.44See Chapter 10, Halachah 4. With regard to terumat ma'aser, [Numbers 18:26] states: "And you shall remove the terumah of G‑d from it" and [ibid. 15:20] states that it should be "like the terumah of your grain heap."45This verse refers to challah; or it is comparing challah to the great terumah. Perhaps a scribal error crept into the text and this was intended as support for the following clause. The Radbaz, however, gives an explanation why it was included here.With regard to challah, [ibid.] states: "You shall separate challah as terumah." And [Deuteronomy 12:17]: "You may not eat in your gates the tithes of your grain, your wine, and your oil,... and the terumah of your hand." Now there are no substances that are required to be brought [to Jerusalem to be eaten] that are not explicitly mentioned in the verse except the first fruits. Thus the phrase "the terumah of your hand" can be applied to them. Thus we see that they are [also] called terumah.
Therefore the laws regarding partaking of all four types of substances and mixtures of them and other substances are the same. All can be nullified in a mixture of 101 times the original substance. They are also all combined with each other.46I.e., to cause a mixture to be forbidden to non-priests. If they become impure, they should all be burnt. The laws that apply to terumat ma'aser that is demai,47Produce from which we are unsure that the tithes have been separated. are the same that apply to terumat ma'aser separated from produce [from which the tithes were] definitely [not separated]. It is only that its violation is not punishable by lashes.
Anyone who partakes of terumah should recite the blessing for that particular food and then recite the blessing:48For partaking of terumah is a mitzvah and we are required to recite a blessing before the observance of all mitzvot (Kessef Mishneh). "[Blessed are You... who has sanctified us with the holiness of Aaron and commanded us to partake of terumah."49See Hillchot Bikkurim 1:2. We have received the tradition and observed that people would recite this blessing even when partaking of challah separated in the Diaspora.50Even though it is only a Rabbinic commandment. For even partaking of sacred foods from the boundaries [of our Holy Land] is like service [in the Temple],51Pesachim 72b relates that one day Rabbi Tarfon did not come to the House of study. Rabban Gamliel rebuked him for his absence. Rabbi Tarfon answered that he was carrying out priestly worship. Rabban Gamliel asked him how that was possible, for they lived in the era of the Temple's destruction. Rabbi Tarfon replied that partaking of terumah was equivalent to serving in the Temple. as [Numbers 18:7] states: "I have granted you your priestly service as a gift."
